* 9614791
* National Conference on Climate Change, Climate              Variability, and Water Resources Management
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Kenneth Strzepek, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1998
* USD 87,133.00

9614791 Strzepek In November 5-7, 1991, the First National Conference on Climate
Changes and Water Resources Management was held in Albuquerque, New Mexico, to
inform water resource managers about the state of the science on climate change,
the ability to predict regional climate change, and management strategies for
coping with climate change. Almost five years have passed since the conference,
and there have been major developments in our understanding not only of climate
change and water resources, but also of climate variability and water resources.
There is much more certainly about climate change and there have been
significant improvements in capabilities to forecast extreme events and long-
term climate. In addition, a significant amount of research has been done on how
water resource managers can prepare for changes in extreme events and climate.
Water resource managers and planner can benefit by meeting with scientists and
water resource researchers to learn about and discuss the latest developments in
science. In addition, they can benefit from discussions about how to plan for
and adapt to changes in climate. We propose to organize a conference that will
present the latest developments in the understanding of climate change, climate
variability, forecasting, and hydrologic analytic methods as they relate to
water management. The presentations will be by academic, govenment, and other
researchers and by water resource managers. The target audience will be the
research community and water resource managers. The conference will be organized
so water managers can learn about the latest research on managing water
resources in light of climate variability and climate change and can tell
researchers what additional Climate variability and climate change. We intend to
involve all the major federal agencies information, methods, and models the
water managers need to successfully adapt to the risks from involved in climate
change and climate variability related activities. The conference will take
place in 1997 to allow sufficient time for organization and advertising. We hope
to attract 100 to 150 attendees. Speakers will be solicited and invited based on
the relevance of their work to the conference goals and objectives. An emphasis
of the conference will be feedback from water resource mangers on where federal
research on climate change, variability, forecasting, and water resource
management to cope with climate should be directed. A proceedings with the best
peer reviewed papers will be published . Sessions will be on such topics as the
use of improved weather and climate forecasts in water resources management,
impediments to the use of weather and climate forecasts in water resource
management, water resource management under uncertainty, implications of climate
change for long term supply and demand management, use of models and other
analytic techniques to analyze vulnerability and adaptation to climate change,
and incorporation of climate change in formal analytic methods for water
resource management.