* 9614314
* RUI:  Upper Devonian Black Shales in Eastern North America, Conodont Biostratigraphy, Frasnian-Famennian Mass Extinction Horizon, and Absolute Dates from Associated Ash Layers
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2002
* D. Jeffrey Over, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2002
* USD 78,000.00

9614314 Over The Upper Devonian black shales in eastern North America are
important for hydrocarbon resources, understanding of global climate change, and
the occurrence of a global mass extinction event, have never been systematically
collected to determine the complete conodont biozoneation. this is simply
because workers have had difficulties recovering conodonts from the black shales
and have instead focused on green shale and carbonate interbeds. The result is
undescribed taxa, incomplete zonations, and tenuous correlations of black shales
in the Appalachian, Illinois, and Michigan basins. High resolution
biostratigraphy and recognition of global event horizons is possible by careful
sampling of black shale horizons. Biozones, cryptic disconformities, the
Frasnian-Famennian boundary, and the Devonian-Carboniferous boundary have been
recognized in the Woodford Shale of Oklahoma - entirely within black shale.
Similar sampling and processing techniques in the northern Appalachian Basin
have recovered new taxa, as well as isolated the Frasnian-Famennian boundary in
the Hanover Shale of New York and the Upper Olentangy Shale of Ohio. Conodonts
have been described from the Middlesex and Pipe Creek shales, two petroliferous
black shales that had previously been unzoned. The purpose of this project is to
expand upon previous studies and preliminary sample materials that are currently
under investigation to systematically collect black shale sequences in the three
eastern North American basins, describe conodont faunas, and utilize revised
taxonomy and correlation techniques to prepare complete zonal schemes for the
Antrim Shale (Michigan Basin), Chattanooga Shale (southern Appalachian Basin),
and New Albany Shale (Illinois Basin). This study will differ from previous
works by collecting the black shale horizons. This will enable recognition of
minor disconformities, ash horizons, and determine the ranges of biozones.
Within this biostratigraphic framework small scale depositional cyc les will be
correlatable between basins and absolute dates of known ash beds (e.g., Center
Hill, Belpre), as well as ash beds found during recent sampling, will be tied
together. The result will be a clearer understanding of biozone and depositional
cycle intervals, and an indication of depositional rates for the different
members of the eastern shale formations on relative and absolute time scales.
This will also allow precise correlation of discrete members and beds within the
black shale facies. Undergraduate research participation is a primary focus
within the project. Students will collect, process, and analyze strata for
microfossils and characterize ash horizons utilizing petrographic techniques,
the scanning electron microscope, and energy dispersive x-ray analysis for
elemental determination.