* 9614455
* Travel Grant for World Congress in Bioengineering and       Medical Physics, Nice, France, July 1997
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Alfred Potvin, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 05/31/1998
* USD 9,500.00

9614455 Hendee This award supports travel for ten individuals to attend the
World Congress in Bioengineering and Medical Physics in Nice, France in July,
1997. These individuals will be responsible for identifying research frontiers
in specific areas of bioengineering, estimating future research directions, and
assessing how these frontiers and directions are likely to be impacted by global
information networking. A report on these issues will be generated by the
attendees and furnished to the National Science Foundation. This report will
serve also as a guide to planning the next World Congress in Bioengineering and
Medical Physics scheduled for Chicago in the Year 2000. Each of the Nice-meeting
attendees for whom travel support is requested are pivotal members of the
Steering Committee for the Year 2000 World Congress, including the Congress co-
presidents. The report to be prepared by the travelers would find three
important uses: 1) NSF and other funding agencies would receive a report about
frontiers of research in the classical areas of biomedical engineering supported
by the division of Bioengineering and Environmental Systems plus a section that
emphasizes how global information networking is likely to impact on the
discipline in the near future; 2) the report would be placed on line on the home
page for the World Congress 2000 and thus be available to all interested
parties; and, 3) the information would be a key factor in planning the technical
program for World Congress 2000. ***