* 9614442
* Systematic Analysis of Climatic and Topographic Controls    on Long-Term Erosion Rates
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2002
* James Kirchner, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2002
* USD 260,942.00

9614442 Kirchner Understanding how topography and climate affect bedrock
weathering and erosion remains an important problem, one with implications for
geomorphology, tectonics, paleoclimatology, paleohydrology, and environmental
impact assessment. To date, most erosion and denudation studies have been
confined to sites where long-term measurements of river sediment flux or
reservoir sedimentation rates happen to be available. This makes them vulnerable
to variations in lithology and land use, which alter erosion rates and thus
obscure the effects of topography and climate. However, cosmogenic nuclide
techniques now permit us to measure long-term erosion rates, without requiring
decades of sediment yield data. This dramatically broadens the range of sites
where erosion rates can be measured. Sites can now be chosen to isolate specific
factors of interest (such as climate and topography), and to minimize the
influence of other variables (such as lithology). This project combines new
cosmogenic nuclide techniques for measuring erosion rates, and an efficient
experimental design, to systematically explore how climate and topography affect
weathering and erosion rates in unglaciated granitic terrain. To minimize the
effects of lithologic variation, this study will focus on dirites and
granodiorites of the Sierra Nevada. Nine localities have been chosen, across
which annual precipitation varies ten-fold and annual average temperatures vary
by over 10oC. Within each locality, a series of small subcatchments will be
selected, encompassing at least a five-fold range of average hillslope
gradients. The site selection protocol is specifically designed to encompass the
widest possible ranges of precipitation, temperature, weathering rates, and
topography, in nearly all possible combinations. With this experimental design,
one can explore how weathering and erosion rates vary with topography under
several different climatic conditions; conversely, one can also explore how
climate affects we athering and erosion in a range of topographic situations. At
each subcatchment, long-term erosion rates will be measured from the
concentration of cosmogenic nuclides in sediment draining from streams or
gullies in each subcatchment. A recently-completed pilot study shows that
cosmogenic nuclide concentrations in alluvial sediments record the spatially
averaged erosion ate of the contributing area (to within+% or 1cm/ka), averaged
over 2-15 ka. This method of measuring erosion rates is useful for several
reasons: (a) it reflects a spatially averaged erosion rate, rather than the
erosion rate of an individual--and possibly anomalous--point, (b) it reflects
long-term erosion rates rather than recent land-use disturbance (a major
confounding factor in previous studies), (c) it averages over short-term
fluctuations in climate and sediment yield, but predominantly reflects the
Holocene climate, and (d) it averages erosion over timescales that are relevant
to hillslope processes, but still short enough that the underlying topography
has not changed. At several sites, chemical weathering rates will be inferred
from stream solute fluxes, and the regolith profile will be sampled to determine
the degree of chemical alteration. This research is designed to quantify, for
the first time, how weathering and erosion rates depend on climate and
topography in a single well-defined lithology. It should contribute to our
understanding of feedbacks between tectonic forcing, erosion, and climate, and
should help us to model landform evolution more realistically. It should help in
interpreting river sediment fluxes and chemical denudation rates in continental-
scale geochemical studies, and should provide an extensive new data set for
process-oriented studies of weathering and erosion. Finally, this study should
aid in estimating long term "background" erosion rates, as a benchmark for
measuring the erosional consequences of human land use.