* 9614984
* Molecular Phylogenetics of the Wild Perennial Relatives of  Soybean (Glycine Subgenus Glycine):  Intron-Containing      Nuclear Genes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Jeffrey Doyle, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2001
* USD 199,989.00

9614984 Doyle The wild perennial species of Glycine subgenus Glycine (family
Leguminosae) are the closest known relatives to the soybean, Glycine max, and
its wild progenitor, Glycine soja, in Asia. The subgenus comprises 16 species
native to Australia, two of which are widespread in the Pacific region. They
occur in a variety of habitats including very dry areas of central Australia.
Particular species are of potential economic interest as sources of drought and
disease resistance, and consequently have been used in breeding programs with
the cultivated soybean both in the U.S. and Australia. Relationships among the
species of subgenus Glycine have been studied using many approaches, and
groupings ("genome groups") have been hypothesized primarily on the basis of
artificial hybridizations. Prof. Jeff Doyle's studies some years ago using
chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) provided the first rigorous phylogenetic hypotheses for
the subgenus. Although results were in substantial agreement with earlier
biosystematic studies, some areas of disagreement were noted with the genome
groupings. Within the genome groups, however, cpDNA data either failed to
resolve relationships, or produced hypotheses that were incongruent with
traditional taxonomic boundaries. The chloroplast evidence could be giving the
"right" answers, in which case taxonomic boundaries should be reassessed and
realigned; alternatively, the genealogical pattern of cpDNA data may not be
tracking the historical pattern of speciation in the subgenus, for any of
several possible reasons. Testing these alternatives using molecular (genetic)
data requires the use of DNA sequences capable of showing historical
independence from the chloroplast genome. The most obvious choices are nuclear
genes; however, apart from the nuclear ribosomal gene locus, nuclear gene
sequences appropriate for the low levels of divergence expected for closely
related species within a genus have not been available. This is a general
problem in molecular systematics that is not unique to Glycine. Non-coding
regions of nuclear genes theoretically should provide variation suitable for
phylogenetic reconstruction at this taxonomic level. Of the various types of
non-coding regions, intervening sequences (introns) afford technical advantages
because they are flanked by coding regions (exons) whose higher degree of
sequence conservatism facilitates the design of oligonucleotide primers for
amplification by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In preliminary work, Prof.
Doyle has shown that introns of one such locus, histone H3-D, provide useful
phylogenetic data in Glycine; and he and his Australian colleague, Dr. Brown,
plan to utilize DNA sequences from this genetic locus to test a wide range of
chloroplast and non-molecular hypotheses in the subgenus. These include
relationships among and within the diploid genome groups as well as the origins
and diversification of at least one of the three polyploid complexes in the
subgenus. The basic methodology includes amplification by PCR, DNA sequencing of
PCR products either directly or after molecular cloning, and phylogenetic
analysis.