* 9614981
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Verbal Semantics and Morphosyntax in Tsafiki (Colorado)
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,04/30/1998
* Scott DeLancey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 04/30/1998
* USD 22,800.00

The current project is for doctoral dissertation research on the morphosyntactic
and semantic verbal system of Tsafiki (Colorado). Tsafiki is the native language
of the Tsachila (Colorados), an indigenous minority (2,000 speakers) of the
tropical western lowlands of Ecuador. The dissertation topic will accomplish two
goals: 1) present a thorough description of one of the major grammatical systems
of the language; and 2) explore a topic of theoretical interest to the
linguistic community. Tsafiki is an under-documented language which belongs to a
little-described family of languages of South America, Barbakoan-Paesan. A
detailed description of the morphosyntax of the verbal system will contribute
greatly to both the understanding of Tsafiki and knowledge about this family of
languages. Tsafiki is of theoretical interest in that it has an interesting
system of verbal classification, incorporation of both subjects and objects and
perhaps, most importantly, a very elaborate evidential (source of knowledge)
system. This evidential system is an integral part of the grammar. Much of the
morphosyntactic resources of the language are devoted to coding not only the
source of information but also the type of information and whether the
information falls into the category of cultural, general knowledge or knowledge
based on the speaker's own immediate perceptions and internal states. The
evidential system interacts in some interesting ways with the person-marking
system, the tense-aspect system and the verbal classification system. While
evidential systems are attested in a number of languages worldwide they also
appear to be an areal phenomenon in South America. They appear in Quechua,
Aymara and languages of the Amazonian basin. But very little descriptive or
theoretical work has been done on such systems. This dissertation will advance
the theoretical understanding of such systems. The project has also been
designed to benefit thr ee different communities: 1) the academic community of
the United States; 2) the academic community of Ecuador; and 3) the Tsachila
community itself. Copies of all materials produced will be given to the
Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Ecuador and to the Tsachila community. In
addition, the materials will be used as a basis for eventually producing
bilingual materials, a dictionary and pedagogical materials for the community.