* 9614505
* Collaborative Research:  Observations and Modeling of Flow  and Fracture Processes Leading to Iceberg Calving
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* Bernard Amadei, U.S. Geological Survey, WRD, Alaska District Office
* Interagency Agreement
* Jane V. Dionne
* 05/31/2000
* USD 78,613.00

Most of the ice lost from the world's glaciers is lost through the calving of
icebergs. An understanding of this process is vital to projections of sea-level
rise, to reconstructing changes in the great ice sheets of the past, and to
analyses of present and future changes in many Arctic glaciers. Unfortunately,
the process is complex and no satisfactory calving relation that can be
incorporated into numerical models has been developed and validated. A unique
opportunity to do this is now at hand: An extensive data set on geometry, flow
and calving of the rapidly disintegrating Columbia Glacier, Alaska, has been
developed by the U.S. Geological Survey, and new developments in fracture
mechanics now make it possible to compute crevasse interactions and other
processes that are critical to the breakoff problem. The investigators will
collect additional, highly-detailed strain and geometric data at and near the
terminus of this glacier using primarily aerial photogrammetry. They will then
use these and the existing data set in newly-developed fracture and flow models.
These models, which use discrete displacement analysis (DDA) as well as finite
element models, will be used to simulate breakoffs and define the interaction
between calving and flow. The results will be tested to see if the current
behavior of the glacier can be simulated well, and if so, to see if the 1978-95
history of change in this glacier can be modeled accurately. Then the generality
of the modeling for other applications will be explored. It is expected that
this study will produce 1) a detailed observational data set on dynamics and
calving for use by others, 2) further insight into iceberg discharge mechanisms
and the interrelations between calving and ice dynamics, 3) better knowledge of
large-scale fracture processes in ice, 4) new glaciological modeling tools, such
as DDA, and 5) an iceberg calving relation which will be useful for a wide range
of paleoglaciological and current ice sheet and glacier investi gations as well
as studies of the role of iceberg discharges in ice/ocean interactions.