* 9614247
* Causes of Compositional Variation in Historical Lavas       from Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Michael Garcia, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/1999
* USD 123,490.00

9614247 Garcia This is a proposal to continue work on the petrology and
geochemistry of lavas from Kilauea volcano in Hawaii to improve our
understanding of magmatic processes within active basaltic volcanoes. Recent
work has documented large, systematic compositional variations within the
historical lavas of this volcano (~200 years). The variation observed appears to
be cyclic and correlated with summit explosions. The main purpose of this study
will be to determine the cause of this compositional variation and to evaluate
the relative importance of imputs from crustal and mantle processes. The working
hypothesis is that the long-term geochemical cycle observed in Kilauea is caused
by the dynamic melting of a heterogeneous plume source followed by mixing in the
shallow summit magma reservoir. Inflections in the cycles occur when the summit
reservoir is extensively drained during explosive events. Continuation of the
study will allow the monitoring of the compositional variations in the ongoing
Puu Oo eruption and the evaluation of the extent of crustal contamination in the
Kilauea lavas. In addition, the proposed work will seek to provide insights into
factors that may control the geochemical variation at Kilauea such as the role
of explosive events, the relative effects of mantle heterogeneity and changes in
the extent of partial melting and shape of melting regions.