* 9614365
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics and Kinematics of North    America-Juan de Fuca-Pacific Plate Interaction: Constraints from GPS Geodesy and Geophysical Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Charles Rubin, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2001
* USD 136,465.00

9614365 Miller This collaborative project proposes installation of a GPS network
in the Pacific Northwest to measure strain accumulation and earthquake hazard in
the region that is associated with subduction of the Juan de Fuca plate.
Geodetic monitoring, combined with geologic studies and geophysical modeling,
should discriminate the relative importance of the many factors contributing to
the deformation of this area. The PIs will employ a matrix of permanent and
roving GPS receivers in a project that includes 1) site installation, 2) data
acquisition, reduction and archiving, and 3) modeling of the kinematic results.
This work will be done in collaboration with other agencies and governments
(Canadian) operating under the auspices of the Pacific Northwest Geodetic Array
(PANGA), of which the PIs are members. A data analysis facility developed at CWU
will reduce and distribute on-line and CD ROM geodetic data products to the
geophysical community. Finite-element modeling of the new constraints on Pacific
Northwest deformation will allow the development of both kinematically
consistent, two-dimensional estimates of the surface deformation, and three-
dimensional models of the forces that drive that deformation. The integrated
approach of field observations and modeling should provide an advancement of
understanding of the kinematics and dynamics of the Pacific Northwest, and will
provide important seismic monitoring of this seismically active region. ***