* 9614565
* IAI:  A Survey of the Research and Researchers Relating to  Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change in Latin    America
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Diana Liverman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 12/31/1998
* USD 14,966.00

964565 Liverman The goal of this project is threefold: to identify individuals
and institutions developing research on issues related to the human and policy
dimension of global change in the region; to inform Latin American social
scientists about the research mission and project funding opportunities of the
Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI); and to involve them
in the development of the IAI's Human Dimensions research agenda. Although the
IAI has held two meetings with Human Dimensions as one of the foci (at Taxco,
Mexico, in 1993, jointly with the International Human Dimensions Programme; and
at Bel=E9m, Brazil, in 1995), few proposals have been received by the IAI
dealing with social, economic, or policy issues identified by these two meetings
as critical to the success of the Institute. This survey will identify the
current researchers, their institutions, and their programs in order to target
these groups for specific program announcements and more detailed information
regarding the availability of funds and areas of research interest for the IAI.
The proposal will produce the following: 1) an overview paper of the IAI
describing how environmental social science research can contribute to the IAI
agenda; 2) a mailing list for the later use of the IAI Directorate in mailing
Human Dimensions-related calls for proposals; 3) a tri-lingual survey (English,
Spanish and Portuguese) addressing collaboration, resources and capabilities,
electronic connectivity, and research interests and current projects; 4) a set
of compiled survey results, and a preliminary analysis; and 5) a final report to
the IAI Director and the IAI Scientific Advisory Committee. If the survey has a
good response rate, it could also serve as the basis for a formal IAI directory
on Human Dimensions Research in the Americas. %%% The goal of this project is
threefold: to identify individuals and institutions developing research on
issues related to the human and policy dimension of global cha nge in the
region; to inform Latin American social scientists about the research mission
and project funding opportunities of the Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research (IAI); and to involve them in the development of the IAI's Human
Dimensions research agenda. Although the IAI has held two meetings with Human
Dimensions as one of the foci, few proposals have been received by the IAI
dealing with social, economic, or policy issues identified by these two meetings
as critical to the success of the Institute. The proposal will produce the
following: 1) an overview paper of the IAI describing how environmental social
science research can contribute to the IAI agenda; 2) a mailing list for the
later use of the IAI Directorate in mailing Human Dimensions-related calls for
proposals; 3) a tri-lingual survey (English, Spanish and Portuguese) addressing
collaboration, resources and capabilities, electronic connectivity, and research
interests and current projects; 4) a set of compiled survey results, and a
preliminary analysis; and 5) a final report to the IAI Director and the IAI
Scientific Advisory Committee. If the survey has a good response rate, it could
also serve as the basis for a formal IAI directory on Human Dimensions Research
in the Americas. The IAI is an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on
global change issues in the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the
designated U.S. Government agency to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the
IAI. ***