* 9614225
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Grinding Research and Development
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* John Webster, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 08/31/1999
* USD 116,000.00

Abstract ECC-9614225 Howes As a National Science Foundation Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center, now entering its seventh year of NSF sponsorship,
the Center for Grinding Research and Development at the University of
Connecticut continues to focus its efforts in two areas: 1) the Grinding Center
is making significant progress in fulfilling its mission of providing
appropriate solutions and training for specific industrial applications in the
grinding-dependent industries; and 2) the Center is pursuing strategies to
strengthen and diversify its industrial sponsorship and funding base. These
activities are critical given the effects of the depressed economy in
Connecticut and the substantial cutbacks in defense-related contracts to
Connecticut manufacturers. The Grinding Center increased its income to more than
$2.7 million in 1995-1996 and has developed a $4,000 square-foot complex
consisting of a machine shop and laboratories for grinding, micro-machining,
metrology, and materials assessment. The Center is continually updating and
expanding its technical capabilities and resources. This award provides funding
for the first year of a five-year continuing award. Continued support for
another five years will help the Center continue to serve its industrial
sponsors and contribute to the resurgence of manufacturing firms regionally and
nationally. As part of the Centers efforts to promote international
collaboration in engineering research and development, CGRD has helped arrange
and is participating in the hosting of the International Manufacturing
Engineering Conference (IMEC) to be held at the university on August 7-9, 1996.
The University of Connecticut had offered to host this conference for the
International Foundation for Production Research. IMEC will have over 200
internationally recognized researchers, engineers, and professionals from the
manufacturing field. The conference is sponsored by NSF, ASME, and CIRP.
Additional funding is provided in this award to cover expenses associated with
the International Manufacturing Engineering Conference.