* 9614217
* CONACyT:  Advancing Human Language Technology in Mexico and the United States Through Collaborative Research on Spoken  Language Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Ronald Cole, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 12/31/1998
* USD 130,197.00

The goals of this project are to address some of the barriers that limit
accessibility and prevent widespread use of spoken language technology. In
particular, the lack of portability of today's technology means that application
development requires significant engineering for each new task. As a result, the
high cost and level of expertise entailed restrict research and development
activities to a handful of specialized laboratories. A partnership with the
Universidad de las Americas, Puebla has been established to address this
portability issue. Through a program of collaborative research and technology
transfer, we are developing an integrated toolkit for learning about,
researching and developing spoken language systems in both English and Spanish
languages. This involves creating suitable infrastructure, language resources
and teaching materials, as well as performing basic research to improve on the
technology underlying the toolkit. The results of this work will benefit large
numbers of people. We plan to distribute the resulting toolkit and resources by
making them available at no cost to academic institutions throughout the United
States and Mexico. This, in turn, will promote interest and understanding into
spoken language technology by allowing people to rapidly design, build and
experiment with spoken language systems.