* 9614740
* Everest
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Greg MacGillivray, MacGillivray Freeman Films
* Continuing grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 01/31/1999
* USD 1,650,000.00

9614740 MacGillivray MacGillivray Freeman Films is producing a 40-minute large
format film about a scientific and climbing expedition on Mount Everest. The
film will introduce viewers to the methods and significance of scientific field
research and the rigor and excitement of the scientific endeavor through an
expedition to the top of the world's tallest mountain. An international climbing
team of women and men will advance the research of geophysicist Roger Bilham who
has been influential in applying Global Positioning System (GPS) technology to
the study of earthquakes in the Himalaya. The film also will explore the
physiological challenges the climbers face at extreme altitude. Endoscopic and
microscopic photography will reveal the human body's amazing adaptations to a
cold, low-oxygen environment. A comprehensive package of ancillary materials for
teachers, students, film exhibitors, and the general public will enhance the
educational experience of the film. Greg MacGillivray, President of MacGillivray
Freeman Films, will be the PI and Executive Producer/Co-
Producer/Director/Photographer. Stepehen Judson and Alec Lorimore, both of
MacGillivray Films, will be Co-writer/Director and Co-Producer respectively. Tim
Cahill, a freelance writer with experience writing for National Geographic and
GEO will be the other Co-writer. Advisors include: Cynthia Beall, Prof. of
Physical Anthropology, Case Western Reserve University Broughton Coburn,
Conservation and Development Expert on Nepal James Fisher, Prof. of
Anthropology, Carleton College Kip Hodges, Prof. of Geology, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Charles Houston, Prof. of Medicine (emeritus),
University of Vermont Peter Molnar, Senior Research Assoc. Atmosphere and
Planetary Sciences, MIT Audrey Salkeld, Author and Fellow, Royal Geographical
Society Bradford Washburn, Honorary Director, Museum of Science, Boston