* 9614186
* Characterization of Fluvial Suspended Matter Using          Field-Flow Fractionation and Related Methods.
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2000
* USD 184,250.00

9614186 Shiller The composition and properties of size-fractioned riverine
suspended matter will be determined, with special emphasis on particles in the
sub-micron size range. This work is important because suspended particles carry
much of the load of many elements in rivers and because particle surfaces can
control dissolved concentrations through adsorption. However, little is known
about how particle composition and adsorbing properties vary with particle size
---especially in the sub-micron (or colloidal) size range. The work will utilize
relatively new technologies for size fractioning suspended particles,
specifically field-flow fractionation (FFF) and split-flow thin-cell lateral
transport (SPLITT) fractionation. The capabilities of these methods have been
demonstrated in the literature; however, their application to environmental
problems is still in its infancy. Thus, a primary objective of this proposed
work is the further development and quality assurance testing of environmental
FFF methodology. Other objectives include the application of FFF and SPLITT to
the characterization of fluvial suspended matter from a variety of fluvial
environments, analysis of filtration artifacts in samples processing,
investigation of bacterially-induced changes in particulate composition, and
development of methodology for investigating variation of adsorption with
particle size. The project will have two types of results: 1) development of FFF
and SPLITT methods to the point where they can be applied more routinely for
particle characterization in natural waters and 2) solution of some specific
environmental questions. These specific questions include how best to filter
samples for dissolved trace element analysis, what size fractions of the
suspended particles contain what types of materials (and how this affects
adsorption of trace elements), and how bacteria affect particle surfaces. The
work will include examination and comparison of FFF results with
ultrafiltration, light sca ttering, and electron microscopy. Additionally, we
will do the size fractionation work using different sample pre-treatments and
fractionation conditions. This will shed light on potential artifacts of the
techniques. Although this is a stand alone project, the work will be pursued
collaboratively with colleagues at the US Geological Survey.