* 9614212
* Microanalytical Studies of Extraterrestrial and             Terrestrial Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Ernst Zinner, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2000
* USD 435,000.00

9614212 Crozaz The research proposed will have two main thrusts: 1) the detailed
study of circumstellar grains isolated from primitive meteorites and 2) trace
element studies relevant to the origins of two types of meteorites (ureilites
and aubrites) and of terrestrial mantle nodules. Both goals will be achieved
with state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation. Isotopic compositions of
circumstellar grains will be used to set constraints on nucleosynthetic
processes in individual stars and provide information on the multiplicity of
stellar sources that contributed materials to the solar system, while
mineralogical and elemental data will be used to infer chemical and physical
conditions in the stellar atmosphere and ejecta in which these grains formed.
Trace element (mainly REE) ion microprobe studies of evolved meteorites and
terrestrial samples will help to delineate planetary processes. Ion imaging will
be used in an effort to identify the controversial (terrestrial contamination or
indigenous) LREE carrier phase in ureilites. Analyses of experimental charges of
aubritic compositions doped with lower levels of REE will be done in order to
check if partition coefficients inferred from natural systems can be obtained
under those conditions. Trace element concentrations of mantle eclogite and
peridotite nodules will be done in order to provide insights into the formation
of mantle materials, the structure and evolution of old cratons, and the
differentiation of the early earth.