* 9614719
* Workshop on Future Research Directions for Signal           Processing Research, August, 1996, Durango, CO
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Delores Etter, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/1997
* USD 56,740.00

Today, all areas of technology use signal processing. The applications range
from adaptive coding of speech signals, to analysis of medical images, to echo-
canceling in cellular telephones. The successful implementation of signal
processing algorithms in both software and hardware is a result of research into
various aspects of signal processing, including analysis, modeling, synthesis,
algorithm development, tool development, and implementation. This workshop in
intended to bring together a distinguished group of research scientists and
educators to explore the expanding role of signal processing within applications
that include the telecommunications infrastructure and the expanding information
highway. The workshop will meet for 3 1/2 days to assess and document recent
advances and current and future research directions in signal processing. During
this time we expect to prepare recommendations for research activities and to
initiate a debate on the future directions of the field from among the research
community. Participants will be drawn from academia, industry, and companies
whose products include significant signal processing components. The goal of the
meeting will be to develop a vision statement for the field and determine areas
which have the potential for high payoff in terms of application areas. The
participants will also discuss ways of integrating signal processing research
results and applications into the undergraduate engineering curricula - "the
integration of research and education." Another important topic will be the
discussion of ways to promote public awareness of the pervasive role of signal
processing.