* 9614649
* Ubehebe Peak Contact Aureole as a Test of Stochastic        Modeling of Fluid-Rock Interaction
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Lukas Baumgartner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/29/2000
* USD 188,999.00

9614649 Baumgartner The aim of this research is to study the effect of spatially
heterogeneous and temporally evolving permeability through field and geochemical
studies in the Ubehebe Peak contact aureole and to develop a finite element code
capable of modeling the basic physical, thermodynamic and transport processes
occurring in a typical upper crustal contact aureole. This includes mass and
heat transport, reactive tracer transport, metamorphic reactions, reaction
enhancement of permeability, and collapse of permeability. The objectives of the
proposal are to: (a) complete a geostatistically based data set of stable
isotope compositions of carbonates and silicates in the aureole; (b) establish a
geostatistically valid major and trace element data base; (c) expand the
capabilities of the finite element code to model infiltration driven mixed
volatile reactions, porosity and permeability changes due to reaction progress
of such reactions; (d) to include in the code simple rheological models to
simulate pore collapse due to plastic, brittle, or elastic failure of a rock
undergoing reactions. The evolution of porosity, and hence permeability, in such
models can be predicted using the fully coupled transport code together with
phenomenological equations linking permeability and porosity, reaction progress
and porosity, as well as elastic and plastic pore collapse.