* 9614756
* Retroactive Determination of Movement at Age in Relation to Water Mass in Patagonian Toothfish Through Laser-Based      Elemental Analysis of Otoliths
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Cynthia Jones, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/30/2000
* USD 26,202.00

9614756 Jones Laser-based Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry LA-ICPMS)
is a new technique, which is being applied for the first time in the Southern
Ocean, to examine movement-at-age in Patagonian Toothfish (Dissostichus
eleginoides). The chemical structure of growth increments in the otoliths of
fish reflects the composition of water passing across the gills; the increments
also give a chronological record of the life history of individual fish before
capture and are used for aging. Elemental analysis using LA-ICPMS allows
accurate sampling of a suite of elements in the otoliths, giving a record of
changes in the water mass experienced by the fish. This can be related
retroactively to age and real time using the increments. The project is an
international collaboration between scientists from the United States, United
Kingdom, France, Chile and Australia. The central collaboration is between
scientists at Old Dominion University and the British Antarctic Survey, bringing
together the most extensive experience currently available of the technique,
with that of Antarctic life systems. Scientists from France, Chile, Australia
and the United States are providing samples of Toothfish otoliths from the
Southern Ocean and southern South America. The project consists of four inter-
linked modules, addressing the overall question: what are the patterns of
movement of Patagonian Toothfish over its life history in relation to
variability of water mass in time and space? The objectives are to show that the
LA-ICPMS technique can discriminate between Patagonian Toothfish from different
geographical regions, develop a validated aging method, and characterize the
variability of the chemical signal with age and between years. Other objectives
are to elucidate differential spawning sites, and examine age-specific movement
retrospectively in individual fish within the Southern Ocean, and within the
Patagonia-Scotia Arc region. NSF will fund only module 3 (Does eleme ntal
analysis indicate movement of Patagonian toothfish between the Atlantic, Inian,
and Pacific sectors of the Southern Ocean?), while modules 1, 2, and 4 will be
funded by other governments. The first module consists of a preliminary test for
elemental variability in otoliths, using LA-ICPMS. The second is the development
of a reliable aging method with fully validated criteria for interpretation of
growth increments, using marginal increment analysis. The third module consists
of analysing, with LAICPMS, a suite of elements present across otolith sections
of fish taken from Macquarie Island, the Kerguelen Islands and South Georgia in
the Southern Ocean. Discrimination of element concentrations at the otolith edge
between regions will confirm that the technique can detect geographic separation
in Patagonian Toothfish. Discrimination by year class of concentrations at the
nucleus will indicate that spawning sites are separate. Comparison between
known-age sites in the otoliths will test for changes in the elemental profile
with age corresponding to movement of fish between water masses. Comparison
between the same known-age sites of fish from different age classes will test
for variability between years. The fourth module examines elemental
concentrations on a finer scale, comparing consecutive year sites across
otoliths sampled from northern and southern Chile, the Falkland Islands and
South Georgia. The results of the project will be of direct benefit to
population and ecosystem ecologists, oceanographers, and fisheries managers
working in the Southern Ocean and outside. They will indicate where movement
occurs in time and space, and where populations are isolated potentially by
oceanographic barriers. The validation of aging criteria will be a major
contribution to accurate aging of Patagonian Toothfish. Better knowledge of age
and stock structure, and mixing levels, is important for the use of fisheries
yield models; better understanding of the role playe d by environmental
processes will allow better prediction of recruitment and growth. The chemical
structure of the otolith may be used as a retroactive environmental record,
giving data that may enhance understanding of the role of inter-annual
variability in structuring marine ecosystems, and allow detection of trends
associated with climate-induced change.