* 9614411
* Electromagnetic Imaging of Fluids in the San Andreas Fault: Collaborative Research with University of Washington and    Oregon State University
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Gary Egbert, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2000
* USD 48,991.00

9614411 Egbert This is a collaborative project between Oregon State University
and the University of Washington to acquire and interpret high resolution
magnetotelluric (MT) data across two segments of the San Andreas Fault (SAF). In
previous work the P.Is. have used continuous MT profiling data to obtain high
resolution images of electrical resistivity to depths of 4 km across the
Parkfield segment, revealing a narrow zone of anomalously low resistivity in the
core of the fault. In the first phase of this project, they will continue work
at Parkfield, collecting additional profiles across the San Andreas Fault near
Middle Mountain, to obtain a three-dimensional image of electrical resistivity
in this area. To extend the image to seismogenic depths they will take MT data
at distances of up to 20 km from the fault, and will employ controlled source
exploration methods. In the second phase, a three-dimensional high resolution
survey of the central creeping segment of the San Andreas fault will be
conducted near Hollister, California. Because the resistivity of crustal rocks
is largely controlled by fluid content, these surveys will allow constraints to
be placed on the distribution and connectivity of fluids within the fault zone,
and to show hmw these properties vary between segments with different mechanical
behaviors. These results are expected to ultimately provide important
information on the role of fluids in the earthquake process. ***