* 9614646
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Development of Environmental        Tracers for Water and Solute Transport in Arid Vadose       Zones with Applications to Paleohydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Scott Tyler, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2000
* USD 158,597.00

9614646 Tyler The transport of water and solute through the vadose zone
represents a major area of uncertainty in hydrologic processes of arid regions.
The understanding of these fluxes in arid regions is critical in developing
hydrologic models, estimating water resource availability and in the siting of
waste disposal facilities. Two the most promising tracer techniques, chloride
mass balance and secular variations in chlorine-36 (36Cl) rely on untested
assumptions of the consistency of their deposition at the land surface. This has
led to significant criticisms of these methods. The goal of this research is to
develop sound techniques for measuring recharge and solute transport using the
southern Great Basin, where the thickness of the vadose zone in alluvial valleys
often exceeds 250 meters as field research laboratory. To use this tracer data
to reconstruct the water solute flux history in the vadose zone, accurate
reconstruction of the flux of Chloride and 36Cl from precipitation and dry
deposition are needed. We first propose to develop an accurate 36Cl chronology
using age dated pack rat midden materials from the area. Recent pack rat midden
data from Plummer et al. (1996) show convincing evidence that 36Cl deposition
varies both with magnetic field intensity and climatic patterns, and is also
preserved in ground waters and soil waters. The 36Cl chronology will be
developed using these data, combined with paleomagnetic intensity data to
determine the secular 36Cl production through the late Pleistocene. The 36Cl/Cl
chronology will next be used to estimate the variations in chloride flux through
the late Pleistocene. Knowledge of the chloride flux is crucial if the chloride
mass balance approach is used to estimate recharge and soil water age and
represents one of the major uncertainties in the application of the method,
particularly during dry and windy periods of the Pleistocene. 36Cl/Cl ratio
changes that are not in phase with secular variations are the result of dilution
of the ratio by increased chloride flux from precipitation and/or dry
deposition. Two methods are proposed to bracket the paleochoride flux, by first
ignoring any additional 36Cl in dry deposition (minimum chloride flux) and
secondly by accounting for 36Cl/Cl observed in lacustine dust sources. The
chloride flux chronology will be extended beyond 14C dated material by analogy
with climatic conditions occurring prior to 40 ka. Modern chloride deposition
will also be measured using in situ samplers in both Nevada and New Mexico. Soil
from these areas will first be leached of chloride and repacked into columns
open only at the top. The columns will be buried on site and allowed to
accumulate chloride, bromide and 36Cl to calculate the integrated modern flux of
these tracers. Due to the low fluxes, the accumulation period must extend beyond
the length of this project (5-10 yr), but will provide firm estimates of modern
tracer flux. The reconstructed 36Cl and Cl chronologies will then be used to
infer the recharge and paleoclimatic conditions preserved in three previously
analyzed boreholes in Frenchman Flat and a 1200 meter core hole (Ue6e) drilled
in 1973, preserved and archived at the USGS Core Library in Mercury, NV which
penetrates 450 meters of unsaturated zone comprised primarily of alluvial
sediments. The boreholes in Frenchman Flat have preserved up to 120 kyr of soil
water and it is hoped that the deeper vadose zone found at Ue6e will push this
record back significantly further. Analysis of chloride and 36Cl/Cl ratios will
be conducted on the archive core. Chloride analysis will be used delineate
portions of the core where 36Cl will be analyzed. The chloride flux chronology
and paleorecharage developed in this project will be compared to soil-derived
paleorecharge reported from other sites in the American Southwest (Mojave
Desert, New Mexico and Texas) along with ongoing paleohydrology studies in the
adjacent Amargosa River drainage for consistency and to develop a reg ional
picture of paleorecharge. Data obtained during DOE investigations of both
Frenchman Flat and Yucca Flat will be incorporated as it becomes available. This
project will closely coordinate with DOE drilling activities to obtain new core
samples for additional analysis and work through DOE to obtain drilling support
for a shallow borehole adjacent to Ue6e. The tracer profile to be analyzed in
this proposal, previously reported tracer profiles from adjacent Frenchman Flat,
also represent natural vadose zone tracer tests and provide an excellent
opportunity to study solute transport at much larger time and length scales than
are currently available. Using the reconstructed chloride and 36Cl flux, the
research proposed herein will simulate the observed water and solute profiles to
determine the effective dispersive properties of dry, alluvial sediments. Soil
water fluxes in the Frenchman Flat boreholes has varied from less than 0.1 mm/yr
today to as high as 3 cm/yr during pluvial times, based on chloride
concentrations in soil water. Analysis of solute transport will therefore be
transient in nature, using the fluxes constrained by the observed chloride
concentrations. Traditional advection-dispersion solvers as well as mobile-
immobile models of solute transport will be applied to the data sets to
determine the mechanisms of transport and to provide confidence in the methods
over long-length and time scales. This proposed research will significantly
increase the understanding of vadose zone processes in arid regions. The
development of an accurate 36Cl and Cl chronology constrain the tracer fluxes
will significantly reduce the principal uncertainty in these wildely used soil
water flux and recharge estimators. The core data available represents a unique
opportunity to quantify the response of thick vadose zones to major climatic
shifts extending back as far as the penultimate glaciation. Finally the
development of large scale vadose zone tracer test data and the estimation of
tra nsport parameters will provide new insight into the fundamental behavior of
arid zone hydrology.