* 9614928
* Continued Research on the Triassic and Jurassic Vertebrate  Faunas From the Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* William Hammer, Augustana College
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 06/30/2000
* USD 126,644.00

OPP 9614928 Hammer Abstract This award supports continued research on Triassic
and Jurassic fossil vertebrates from the Transantarctic Mountains. During the
1995/96 austral summer, a field team collected 120 new specimens of Triassic
vertebrates from sites near the Shackleton Glacier. In previous seasons Triassic
to Jurassic age vertebrates were recovered from localities near the Beardmore
Glacier. This award supports the continued preparation and study of these
collections, particularly the material collected recently. The new fossils are
all from the Early Triassic age lower Fremouw Formation and they represent at
least 12-16 different taxa, several of which appear to be new. Included are
15-20 partial to complete skeletons and numerous additional skulls, jaws, and
other diagnostic pieces of numerous herbivorous and carnivorous synapsids, small
diapsids, procolophonid anapsids and temnospondyl amphibians. Preparation of
most of the specimens is required before more precise identifications can be
made. This extensive amount of material will be used to determine whether the
greater diversity in assemblages found in the Shackleton Glacier area compared
to similar age collections made near the Beardmore Glacier is due to climate or
facies. The Shackleton localities are upland from the Beardmore vertebrate sites
and the climatic differences may have effected the relative diversity of the
faunas. An interpretation of the taphonomic/depositional settings for each
locality will also be made. Finally, studies on the evolutionary significance of
the high latitude vertebrate faunas from the Mesozoic (Early Triassic, early
Middle Triassic and Early Jurassic) will continue. Because vertebrates of
several different ages spanning the Triassic to Jurassic are now known from
Antarctica, they provide a unique opportunity to study the evolution of high
latitude faunas. These faunas also contribute to our understanding of high
latitude climates during this time.