* 9615839
* The Emergence of Structures in Planetary Nebulae
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Julie Lutz, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 09/30/1998
* USD 57,410.00

AST-9615839 ABSTRACT: J. Lutz This research project will involve the
investigations of the connections between Asymptotic Giant Branch (AGB) stars,
Post-AGB objects and Planetary Nebulae (PN) by using PN morphologies as a focus
for the work. Recent observational studies indicate that the structures observed
in PN shells seem to originate earlier in the star's history than was suspected
previously. Consequently, a careful review of the phenomena manifested by stars
in the evolutionary stages prior to the PN (i.e., AGB stars and Post-AGB
objects) will be conducted to elucidate the shaping mechanisms (possibilities
include binary star interactions, pulsations, winds in single stars, disks) for
PN shells. The research project has several phases. It begins with an
investigation of the literature on AGB stars and Post-AGB objects. Additional
information will be gained by attending two specialized meetings (June and July
1997) which deal with current research on Stellar Pulsations and Cool Stars. The
observing phase of the research will begin in September 1997. Based on the
knowledge gained in the first phase of the research, optical and infrared
observations will be obtained with the goal of elucidating how structures emerge
in PN shells. The results from the research project will be published and
presentations at professional meetings will be given. These research activities
are being carried out under the NSF Career Advancement Awards (CAA) program. The
research will be done while working in the Astronomy Department at the
University of Washington with collaborators Bruce Balick and George Wallerstein,
who are experts in PN and AGB stars respectively. The Principal Investigator
will be on sabbatical leave from the Washington State University during the
period of the award and thus will be able to do research full time.