* 9615540
* Processing and Forming of Laminated Metal Composites
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Amiya Mukherjee, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 04/30/2001
* USD 300,000.00

Mukherjee DMI-9615540 Laminated Metal Composite (LMC) provides a very high
strength and exceptional fracture toughness for the transportatimn industry, in
particular, for aerospace and high speed grould vehicle applications. To realize
its full potential applications, technical advances in near-net shape
manufacturing is required. The current state of knowledge regarding LMC is
lacking in understanding of the microstructure and process characteristics of
the formed LMC. This research project investigates the process characteristics
and the superplastic formability of multilayered laminated metal composites
(LMC) which consists of aluminum-based metal alloy and metal-matrix monolithic
layered materials. The specific goal of this project is to understand the
microstructure of the LMCs and to provide better control parameters in the
manufacturing process. The outcomes of this study could provide useful findings
for die designs and a better furnace capabilities to carry out the effective
forming operation. This collaborative research project addresses fundamental
issues on the characterization of microstructure of the near-net shape LMC
manufacturing process. The research project has a balance between theory and
experiment, and will provide valuable findings for the laminated metal composite
industry.