* 9615515
* Preliminary Exploration of Molecular Methods for the        Specific Detection and Differentiation of the Bdellovibrios
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Henry Williams, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1998
* USD 74,994.00

Abstract: 9615515, PI-Williams: Bdellovibrios are procaryotic, parasitic
predators which prey on susceptible gram-negative bacilli. Based on the
observation that bdellovibrios reduce the population of its prey in laboratory
vessels, a logical question is, does the predatory bacterium play some role in
the control of microbial populations in nature? Adequate experimentation to
resolve this question has not been reported. This is largely due to the
limitation in technology to detect and monitor the predator in the environment.
The only method currently available for the specific detection of bdellovibrios
is the culture technique. As with nearly all cultural methods this technique has
substantial limitations. Serological and molecular probes and polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) primers which allow for the specific detection of a number of
bacterial species have been constructed. However such probes have not been
developed for the bdellovibrios. A probe for the bdellovibrios willould allow
studies which monitor the numbers of these predators in the environment. The
ability to detect those which are parasitic within host cells would allow an
estimation of the number of infected cells in the environment and hence define
the impact of bdellovibrios on populations of susceptible bacteria. The aim of
this researchproposal is to develop a genetic probe and PCR primers which can be
used for the specific detection of bdellovibrios in aquatic environments.
Initial efforts will be made to identify unique sequences among known nucleic
acid sequences for bdellovibrios and to test these as probes and as PCR primers.
The objectives and experimental approaches to developing a probe specific for
the bdellovibrio group or subgroups of these organisms are described below. 1.
Identification and synthesis of specific DNA oligonucleotide sequences for use
as detection probes and PCR primers; identification of candidate genomic
restriction fragment sequences for use as DNA probes and their production by
cloning and/or PCR synthesis; identification of candidate rRNA sequences and
construction of rRNA probes. 2. To examine the use and sensitivity of PCR to
detect bdellovibrios in laboratory microcosms. 3. To examine the use of genus
and species specific probes to confirm the identification of plaques (colonies)
of bdellovibrios recovered on culture medium.