* 9615499
* LTREB: A Long-Term Study of the Role of Biotic and Abiotic  Factors in a Chilean Semiarid Community
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Peter Meserve, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/1999
* USD 85,000.00

9615499 Meserve This project now in its eighth year is a long-term, large-scale
experimental manipulation examining the importance of biotic interactions
including predation, interspecific competition and herbivory in a Chilean
semiarid community. At the same time, responses of plants and animals to abiotic
factors related to climatic events are being quantified. Results thus far have
documented that vertebrate predators had major effects on numbers and survival
of two core small mammal species, and relatively minor effects on opportunistic
ones. Significant time by competitor interactions on numbers and survival of
some species suggests interference effects. Heterogeneous effects of
predator/herbivore exclusions were detected on plant cover of perennials and
ephemerals. Seeds of several ephemeral species decreased on plots where small
mammals were excluded suggesting positive effects of herbivory on plant species
diversity. These biotic responses have been superimposed on strong demographic
responses of small mammals and plants to El Nino events. During prevailing
drought periods, biotic interactions appear less important due to extreme
resource and water limitation. Consequently, it is vital to continue to monitor
the biotic dynamics in response to periodic abiotic forces that vary over long
time scales. This study is currently the longest large-scale experimental study
of the role of biotic and abiotic factors in the temperate Neotropics.