* 9615704
* Contrasting Architecture and Dynamics of the Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Robin Bell, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 06/30/2002
* USD 470,059.00

Bell and Buck: OPP 9615704 Blankenship: OPP 9615832 Abstract Continental
extension produces a great variety of structures from the linear narrow rifts of
the East African Rift to the diffuse extension of the Basin and Range Province
of the Western U.S. Rift shoulder uplift varies dramatically between rift
flanks. The cause of variable rift width and crustal thinning is fairly well
explained by variable initial heat flow and crustal thickness. Mechanical
stretching of the lithosphere has been linked to rift shoulder uplift but the
cause of variable rift flank uplift remains poorly understood. The
Transantarctic Mountains (TAM) are an extreme example of rift flank uplift,
extending over 3500 km across Antarctica and reaching elevations up to 4500 m
and thus constitute a unique feature of EarthOs crust. The range was formed in
the extensional environment associated with the Mesozoic and Cenozoic breakup of
Gondwanaland. Geological and geophysical work has shown that the TAM developed
along the long-lived lithospheric boundary between East and West Antarctica
reactivated by a complex history of extensional and translational microplate
motions. The TAM are not uniform along strike. Along the OWilkes FrontO, the
northern segment of the rift extends from North Victoria Land to Byrd Glacier.
The Wilkes Front architecture consists of (1) thin, extended crust forming the
Victoria Land Basin in the Ross Sea, (2) the TAM rift shoulder, and (3) a long-
wavelength down- ward forming the Wilkes Basin. Contrasting structures are
mapped along the OPensacola/PoleO Front, the southern segment of the rift
extending from the Nimrod Glacier to the Pensacola Mountains. Along this
southern section no rift basin has been mapped to date and the down-ward along
the East Antarctic, or ObacksideO, edge of the mountains is less pronounced. A
flexural model linking the extension in the Ross Sea to the formation of both
the mountains and the Wilkes Basin has been considered as a me chanism for
uplift of the entire mountain range. The variability in fundamental architecture
along the TAM indicates that neither a single event nor a sequence of identical
events produced the rift flank uplift. The observation of variable architecture
suggests complex mechanisms and possibly a fundamental limitation in maximum
sustainable rift flank elevation. The motivation for studying the TAM is to try
to understand the geodynamics of this extreme elevation rift flank. Are the
geodynamics of the area unique, or does the history of glaciation and related
erosion contribute to the extreme uplift? With the existing data sets it is
difficult to confidently constrain the geological architecture across
representative sections of the TAM. Any effort to refine geodynamic mechanisms
requires this basic understanding of the TAM architecture. The goal of this
project is to (1) constrain the architecture of the rift system as well as the
distribution and structure of sedimentary basins, glacial erosion and mafic
igneous rocks surrounding the rift flank by acquiring three long wavelength
geophysical transects with integrated gravity, magnetics, ice- penetrating
radar, and ice surface measurements, (2) quantify the contribution of various
geodynamic mechanisms to understand the geological conditions which can lead to
extreme rift flank uplift, and (3) use the improved understanding of
architecture and geophysical data to test geodynamic models in order to improve
our understanding both of the TAM geodynamics and the general problem of the
geodynamics of rift flank uplift worldwide. This project will allow development
of a generalized framework for understanding the development of rift flank
uplift as well as address the question of the specific geodynamic evolution of
the TAM.