* 9615167
* Collaborative Research:  Volcanic Records from the Siple    and Taylor Dome Ice Cores, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2003
* Nelia Dunbar, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 03/31/2003
* USD 47,395.00

9614384 Zielinski 9615167 Dunbar This award supports a project to characterize
the volcanic material in the Siple Dome and Taylor Dome ice cores. The time
series of volcanic aerosol and tephra deposition available in high-resolution,
bi-polar ice cores is the most reliable means of developing continuous and
lengthy records of past volcanic activity and assessing the climatic and
environmental impact of global volcanism. The volcanic records from the Siple
Dome ice core, initial ice core in the West Antarctica Ice Core Program
(WAISCORES), and the Taylor Dome core, recently collected from the
Transantarctic Mountains, will provide the Southern Hemisphere component of this
record. These results will complement the lengthy GISP2 volcanic record from
Greenland. Annual resolution should be available in the Siple Dome core for the
Holocene resulting in the longest volcanic record with such resolution from
Antarctica. Total length of record thought to be available from the Siple Dome
core is 80,000 years whereas that for the Taylor Dome core is probably over
100,000 years. Although temporal resolution will be much coarser in the glacial
portion of the Siple Dome core and in much of the Taylor Dome core, correlations
and comparisons of the volcanic records from those cores with those from the
GISP2 core are still possible. Evaluation of the timing of the volcanic signals
in relationship to the record of changing climatic conditions available in these
ice cores provides critical information on the climate forcing capabilities of
global volcanism on decadal to century time scales through the Holocene. The key
to developing a reliable chronology of past volcanism from the Siple Dome core
is the simultaneous and continuous measurement of SO42-, a direct measure of the
volcanic H2SO4 produced from the eruption, and the search for tephra in the same
subsamples over the entire length of the core. The glaciochemical record will be
available through other investigator s in the Siple Dome project. The
glaciochemical record for the Taylor Dome core is presently available. Locating
tephra and identifying the source of the volcanic glass through both optical
microscope and microbeam (both electron and ion microprobes) analyses will
verify the source of the chemical signal and help differentiate between
equatorial and local eruptions. Comparisons with the GISP2 volcanic record will
assist in achieving this goal. This multiparameter approach to deciphering the
volcanic record will improve on our understanding of the influence of volcanism
on climate both interhemispherically and intrahemispherically. The correlation
of tephra found in these cores with that found in marine sediments and in the
terrestrial record will expand on the chronology of global volcanism and improve
the correlation among ice core, marine, and terrestrial proxy climatic records.
Visible tephra layers that should exist in the Siple Dome core and do exist in
the Taylor Dome core will provide additional absolute time lines for possible
correlations between the two cores, among previously collected Antarctica ice
cores and with tephra studies in blue ice areas of Western Antarctica and the
Transantarctic Mountains.