* 9615317
* The Genetic Basis of Disease Resistance in Natural          Populations of Silene alba
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Janis Antonovics, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/29/2000
* USD 150,000.00

9615317 Antonovics Plants are assailed by a wide array of pathogens, and these
are a serious problem in agriculture. However, the role of pathogens in
determining the abundance of species in the wild is much less well understood;
epidemics seem rarer, pathogens are less apparent, and effects on plant
abundance are not always self- evident. Over the past ten years, Dr. Antonovics
and his colleagues have used the anther-smut fungal disease of the plant white
campion (Silene alba) as a model system to understand how pathogens impact
natural populations. Individual plants differ in their susceptibility to the
disease, but the genetic basis of this susceptibility is not understood. It is
also not clear why populations do not become completely resistant; presumably
the genes determining resistance have negative side-effects. This research will
investigate whether one or several genes are involved in susceptibility,
localize these genes using DNA markers, and investigate the causes of the
resistance cost. Dr. Antonovics will also investigate whether the resistance is
general to many pathogens or specific to just this one fungus. Identification of
resistance genes will allow rigorous study of how these genes are distributed in
nature, and of the role they play in rescuing plant populations from the
disease. This research will improve understanding of how pathogens control plant
populations, and will therefore be of direct relevance to biological weed
control and conservation biology. It will also open the door for the possible
use of these resistance genes in developing resistant transgenic crops.