* 9615708
* Behavioral Strategies of Sit-and-Wait Foragers: Models of   Ant Lion Foraging
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Nicholas Gotelli, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 11/30/2000
* USD 115,000.00

GOTELLI DEB-9615708 Antlion larvae build and maintain steep-sided pits which are
used to trap small arthropods. The probability of the antlion reaching adulthood
depends on its ability to locate a suitable site for its pit and to determine
when to change sites while avoiding predation. This proposal attempts to unravel
the behavioral rules that antlions use in deciding whether or not to stay in a
particular pit. The investigators will combine computer models (individual-based
simulation models and dynamic programming models) with field data and field and
laboratory experiments to evaluate a wide variety of potential behavioral
strategies and assess their success under a range of ecological conditions. This
work will significantly expand the current understanding of the ecological
impact of predators, such as antlions, that sieve prey from the environment. Ant
lions are significant predators on local ant communities, and they exert a
potentially significant effect on the populations of these economically
important organisms. The investigators field experiments will provide data that
will enable a quantifying of the potential seasonal impact of antlion predation
on local ant populations. This research will provide information on a general
class of sit-and-wait predators which are important insect predators.