* 9615657
* Chemists and Cultures in Early Modern Germany:  Andreas     Libavius and his War of Words
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Bruce Moran, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Seely
* 08/31/2000
* USD 81,143.00

Libavius was one of the most prolific writers of the early modern era yet only
scant attention has been given to his writings by historians of science. In over
twenty large volumes he defended his own understanding of the dignity and
disciplinary nature of chemistry and contended with the philosophical claims,
laboratory procedures, and interpretations of nature proffered by Paracelsian
empirics, court physicians, literate artisans, and members of academic
faculties. The study will follow the course of Libavius's polemics and will
investigate the wide range of social, political, moral and religious issues that
were often included in debates about chemical-medical reform, the proper use of
chemical language, and the preparation of chemical medicines. By analyzing the
broader social and intellectual content of the chemical-medical debates
surrounding Libavius and by exploring the dynamics of cultural exchange within
and between local chemical communities, the project will suggest new ways of
understanding the history of chemistry. On a broader level, the discussion of
chemists and cultures will propose new techniques for assessing the influence of
chemistry itself among the many currents intersecting within the Scientific
Revolution. ¢ ¥©/¥ ╣>│%┐┤Á ¢│╣Á>¥╣¢¥¢ />┤ ║©╣%?¢?║©Á╝¢ ║?%╣│` _/,Á╝¢ />┤ ¥©Á
ÀÁ>Á╝/% ║┐▓%╣│