* 9615877
* Mathematical Sciences: VIP/Thin Film Deposition: Atomic     Level Simulations, Verification, and Implementation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Joseph Greene, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/2001
* USD 2,088,642.00

This award will support a multi-disciplinary collaboration on the development of
mathematical and computer simulation techniques which are sufficiently
sophisticated, flexible and robust to meaningfully predict a complex
manufacturing process. Success in this program will represent a significant step
forward in the complexity of real manufacturing issues which can be effectively
addressed by simulation. The specific process which will be addressed in this
program is the growth of multilayer metal and dielectric films, which need to be
patterned with precision of a fraction of a micron for contacting the tens of
millions of individual device elements within modern microelectronic circuits.
The program will combine mathematical models with atomic-level computer
simulations to predictively model the film growth over length scales ranging
from the atomic to the microstructural. These predictions will then be compared
with atomic-scale characterization (using state-of the-art electron and ion
microscopy techniques) of experimental depositions, to refine our understanding
of the exact physical processes describing film growth, and to verify and refine
the predictive models. The experimental depositions will be performed both with
state-of-the-art research systems which provide atomic-scale control of film
growth, and with real microelectronics processing facilities at Lucent
Technologies. This program will assemble a team of internationally recognized
mathematicians, physicists and materials scientists. The program goals are to
improve substantially the deposition of microelectronic contact layers, a
central challenge to the two hundred billion dollar microelectronics industry,
and to expand current acceptance of what is technically "possible" in terms of
predictive modeling of complex manufacturing processes. Funding for this
activity will be provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the MPS
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the NSF Engineering Directorate, and by
DARPA .