* 9615567
* RUI:  Molecular Evolution of the Glucose Phosphate          Isomerase Locus in Argopecten irradians
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Maureen Krause, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/2000
* USD 90,918.00

9615567 KRAUSE The degree to which genetic variation for metabolic enzymes can
potentially translate into biochemical, physiological and fitness differences
among individuals is largely unknown. Previous studies suggest that protein
variation for an enzyme involved in energy metabolism from the bay scallop,
Argopecten irradians, directly affects biochemical and production-related
traits. Scallop size, reproductive output, and certain biochemical traits are
associated with genetic variation for the enzyme glucose phosphate isomerase
(Gpi). The proposed research will build on previous work and examine DNA
sequence variation for the Gpi gene. DNA from individuals with different Gpi
protein variants will be sequenced following isolation and amplification by the
polymerase chain reaction. A variety of statistical tests will be applied to the
nucleotide sequence data in order to test hypotheses regarding the relative
strength of random and selective forces maintaining genetic variation at Gpi.
Also, the relationships among nucleotide variation and previously characterized
protein and size differences among scallops will be explored. The results from
this study will contribute to the general body of knowledge describing the
relative roles of random and selective forces in evolution. More importantly,
these data will begin to address the functional relevance of nucleotide
variation and the hypothesis that genetic differences for this glycolytic enzyme
translate into fitness differences among individuals in a population.