* 9615161
* Antarctic Tectonics Evolution: CD-ROM
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Ian Dalziel, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 04/30/2000
* USD 139,178.00

OPP 9615161 Lawver and Dalziel Abstract Antarctica is the Earth's most isolated
continent. It is surrounded by actively spreading ridges except in the South
American sector. Antarctica is the only glaciated continent on the planet, and
as such constitutes a unique element in the Earth's environment. The tectonic
evolution of its plate boundaries, and of features within the Antarctic plate,
controlled development of the seaways around and through the continent prior to
and during the onset of glaciation. In addition to its unique role in the
present day planetary environment and its classic one as the Okeystone of
GondwanalandO during Paleozoic and early Mesozoic times, Antarctica has played
an important role in global dynamics over the past 1.0 billion years, and indeed
throughout Earth history. Because Antarctica is ice covered, few continent-wide
compilation maps have been attempted. This award supports a project to produce a
set of digital geologic reference maps of the Antarctic. A new tectonic map of
the Antarctic plate will incorporate: geological data, both from previously-
published maps, from new papers and from unpublished sources; and terrestrial
and marine tectonic data, including seafloor structure derived from Geosat
satellite gravity data, and seafloor age and spreading history information.
Moreover, it will be based on the sub-ice topography. In addition to a tectonic
map, a series of reconstructions centered on Antarctica, starting with the early
Neoproterozoic and continuing through to the Cenozoic will be produced. These
maps will be presented in digital form on a CD-ROM, so that they can be easily
reproduced and used by others. The digital information will be compiled in a
format that will allow future data sets to be easily added to the database and
to allow old data to be easily updated, modified or discarded. Besides the maps
mentioned above, the CD-ROM will include digitized versions of updated ice-
thickness and sub-ice top ography maps, and an archive of available data as
other investigators wish to contribute. Other data, such as aerogeophysical and
paleomagnetic data, would be covered with separate chapters in the accompanying
text and separate files on the CD-ROM. About 1000 copies of the CD and
accompanying text will be available for the cost of postage and handling.
Further copies can be distributed for the cost of reproduction, postage and
handling.