* 9615897
* A New Approach for Rapidly Transient Evolutionary Seismic   Spectral Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Theodore Wu, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 01/31/2000
* USD 238,945.00

A new method, the Hilbert-Huang Technique (HHT), is being developed to perform
analysis of highly transient time series from nonlinear, dispersive, and
nonstationary systems. Such data as typical of records on natural disasters for
which the conventional Fourier and Fourier-akin (such as the various wavelet
schemes) have severe drawbacks. This new method consists of two parts: the
Intrinsic-Mode Decomposition (IMP) scheme, and the Hilbert Spectral Analysis
(HSA) technique. The IMD generates the Intrinsic Base Functions from the raw
data; and the HSA then concerts the IBF into an energy-frequency-time
distribution through the Hilbert transform. The result yields the Hilbert
Spectrum depending on both time and time varying-frequency as two spectral
independent variables. This project will conduct the following research: First,
a thorough understanding of the physical characteristics of the HHT in seismic
data analysis will be established. For this purpose, both rigorous theoretical
analyses and controlled laboratory tests will conducted. Second, the HHT method
will be applied to seismic data and explore the potential applications in the
specific take of determining site-specific spectra. Data collected during the
Northridge earthquake (1994) and those collected from Taiwan including the
SMART-l and SMART-2 network will be used. Specific tasks include: (a) To derive
accurate information on strong-motion and weak-motion evolutions due to the
geophysical effects along the paths of propagation, and the site effects on
seismic waves. (b) To determine the energy-frequency-time history of the seismic
activities and their response spectra; to evaluate the nonlinear wave evolution
and surface wave dispersion due to complex earth structure. (c) To clarify the
role of the suspected excessive vertical motion by comparison with the known
earthquake damages. (d) To establish a methodology for evaluating the site-
specific spectra based on the HHT and the data analyzed above. The data will be
classified by their sources and grouped by the seismic strengths to isolate the
propagation effects through earthquakes of all sizes. Specific attention will be
on the identification of propagation path and site-specific geo-engineering
properties of the site.