* 9615274
* Geochemical Evolution of the Lithospheric Mantle Beneath    East Antarctica: Connections to the Plate Tectonic          Development of Eastern Gondwanaland
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Samuel Mukasa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/2000
* USD 134,921.00

9615274 Mukasa Ultramafic xenolith suites from Jetty Peninsula, East
Antarctica, provide an unparalleled opportunity to examine and describe the
consequences of magma/rock reactions equilibrated at subcontinental mantle
temperatures and pressures during the lithospheric extension that fragmented
eastern Gondwanaland at the end of the Jurassic and beginning of the Cretaceous.
The samples to be used in this study were collected by Soviet/Russian
expeditions during 1982-83, 1983-84 and 1986-87 and have been put entirely at
our disposal by Dr. Alex Andronikov of the Department of Antarctic Geology, VNII
Okeangeologia, St. Petersburg, Russia (now on leave at the University of G
ttingen, Germany). This award will support analytical work to determine the Nd,
Sr, and Pb isotopic compositions and Rb/Sr, Sm/Nd, and U/Pb elemental ratios for
clinopyroxene (cpx) and glass taken from garnet lherzolite and spinel lherzolite
xenoliths, and to perform the same measurements on whole-rock samples from the
host magmatic rocks which are alkaline picrite, aln ite, and nephelinite in
composition. In addition, the analytical program will include concentration
measurements, using secondary ionization mass spectrometry (SIMS), of the rare
earth elements (REE) and Ba, Cs, Cr, K, Nb, Rb, Sr, Ti, V, Y and Zr (in
different combinations) in cpx, garnet and the various glasses present in some
of the xenoliths. With his recent award of a fellowship by the Alexander von
Humboldt Foundation, Dr. Andronikov will carry out complementary studies on the
same materials at the University of G ttingen, Germany, focusing on xenolith
mineral chemistry determined by electron microprobe, and the major and trace
element compositions of the host rocks measured by X-ray fluorescence
spectrometry and Inductively Coupled Plasma-mass spectrometry, respectively. The
combined data will allow, for a subset of the xenoliths, assessment of the
degree and effects of partial melting in lherzolites derived from different
depths in the upper mantle, and, for a glass-bearing subset, characterization of
the compositions of the melts which intruded the mantle lithosphere and altered
its composition by infiltration. Through analysis of these results, this work
will lead to better understanding of the scale of chemical interactions between
melts and adjacent wall rocks at mantle depths in the Earth. The principal
objectives of this work are to model the magmatic processes which affect
subcontinental mantle lithosphere during rifting, reconstruct the thermal
evolution of the lithosphere during such deformation, determine the provenance
of magmas which intrude the lithosphere at various times during its evolution,
and with model ages, establish a connection between the evolution of the
lithospheric mantle beneath East Antarctica and the plate tectonic history of
eastern Gondwanaland. In addition to the importance of this work to regional
geologic models, understanding the processes that control lithospheric evolution
during extension will provide important general constraints on thermo-mechanical
models of rifting, and on chemical evolution of the mantle beneath continents.