* 9615383
* Ecology of Darwin's Finches on the Galapagos Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2004
* B. Rosemary Grant, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2004
* USD 425,120.00

9615383 Grant The goal of the proposed research is to understand the processes
involved in speciation and adaptive radiation. It will be carried out on the
small island of Daphne Major in the Galapagos archipelago. Previous research has
shown that the three species of Darwin's Finches on the island occasionally
hybridize. Over the past 20 years almost all individuals on the island have been
uniquely banded, and pedigree analysis has shown that hybrids may survive and
breed as well as or better than the parental species at certain times. The
proposed research will build on the long-term data set to complete a demographic
study of the three cohorts of all species and hybrids produced in 1983, 1984 and
1987. These will be the first complete analyses of a cohort of hybrids, possibly
for any organism in nature. The study will involve using molecular methods to
make unambiguous assignments of parentage, and ecological methods for
determining the causes of variation in the fates of individuals. The complete
data will allow a measurement of the long-term genetic fitness consequences of
hybridization, and will allow modeling of the long-term dynamics of these
interacting species. This research is important for understanding the origin and
maintenance of biodiversity. Speciation is a key process for generating
biological diversity, yet little is known about the ecological and
microevolutionary forces responsible for speciation. The proposed research takes
advantage of an exceptionally favorable situation for directly investigating
some of the forces at work in the final stages of speciation when hybridization
is still possible. For conservation biology, the research will help to
illuminate the ecological factors that influence genetic variation in small and
potentially endangered populations.