* 9615237
* Theoretical Investigation and Numerical Simulation of High  Pressure Plasma Microdischarges
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* William Williamson, University of Toledo
* Continuing grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 07/31/1998
* USD 97,484.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9615237 Principal Investigator: William Williamson Title:
Theoretical Investigation and Numerical Simulation of High Pressure Plasma
Microdischarges Analysis: Theoretical and computational research activities to
develop a comprehensive understanding of high pressure plasma microdischarge
physics and engineering principles will be pursued. This research will form the
basis for development of the microdischarge cells to be used in plasma display
panel (PDP) technologies. PDP technologies are the only flat panel display
technology with large screen potential. The PDP area is presently undominated,
therefore this research offers an opportunity for significant contribute towards
a leadership position for the United States. The grant research activities will
include several important investigations: (1) the behavior of gas mixtures; (2)
investigation of voltage-transfer curves for multi-component mixtures using
simulations and analytic theory in to learn how to optimize them for maximum
efficiencies and luminous outputs for given phosphor response functions; (3)
expansion of the atomic database for the noble gasses used in discharge cells.
Additional cross-sections for (Ne, Ar and Kr) are needed. Penning ionization,
dimer ion formation, neutral kinetics and the tracking of photons (including
radiation trapping) will be included in the simulation. (4) the inclusion of
3-dimensional effects such as barrier ribs and varying cell geometries. The
overall approach is based on careful study of the basic principles involved,
careful computational design to include many synergistic plasma, atomic, and
solid state factors accurately yet efficiently, and a serious reliance on
matching predications with available experiments and practical cell design
strategies. Successful development of codes to accurately model these basic
effects and to create a design tool of this sophistication will be of great
value to the display technology industry. The research also provide s a
multidisciplinary learning experience for students in the strong growth flat
panel display area.