* 9615563
* Global Change and the Carbon Balance of Arctic Ecosystems:  The Importance of Carbon-Nutrient Interactions in Soils
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Gaius Shaver, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 03/31/2001
* USD 749,151.00

9615563 Nadelhoffer Changes in terrestrial carbon cycles are often tightly
constrained by interactions between C and other elements, especially N and P.
The aim of this research is to improve the understanding of how carbon/nutrient
interactions in soils might affect the responses of arctic tundra ecosystems to
global environmental change. The research centers on the question, "What
controls the amount of C lost from tundra soils per unit N made available for
plant uptake?" This question is important because plant C gain in tundra
ecosystems is often strongly N-limited, and virtually all of the N made
available to vascular plants in tundra ecosystems comes from microbial
mineralization of soil organic matter. Thus the overall C balance of the
ecosystem is largely determined by the balance of plant C gains associated with
N uptake versus C losses due to soil respiration. The design of the research is
guided by a simple conceptual model, in which the large amount of soil organic
matter in tundra ecosystems is viewed as being composed of three interacting
organic matter pools with different turnover times and characteristic C:N ratios
(microbes are a fourth pool that mediates turnover of the other three, but which
is also much smaller than the other three). The overall hypothesis is that the
balance of C lost: N made available in tundra soils is controlled by
interactions between the chemical quality of soil organic matter (including
fresh litter) and environmental factors that determine the relative rates of
decomposition and interconversion of the various organic matter pools.
Additional hypotheses deal with the individual effects of (1) soil organic
matter quality, (2) drainage and associated aerobic/anaerobic conditions, and
(3) temperature. These hypotheses will be tested by measuring C losses and N
made available in soils from contrasting tundra ecosystem types that are already
known to differ in initial organic matter quality. A field experiment will
compare wet, moist, and dry heath tundras, and two laboratory experiments will
compare wet and moist tundras. One laboratory experiment will be on whole plant-
soil monoliths transported from the field, and the other laboratory experiment
will be on soils only; treatments will include manipulations of temperature,
drainage, and N and P availability. Isotopic tracers and natural abundances of C
&amp; N isotopes in various soil organic matter fractions will be used to help
estimate interactions and turnover rates of the major organic matter pools.
Because the experiments are long-term (the laboratory experiment will simulate 4
full growing seasons over the 3 years of the research, and the field
measurements will be made in the 10th through the 12th years of an experiment
begun in 1988), it may be possible to document changes in characteristics of
organic matter pools themselves, as well as the fluxes into and out of them. In
addition to direct tests of the hypotheses with data, a simulation model (MBL-
GEM) will be used as a synthesis tool and for longer-term prediction and
integration with past research on vegetation C-N interactions.