* 9615062
* RUI:  Using a Paleolimnological Approach to Assess the      Interactive Effects of Acidic Deposition and Eutrophication on Softwater Lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Peter Siver, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Dr. Carol Johnston
* 08/31/2001
* USD 308,906.00

ABSTRACT SIVER (96-15062) Acid deposition eutrophication remains two of the most
adverse processes effecting the health of aquatic resources today. Even though
much research on acid deposition and eutrophication has occurred over the last
two decades, scientists are just beginning to realize the importance of the
interactive effects of both processes on the condition of surface waters. Much
of the research on acid deposition over the last twenty years has focused on
terrestrial processes generating alkalinity in the watershed and, more recently,
on the role of sulfur biogeochemistry on within-lake alkalinity generation.
However, this heavy emphasis on alkalinity generation has sometimes obscured the
roles and interactions of other elements and processes in determining the long
term effects of acidic deposition. Likewise we understand many of the
consequences of entrophication, but are just now realizing that this process
also alters the sulfur cycle and changes the sedimentary sulfur storage record.
Although not completely understood, it is clear that the effects of acid
deposition and eutrophication in controlling the condition and subsequent
degradation of surface waters are coupled through the biogeochemical cycling of
sulfur, iron, and carbon, and the internal loading of phosphorus from the
sediments. A key to understanding these linkages resides in the chemical and
biotic signals that are archived in lake sediments. To understand the
interaction between acid deposition and eutrophication on the sulfur cycle of
lakes, and on the chemical signals we measure in sediments, we need to examine
biogenic markers in the sediment, which respond uniquely to either
eutrophication or acidification. It is now relatively common to use microscopic
algal remains to form inference models that are used to reconstruct historical
changes in the chemical structure of individual lakes. Such a paleolimnological
method has been successfully utilized to reconstruct pH and trophic status. An
independent tracking of changes in historical pH and trophic status relative to
alterations in the burial of sulfur will help elucidate the role that
eutrophication plays in explaining why some low alkalinity lakes in the
northeast have acidified as a result of acid deposition, while others have not.
The primary focus of this project will be to utilize a paleolimnological method
in order to elucidate the interaction of acidification and eutrophication on
sulfur biogeochemical cycling in southern New England lakes. We propose to
utilize scaled chrysophyte remains in order to form inference models that will
be used to reconstruct historical changes in the pH and trophic status of lakes,
and simultaneously analyze changes in the storage of sulfur, iron and carbon,
from the same waterbodies. The study will focus on changes over the last ca. 150
years, compare drainage (Connecticut lakes) and seepage (Cape Cod lakes) lakes,
and include waterbodies that span relatively wide contemporary trophic and pH
gradients. The project will effectively utilize and continue to add to large
paleolimnological data sets from both geographic regions.