* 9615473
* Collaborative Research: The Chemical Basis of Ethological   Isolation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Stevan Arnold, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1998
* USD 65,000.00

9615473 Arnold Understanding the genetic mechanisms underlying the process of
speciation is a long-sought goal in evolutionary biology. For example, it has
long been thought that genetic mutations resulting in slight differences in
chemicals used in communication during the reproductive process (pheromones)
might promote isolation of populations, and ultimately the emergence of new
species. This research project addresses this question using a well-studied
group of amphibians. Terrestrial "lungless" salamanders have evolved a
biochemical communication system in which courting males administer a pheromone
to females during courtship which increases female receptivity. The pheromone is
produced by a gland on the male's chin, and extracts from this gland contain
proteins, which have been partially purified and characterized, and used in
behavioral experiments. These proteins contain multiple isoforms, the amounts
and types of which vary between species and among populations within a single
species. Whether the prevalence of any single isoform offers reproductive
advantages or promotes isolation between evolving populations is unknown. In the
present study, the biochemical characteristics of these proteins and their role
in promoting behavioral isolation among salamander populations will be
investigated. The research is a collaboration between scientists at two
institutions and has two directions: 1) biochemical characterization of the
major protein components of gland extracts (relative concentrations, molecular
mass, amino acid composition, and N-terminal sequence); and 2) behavioral
bioassays to determine the biological activity of the various isoforms in
eliciting receptivity in female salamanders from different populations, and/or
fostering isolation. Taken together, these studies will allow insights into the
biochemical basis of the process of speciation.