* 9615659
* Metabolic Evolution and Taxonomy of Amitochondriate         Protists
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Miklos Muller, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 05/31/2000
* USD 170,000.00

9615659 Muller This project concerns the distribution, taxonomic significance
and evolutionary origin of the main types of eukaryotic energy metabolism.
Biochemical studies on a few parasitic protists have clearly shown that in
addition to the broadly distributed aerobic type with its
mitochondrial/cytosolic compartmentation, there are two additional types without
mitochondria: Type 1 without metabolic compartmentation (Giardia and Entamoeba)
and Type 2 with cytosolic/hydrogenosomal compartmentation (Trichomonas and other
trichomonads, anaerobic ciliates and fungi of the rumen). The presence of these
metabolic types in independent lineages suggests that they became established
repeatedly during evolution. Amitochondriate organisms differ from
mitochondriate ones by oxidizing pyruvate with pyruvate:ferredoxin
oxidoreductase and not with the nonhomologous pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
Type 1 organisms have a number of other glycolytic enzymes, which differ from
those found in organisms of Type 2 and also in mitochondriate protists. Type 2
organisms differ from the mitochondriate group by lacking mitochondria but
containing hydrogenesomes with a pathway leading to H2. The main metabolic
patterns thus can be recognized by the presence or absence a few selected
enzymes. Information on these enzymes and on the hydrogenosome is entirely
restricted to the few strictly parasitic or symbiotic species mentioned.
Morphological and ecological data reveal the existence also of a great variety
of free-living amitochondriate eukaryotes, all living in anoxic or hypoxic
habitats. In this project PCR methods combined with nucleotide sequencing will
be applied to such species selected from several taxa to establish the nature of
those key enzymes that can define their metabolic type. The sequences obtained
will also serve permit the phylogenetic reconstruction of the history of these
enzymes. In combination, this information will contribute to our understanding
of the evolution of eukaryotic energy metabolism and the much debated origin of
the hydrogenosome. %%% Similarly to animals, plants and fungi, most unicellular
organisms, protists, are aerobic, thus their metabolism depends on oxygen and is
linked to an organelle, the mitochondrion. A number of protists that live in
oxygen-free or oxygen-poor environments lack mitochondria and have a relatively
inefficient, oxygen-independent metabolism. The mechanisms of this metabolism
have been studied only in a few parasites. This research, made possible by
recent advances in molecular biology, will establish the metabolic types of
oxygen-independent free-living protists and will compare these with the
parasitic species. The results will contribute to our understanding of the
significance and evolutionary history of this type of metabolism, a topic that
until recently was beyond the possibilities of experimental study. ***