* 9615866
* Organometallic Chemistry of Carbon Dioxide:  Organometallic Chemistry in Unusual Media
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Donald Darensbourg, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 11/30/1999
* USD 454,500.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research on carbon dioxide by Dr. Donald J. Darensbourg of the
Chemistry Department, Texas A&amp;M University. The main focus of the research
is on the fundamental processes occurring during copolymerization of carbon
dioxide and epoxides to form polycarbonates. Information gleaned will be used to
design more selective catalysts for those reactions. Tungsten, zinc, cadmium,
and copper complexes will be used to probe the lability of alkoxide complexes,
epoxide complexation and subseqent coupling with ligated carboxylates, and
catalyst activity and selectivity. In addition, metal catalyzed copolymerization
reactions of carbon dioxide and aziridines to form polyurethane will be
explored, and reactivity of carbon dioxide with coordinatively and
electronically unsaturated metal carbonyl derivatives that contain pi-donor
ligands will be investigated. Biphasic catalysis and supercritical carbon
dioxide will be used for catalyst separation from the substrate and the product
in these homogeneous processes. Carbon dioxide is a potential source of carbon
for various uses. Also, it can serve as an environmentally-benign replacement
solvent for volatile organic compounds. In this study, catalysts will be
designed for reactions in which carbon dioxide is used as a source material for
synthesis of useful polymers. In addition, supercritical carbon dioxide will be
tested as a solvent for some of the separations needed in the process.