* 9615518
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Language Ideology,          Socialization and Pedagogy in a Haitian Rural Community
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1999
* Bambi Schieffelin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 12/31/1999
* USD 9,600.00

Currently, Haiti is undergoing vital political, social, and linguistic
reengineering. A new definition of national identity, one which takes into
account the voices --silenced for too long-- of the non-elite strata of the
population, is being actively negotiated. Central to ,the social construction of
Haitian identity is the ongoing debate regarding the status and roles of Haitian
Creole (Kreyol) and French. Placed within this larger sociopolitical context,
this research is ethnographic and sociolinguistic, designed to examine the
social construction of Haitian identity. Focusing on six Haitian teachers
working in a rural primary school, the use of different registers in Kreyol both
within and outside the formal setting of the classroom will be studied. Using
the language socialization paradigm, studies will analyze how the language
choices and language practices of teachers interacting both with students and
their own children, and students interacting with peers, are shaped by local
ideologies of linguistic variation and how they intersect with language
ideologies held at the macrosociological level. In addition to contributing an
anthropological perspective on how individuals assign meaning to their
discursive practices, this research will offer a case study of educational
language politics in a post-colonial nation of the Caribbean. It will also yield
empirical data in the largely unexplored area of register variation in Kreyol.
This project is funded jointly with the Wenner-Gren Foundation.