* 9615060
* Investigating Iceberg Calving from Antarctic Ice Sheets     Through Isotope Stage 11
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1997,09/30/2002
* James Hays, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 09/30/2002
* USD 350,000.00

Hays, Burckle, & Isley 9615060 This award supports research to better define
the chronology of iceberg calving from Antarctic ice sheets back to oxygen
isotope stage 11 (364-423 thousand-years before present (ka)). Re- assessment of
published data for sediments deposited during the last 100 ka suggests
deposition of ice-rafted debris (IRD) increased dramatically at 17, 22, 63 and
84 ka in the Atlantic and possibly the Indian sectors of the Southern Ocean. The
regional extent of these IRD events will be tested, and others will be
identified for the last 500 ka by examining the sediment record recovered in
curated cores. Age constraints will be provided by biostratigraphy,
chemostratigraphy (opal and carbonate records) and oxygen isotope stratigraphy.
However, carbon-14 dates (using accelerator mass-spectrometry) will also be
acquired in critical cores. The accumulation rate of abiogenic sediment (63 m -
1 mm) will be assessed and its lithology determined to derive IRD accumulation
rates. Preliminary mineralogical and geochemical analyses will attempt to trace
IRD to their source areas. Findings will yield a high resolution assessment of
iceberg calving from Antarctic ice sheets and allow insights to understanding
such things as the late Quaternary history of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. This
study will also assess whether Southern Hemisphere ice caps experienced melting
episodes at timescales of 2-3 ka, as might be inferred from records of
atmospheric temperatures in Antarctic Ice cores. Furthermore, the timing of
these Southern Ocean IRD events will be compared with Heinrich Events in the
Northern Hemisphere. Preliminary results suggest near-temporal correlations
between IRD deposition in the Southern Ocean and Northern Hemisphere Heinrich
Events 1, 2, 6 and an un-numbered event at 84 ka. For the two most recent
events, Southern Ocean IRD events appear to precede those of the Northern
Hemisphere by <3 ka. A finding of strong temporal correlation bet ween iceberg
calving in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres would suggest that external
forcing rather than internal ice sheet dynamics drove at least some of the
Heinrich events. On the other hand, if Southern ocean IRD events preceded those
of the Northern Hemisphere, factors other than the North Atlantic salinity
oscillator must have impacted global climate at sub-Milankovich timescales.