* 9615006
* Dissertation Research: Prevalence & Etiology of Linear Enamel Hypoplasia in Non-Human Primates
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* John Lukacs, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 02/28/1998
* USD 7,761.00

Lukacs/Guatelli-Steinberg Linear Enamel Hypoplasia (LEH) is a dental defect
appearing as one or more lines on a tooth's enamel surface. While a tooth is
being formed, disease or poor nutrition can disturb enamel production resulting
in LEH defects. Many anthropological studies have used LEH as a tool for
assessing levels of disease and/or nutritional stress in human populations.
Relatively little is known, however, about the prevalence and causes of LEH in
non-human primate populations. This study addresses questions regarding the
distribution and causes of LEH in prosimians, monkeys, and apes. The following
questions are examined using a variety of species from several museum
collections: 1) Does the height of the tooth and the length of time a tooth
takes to form have an influence on the variation in LEH patterns across
different primate species? 2) Do males and females have differences in the
degree to which they are affected by LEH and if so, does the difference relate
to the tooth's height and/or its duration of formation? 3) Does captivity, and
particularly the process of being transferred into captivity, have an influence
on the frequency of LEH? 4) Does low ranking social status in a social group
have an influence on the frequency of LEH? The proposed research will help to
provide an evaluation of LEH as a physiological stress indicator in non-human
primates, and the comparative data will help resolve questions about LEH in
humans. This research also will contribute to current knowledge about the degree
of stress in nonhuman primates associated with a variety of living conditions,
including the stresses of living in captivity or having subordinate social
status.