* 9615373
* Dissertation Research:  Potters and Politics:  An           Ethnoarchaeological Study of Political Competition and Craft Specialization in Paradijon, Southern Luzon, Philippines
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1998
* William Longacre, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1998
* USD 11,291.00

Under the direction of Dr. William Longacre, Mr. Mark Neupert will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will obtain neutron activation and
petrographic thin section analyses of ceramic materials collected during an
ethnoarchaeological study in Paradijon a village in the Philippines. He will
also conduct a network analysis to determine social ties among artisans who live
in the village. The goal of Mr. Neupert's research is to gain insight into the
relationship between social factors which structure a society and the artifacts
which individuals produce. During the course of his now completed fieldwork, Mr.
Neupert studied potters who produced ceramics for sale in local markets. Part of
this research involved determining the sources from which individuals obtained
clay and the techniques they employed to mix and prepare it. He wished to
determine the range of behavioral variation which existed and how this related
to other social factors such as political, economic and kinship ties. To
accomplish this he collected both social data and pottery produced by a range of
individuals .During his study in Paradijon, shifts fractional disputes resulted
in political realignments and this had a direct effect on how potters were
organized and the sources from which they obtained their raw materials. Mr.
Neupert will now conduct systematic analyses of these data at both a social and
material level. Archaeologists wish to reconstruct the behavior of the
prehistoric societies they study and given the limited material remains which
are usually recovered through excavation, this goal can be extremely difficult
to achieve. Because of its durable structure, pottery is often recovered in
large amounts and researchers attempt to develop analytic techniques which will
yield the maximum amount of information through study of it. To understand how a
potentially wide range of behaviors are indirectly reflected in such material
remains it is necessary to examine controlled present day situations where both
behavior and material byproduct can be directly observed. Mr. Neupert has
obtained relevant information from just such a context. This research is
important because it will provide a case study of interest to many
archaeologists. It will help to develop analytic techniques of potentially broad
archaeological value and assist in training a promising young scientist.