* 9615268
* Impacts of Climate Change on Antarctic Vascular Plants:  Warming and UV-B Radiation
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Thomas Day, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/30/2001
* USD 338,839.00

9615268 Day There is strong evidence that the climate of the Antarctic Peninsula
has changed appreciably in this century. Weather records indicate that mean
summer air temperatures have risen &gt;1oC over the past 45 yr at some Peninsula
locations. In addition to this warming trend, springtime ozone depletion events
have resulted in well-documented increases in UV-B radiation levels. These rapid
changes in regional climate provide a unique opportunity to assess the impacts
of climate change on vascular plants. While the presence of only two native
vascular plant species (Deschampsia antarctica and Colobanthus quitensis) and
their sparse distribution in Antarctica attest to the severe conditions for
plant survival, there are already indications that climate changes are exerting
a strong influence on these species. Regional warming appears to be leading to
rapid increases in populations of these species, based on censuses along the
Peninsula. The influence of enhanced UV-B levels on these species is less clear.
An experiment has been initiated in which temperature and UV radiation levels
are manipulated around naturally growing Deschampsia and Colobanthus plants on
the Antarctic Peninsula to assess their response to these factors. Assessment
involves examining changes in photosynthesis, growth and reproduction of these
plants following warming or exclusion of different UV components. During the
first field season growth significantly improved under warming treatments.
Exclusion of UV did not have any significant effects, although conclusions from
this short-term assessment would be premature. Field manipulations will be
continued, and expanded in the current assessment of plant responses in four key
areas: (1) photosynthesis, (2) general thermal adaptations, (3) reproduction,
and (4) soils. These areas are critical to understanding plant responses to
climate change in Antarctica. (1) Photosynthesis - Antarctic plants have unique
photosynthetic charact eristics including the ability to photosynthesize at near
freezing temperatures and a high sensitivity to moderate temperatures. Using in
vitro and in vivo techniques including gas exchange, chlorophyll fluorescence
and enzyme assays, the mechanisms responsible for these unique photosynthetic
traits will be examined. It will also be determined whether these species can
alter these traits in response to changes in climate. (2) General thermal
adaptations - These plants must also possess well-developed thermal adaptations
that allow them to survive in the Antarctic. Cell membrane stability, osmotic
potentials and supercooling characteristics of these plants will be noted to
determine how these characteristics change in response to our field
manipulations. (3) Reproduction - Warming appears to substantially improve
sexual reproduction in these plants. However, high levels of UV-B may reduce
reproductive success by damaging pollen. The influence of these opposing factors
will be observed by examining the production and viability of pollen and seeds
under field manipulations. (4) Soils - Nutrient cycling plays an important role
in controlling plant responses to changes in climate. Baseline information will
be collected on pools of nutrients (C, N, P) in soils and plants under our field
manipulations, which will be complimented with measurements of soil respiration.