* 9615886
* Organometallic Charge Transfer and the Reduction            of Carbon Dioxide
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1997,06/03/1999
* Clifford Kubiak, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/03/1999
* USD 383,000.00

Dr. Clifford P. Kubiak, Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, is supported
by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry
Division for an investigation of charge transfer in organometallic systems that
occur on the vibrational time scale and that can be interpreted within the
framework of the Marcus-Hush theories of electron transfer. Intervalence charge
transfer occurs near the vibrational time scale in some triruthenium clusters,
as evidenced by coalescence of carbonyl infrared stretching bands, and
differences in the electron exchange rates in these complexes reflect
differences in the electronic coupling within the complexes. In this project the
factors that control this coupling will be delineated. A self consistent
physical description of the phenomenon will be developed through detailed
spectroscopic studies of the dynamical IR averaging in the triruthenium
complexes. The picture then will be generalized by investigations of three
additional, strongly coupled organometallic charge transfer complexes: (i)
laterally interconnected dimers of trinuclear clear nickel clusters; (ii)
oligomeric metal clusters with strong metal-metal interactions; and (iii) new
tetra(diphenylphosphino) quinodimethane bridged dinuclear metal complexes. Many
of these complexes have appropriate redox potentials and catalytic properties
for the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide, and this aspect of their
chemistry will be developed. The transfer of electrons between reactants and
products is a critical step in many chemical reactions. In these processes the
maximum rate of electron transfer is defined by the rate of vibrations within
and solvent motions about the reactant and product molecules. This study
addresses electron transfer processes that take place at the same speed as
molecular vibrations and will determine the factors that control the electron
transfer rate. The results will permit both a better basic understanding of
electron transfer and provide a basis to design systems with tuned electron
transfer properties. The application of the basic knowledge gained in the
project will be demonstrated by devising systems that are capable of chemically
activating carbon dioxide.