* 9615139
* The Structure of the Crust and Lithosphere of the Antarctic Plate
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Michael Ritzwoller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 06/30/2001
* USD 185,000.00

9615139 Ritzwoller Abstract This award supports a study of the dispersion
characteristics (group and phase velocity, amplitude, and polarization) of
broadband (20 - 200 second) Rayleigh and Love waves propagating across
Antarctica and the southern oceans and to invert these measurements for higher
resolution (lateral: ~500 km) `tectonic scale' crustal and lithospheric models
of the Antarctic Plate. For the most part this research will be built upon
already existing methodological and data resources. In previous work, reliable
frequency-time filtering methods were developed for measuring broad band surface
wave dispersion on large data sets. These classical methods were applied
systematically across Eurasia and are yielding high resolution images of the
Eurasian crust and lithosphere. Second, there now exists a large, steadily
growing, and easily accessible data base of seismograms following large
magnitude high southern latitude earthquakes observed on broad band digital
instruments that have been emplaced in Antarctica, on southern oceanic islands,
and in southern South America, Africa and Australia (e.g., GDSN, IDA, IRIS/GSN,
GTSN, GEOSCOPE, AGSO, POSEIDON, MEDNET, etc.). The application of these existing
techniques to large volumes of high quality broad band data promises to yield
significant new information about the crust and lithosphere underlying the
Antarctic Plate. As a lead-in to this research, data were accumulated from
IRIS's DMC and GEOSCOPE covering the years 1977 - mid-1995. A subset of these
data (~500 events from 1990 to mid-1995) were analyzed to yield preliminary
group velocity maps across the Antarctic Plate from 20 second to 150 second
period. These preliminary maps provide new information about the following
issues (among numerous others): (1) lithospheric extension and rifting in the
West Antarctic, (2) the extent and nature of the East Antarctic Craton, and (3)
the nature of the `anomalous' upper mantle underlying the Austra lian -
Antarctic discordance. The new research supported by this award will extend
these measurements to a much larger waveform data set in order to improve
reliability and resolution. In addition, more accurate ray tracing methods will
be developed and applied to optimize lateral resolution. The ultimate product
will be a shear velocity model underlying the Antarctic Plate to a depth of
about 150 km. Collaborations with Antarctic geoscientists active in the region
will facilitate the interpretation of these models once they are constructed.