* 9615335
* Application of Junction Theory to the Analysis of           Sunflower Hybrids
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Barry Sinervo, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 01/31/2000
* USD 120,000.00

9615335 RIESEBERG One of the most exciting recent advances in biology has been
the ability to generate detailed genetic maps for almost any plant or animal
species. These maps not only are essential for isolating genes of interest, but
they also can be used to study important questions in population biology such as
how new species are formed. However, mapping data sets are very large and
complex, and the current theoretical and analytical tools for exploring them are
inadequate. The purpose of this grant is to develop and apply a new theoretical
approach called the "method of junctions" to the analysis and interpretation of
these complex data sets. Specifically, this method will be applied to mapping
data sets derived from hybrids between wild sunflower species of the genus
Helianthus. Problems that will be addressed include determining exactly what
genetic changes are necessary for new species to be formed and estimating how
rapidly this process might take place. Although this proposal will rely on
mapping data sets generated for wild sunflower species, the analytical methods
developed here should be broadly applicable to any data set that involves
genetic mapping data. Some theoretical and practical issues that these methods
may affect range from understanding how genes interact with other genes to
determining the most effective strategies for moving genes of agronomic
importance from wild plants into related cultivated species.