* 9615830
* U.S. RIDGE: Polymetal Sulfide Oxidation by Hydrothermal Vent Sulfur Oxidizers at Circumneutral pH
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Carl Wirsen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/2001
* USD 173,464.00

9615830 Wirsen New processes of sulfur metabolism are continuously being
described, yet aspects of chemolithotrophic metabolism of marine sulfur
oxidizers have not been well studied. These organisms may have adaptive
mechanisms for energy yielding oxidations in the highly buffered marine
environment compared to the extreme acid conditions in which many of these types
of organisms grow in freshwater environments. A new aspect of oxidation of
polymetal sulfides has recently been described which demonstrates this process
is carried out by natural marine populations and by pure cultures at the near
neutral pH of seawater. Isolates of marine non- acidophilic sulfur oxidizers
from different hydrothermal vent habitats will be studied to determine the
mechanism of this process, what component(s) of metal sulfides (e.g. pyrite,
chalcopyrite) are utilized for energy, what role abiological solubilization
plays, what the intermediates and end products of the oxidation are, and what
some of the limitations are that can control this process of polymetal sulfide
oxidation in the vent environment. Radioisotopic procedures to follow carbon
fixation; chemical assays and EDX to determine substrates, intermediates and
endproducts; factors controlling growth such as pH and oxygen; epifluorescent
microscopy for total direct counts and attached cells; and traditional cultural
techniques will all be used in addressing the above objectives. It is likely
that this process of circumneutral metal sulfide oxidation may play a
significant role in augmenting abiological processes of sulfide geochemistry and
mineralization. That the massive accumulations of metal sulfides which are
deposited around hydrothermal vent areas constitute a new and important long
term supply of chemolithotrophic energy for autotrophic processes necessitates a
clear and better understanding of the importance of this mechanism in the
overall transfer of geothermal into biochemical energy.