* 9615061
* Mechanisms of Olfactory Foraging by Antarctic               Procellariiform Seabirds
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1998
* Gabrielle Nevitt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 02/28/1998
* USD 10,469.00

9615061 Nevitt The Pelagic Ecosystems Studies (PES) program utilizes Framework
Science to analyze the operation of the Southern Ocean Marine Ecosystem.
Objectives of the program include questions relating to the development of
strategies for the management and exploitation of marine resources as part of
CCAMLR, and the effect of Climate Change upon the marine ecosystem. The
geographical focus for the work is the South Georgia area but the open nature of
the ecosystem means that the system must be studied in the context of the
operation of the Scotia Sea and the wider Southern Ocean. As part of the
proposed five-year research program for the period 1995-2000, the Pelagic
Ecosystem Studies Group have designed a coordinated series of research cruises.
In addition to those cruises targeted on specific aspects of ecosystem dynamics,
the study program includes a yearly repeat mesoscale survey cruise designed
specifically to provide information on large-scale, long-term, variability. The
repeat survey will focus on three aspects. First, it will establish a physical
oceanographic context for the season based on a 740 km transect between the
Maurice Ewing Bank and the Willis Islands, to the west of Bird Island. This
transect crosses the Polar Frontal Zone (PFZ) which is a key area for setting
the South Georgia studies in a larger context. Second, it will examine features
of community composition both along the transect and in two survey areas along
the north coast of South Georgia. Finally, it will collect information on the
population structure, distribution and abundance of krill in the same survey
areas. Krill is the dominant dietary component for many of the bird and seal
species studied at Bird Island, and interannual variation in predator
populations is largely related to changes in krill availability around the
island. Krill is also the focus of a major commercial fishery and is the key
organism in the CCAMLR resource based analyses of the ecosystem.