* 9615211
* Molecular and Morphological Phylogeny of the Non-Polychaete Annelids
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Kathryn Coates, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 01/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

9615211 BURRESON The phylum Annelida is an extremely diverse assemblage of
terrestrial, freshwater and marine worms. The phylum is divided into two main
groups. In one group, which includes the branchiobdellidans, hirudinea (leeches)
and oligochaetes (earthworms and relatives), the worms have a glandular
clitellum that secretes a protective cocoon around the eggs. In the other, which
includes the polychaetes, the worms lack a clitellum. Although the ecological
significance of the hirudinean and oligochaete worms is well established, they
are among the most poorly studied invertebrates with respect to their historical
relationships (phylogeny). In this study, Eugene Burreson and colleagues will
collect data from morphology and from both mitochondrial and nuclear gene
sequences, and use these data to reconstruct the phylogeny of non-polychate
annelids. Analyses will include separate investigations of relationships among
leeches, among branchiobdellidans, and among oligochaetes, as well as more
inclusive analyses involving all individuals in all three groups. The latter
analysis should answer long-standing questions on the origin of the
branchiobdellidans and leeches from oligochaete or polychaete ancestors. The
research should yield robust phylogenies that serve as a foundation for
subsequent studies on the life history patterns of these organisms.