* 9615691
* Making Sense of Information: An Electronic Library          of Environmental Exhibitions
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Wendy Pollock, Association of Science-Technology Centers
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 10/31/1999
* USD 250,000.00

9615691 Pollock The Association of Science-Technology Centers Incorporated
(ASTC) proposes a two-year pilot project (November 1996-October 1998) entitled
Making Sense of Information: An Electronic Library of Environmental Exhibitions.
This project will result in a prototype electronic library of exhibit-based
science resources on environmental themes accessible via the World Wide Web. The
electronic library will assist museum professionals in sharing exhibit
resources, and enhance access to those resources by teachers and students.
Science Center Teams from two leading science centers-the Exploratorium (San
Francisco) and the Brooklyn Children's Museum-will work in close collaboration
with ASTC staff to create and test models and frameworks for documenting
scientific resources on the WEB. Consultants and a Project Review Team will
contribute perspectives from other Internet-based science education efforts.
This collaborative project will enable ASTC to leverage the considerable
investment already made by NSF and other funders in two major exhibitions
related to environmental systems now in the final stages of development and
scheduled to begin nationwide tours through ASTC beginning in 1997. They are:
Breaking Ground, an exhibition about plants and people from the Brooklyn
Children's Museum and the Brooklyn Botanic Garden; and Turbulent Landscapes: The
Natural Forces That Shape Our World, an exhibition from the Exploratorium about
self-organization in nature, including phenomena like clouds and blowing sand
dunes. The electronic resource developed in this project will enhance the
outreach of science center exhibitions, expand science center educational
programming, and develop evaluation results for two traveling exhibitions. The
project will result in three principal outcomes: * Models and frameworks for the
electronic documentation of science museum exhibitions on the World Wide Web; *
Increasing efficiency and speed through which science centers share exhibit
ideas and r esources; and * Enhanced access to exhibit-based science resources
available via the World Wide Web to a projected 5,000 museum professionals,
25,000 students in 1,000 classrooms, and 1,000,000 World Wide Web users in the
U.S. and abroad. The long-term goal of this pilot project is to provide the
basis for classroom teacher training in using exhibit-based electronic resources
for science education. Evaluation will focus on the extent to which this new
electronic resource can enhance access and exchange of valuable intellectual and
cultural resources both within the museum community and between museums and
schools, locally and nationally. Ultimately, the resources developed in its
project will be disseminated and implemented through the interactions of
teacher-practitioners, technology and science consultants, researchers, the
Associations of Science-Technology Centers, and 475 museum members of ASTC. ***