* 9615542
* Consequences of Mutualism (Lichenization) on the Phylogeny  and Diversification of Ascomycetes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Francois Lutzoni, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 203,394.00

9615542 Lutzoni Symbiotic associations between distantly related life forms that
have complementary functions provided key innovations that led to the origin and
diversification of major groups of organisms. Lichen symbioses, resulting from
mutualistic interactions between fungi and photosynthetic algae (usually green
algae or cyanobacteria), enabled the evolution of at least 20% of all named
species of fungi. Most lichens include fungi that are ascomycetous in nature
(the others are basidiomycetes); 50% of all known species of ascomycetes are
involved in lichen symbioses. Despite the indisputable significance of mutualism
as a major evolutionary force, very little is known about the origins and
pathways of diversification among mutualistic groups. It is clear that the
phylogeny of filamentous ascomycetes and the impact of mutualism (lichenization)
on the evolution of this phylum can be understood only with taxonomic sampling
of lichen-forming ascomycetes that is at least comparable to the sampling
currently underway for non lichen-forming ascomycetes. Dr. Lutzoni at the Field
Museum in Chicago is commencing molecular phylogenetic analyses of lichen-
forming ascomycetes as part of this enterprise. One goal of the project is to
discover the ancestry and relationships of lichen-forming fungi relative to
their non-lichenized counterparts. To attain this goal, three molecular data
sets, from three nuclear genes expected to show informative variation, will be
gathered from representatives of a wide array of lichenized and non-lichenized
ascomycetes. Special emphasis will be directed toward the Gyalectales and
Lichinales, two taxonomic orders of lichen-forming fungi believed to comprise
the early radiation of filamentous ascomycetes. Theoretical issues relating to
constructing phylogenetic trees from DNA sequence data from multiple genes will
also be explored.