* 9615707
* Research Planning for Spatial Evaluation of Geotechnical    Earthquake Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Ronaldo Luna, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 09/30/1998
* USD 17,774.00

Luna 9615707 This project is for research planning, submitted in response to the
Minority Research Planning Grant Program Announcement, NSF 94-147, to support
preliminary studies related to the development of a competitive research project
and proposal. During the past five years there have been a number of research
initiatives to model the spatial distribution of geotechnical earthquake
hazards. This interest in spatial hazard modeling was due primarily to the
increased use of geographic information systems (GIS) by the engineering
community. A GIS is an ideal platform to analyze spatial data and information
that can aid in the decision making process of engineers and officials. On the
other hand, agencies that respond to the catastrophes produced by these hazards
have moved forward to implement disaster response systems that serve the areas
in a state of emergency. An integration of these two approaches will incorporate
engineering analyses into the procedures for mitigation and response of
earthquake damage, injuries, and loss of life. The goal is to enhance an
existing spatial analysis system that evaluates the potential for soil failure
through liquefaction by adding a liquefaction deformation analysis capability
and by introducing two additional hazards: ground motion amplification and slope
instability. The overall goal is to study spatial geotechnical earthquake hazard
models in the context of damage assessment and disaster (emergency) response
systems. The following are the specific objectives for the first phase, namely
proposal development, of this project: * Identify publications, research
activities and individuals related to hazard modeling in the area of
geotechnical earthquake engineering, and evaluate the implementation of these
models in a spatial framework. A focus on liquefaction deformation analyses is
anticipated. * Study the current development of damage assessment and disaster
response systems, identify collaborators, system developers and establish
contacts with national emergency agencies. * Evaluate the integration of the
hazard modeling with disaster response systems. * Prepare a comprehensive
proposal to NSF focused on the development of these geotechnical earthquake
hazard modules and their use with damage assessment and disaster response
systems.