* 9615937
* Scaling Forest Ecosystem Dynamics from Trees to Landscapes  (Collaborative Research)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Steven Garman, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1999
* USD 103,053.00

We propose to address a fundamental scaling dilemma that plagues ecologists and
resource managers. Many current issues are concerned with processes operating on
scales of landscapes or regions. But our conventional knowledge base is
comparatively fine-scale. For example, anthropogenic climatic change broaches
issues of regional (biome) or even larger-scale importance, but our best
empirical understanding of the mechanisms of ecological response is at the level
of the individual plant. Resource managers face a similar dilemma: multiple-use
or ecosystem management implies scales of watersheds or landscapes, yet our
knowledge base for forest management is founded at the level of individual trees
or homogeneous stands. In general, scaling involves a trade-off between
resolution (grain, or level of detail) and extent (the area or scope of the
study). Large extent comes at the expense of fine-grained resolution of detail,
and so, studies that focus on details do so over a small spatial domain, while
large-scale studies typically sacrifice detail to embrace coarser-resolution
patterns. This scaling trade-off can enforce an incompatibility across scales.
Large-scale studies typically are based on different conceptual models and
different data, as compared to fine-scale studies. While it might be assumed
optimistically that models derived from different empirical bases at disparate
scales might nonetheless converge at a common scale, in practice such models
cannot be compared rigorously because they have too little in common. We propose
to develop a suite of simulation models which address questions at different
scales while still maintaining a consistent conceptual and empirical basis. By
preserving this commonality among models, we can change scale rigorously as
needed, and when using alternative models we can be confident that discrepancies
in the predictions of these various models are due to explicit assumptions or
formulations rather than to unknowable incompati bilities in the underlying
data. We will begin with forest gap model, which simulates the establishment,
growth, and mortality of individual trees on a small (<0.1 ha) model plot, at an
annual timestep. Gap models typically are used to extrapolate tree-level
demographics to stand-level (~10 ha) dynamics over successional time periods. We
will then use this model to generate and parameterize three derived models
(metamodels) that reproduce selected coarse-resolution aspects of the gap
model's behavior, but do so with much greater computational efficiency. We
propose to demonstrate this approach with a nonlinear stage-structured model, a
semi-markovian patch transition model, and a cellular automaton. Each metamodel
emphasizes a different aspect of forest dynamics, and so each is amenable to
particular kinds of applications. We have selected the forests of the Pacific
Northwest (PNW) as a testbed for the development of this methodology, but the
resulting methods will be applicable to a diverse range of forest ecosystems. In
particular, our gap model is already in use in the northwest, southwest,
northeast, and the southeastern United States. The approach should also be
applicable to other types of models. We will make our models and documentation
available to other users.