* 9615372
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Chemical Analysis of Domestic       Sediments as a Means of Identifying Prehistoric Activity    Areas
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1996,11/30/1997
* Gary Feinman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1997
* USD 10,500.00

Under the direction of Drs. Gary Feinman and T. Douglas Price, Mr. William
Middleton will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. The research has
several goals: first, to refine chemical techniques for the reconstruction of
human activities at archaeological sites and secondly, to apply the results to
answer a series of specific questions at Ejutla, a prehistoric habitation in
Oaxaca, Mexico. Although objects such as stone tools or ceramics often provide
insight into specific activities conducted by inhabitants of a prehistoric site,
they are often of little use in the reconstruction of the spatial and social
context in which the activities occurred. People often sweep and remove debris
from living areas and deposit them in trash dumps. To solve this problem,
archaeologists have increasingly turned to chemical analysis of living floors to
search for chemical indicators of cooking or manufacturing processes such as
ceramic production or shell working. However the relationship between activity
and chemical signature is often not straightforward and is complicated by
multiple activities which occur in the same place. To gain insight into both the
spatial patterning of human behavior and the marks which activities leave
behind, researchers such as Mr. Middleton have increasingly turned to controlled
ethnographic contexts where activities can be directly observed and soil samples
subsequently collected for analysis. This award will permit Mr. Middleton to
return to Mexico, make observations and collect samples in a series of
households. These then will be analyzed to determine elemental compositions.
With this information, Mr. Middleton will then examine material collected from a
Classic period house floor from the site of Ejutla in Oaxaca, Mexico. Ejutla was
tied into a larger Middle American trade network which integrated tens of
thousands of individuals over a large area of Central Mexico. It served as a
manufacturing center for shell ornaments. Archaeologists wish to understand how
trade in such complex societies was organized and whether specialists existed
who focused on the production of one or a very limited range of materials. Many
have argued that just such craft specialization led to the rise of civilization.
Dr. Feinman has excavated a structure which indicates both subsistence and
specialized production activities and Mr. Middleton will use the insight gained
through his ethnographic research to analyze and interpret the preserved
chemical signals. This research is important for several reasons. It will shed
new light on the organization of craft production in prehistoric societies. It
will also help to develop a technique which archaeologists can apply at many
sites in many parts of the world. This grant will also help in training a
promising young scientist.