* 9615136
* Plant Population Regulation: Analysis of a                  Long-Term Data Set
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Norma Fowler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/2001
* USD 170,000.00

9615136 Fowler This study addresses one of the core questions of population
biology: What determines the numbers of individuals of a species in a natural or
semi-natural ecosystem? Using an existing 15-year data set, a set of analytical
and simulation models will be constructed, validated, and analyzed to answer
this question for a native plant species, Texas gramagrass. Part of answering
the broader question will be determining the extent to which population size and
structure is effectively regulated; another part will be determining the way in
which that regulation operates. The models will incorporate the effects of
neighboring plants on each other, the spatial arrangement of the plants,
differences in plant size, and variation over time in all variables, as all of
these factors are likely to be important. Although only a single species will be
studied, the information obtained about this species' population dynamics will
provide insights into the population dynamics of many other plant species, some
of which are invasive weeds, endangered species, or, like the study species,
economically important range grasses. A better understanding of plant population
regulation will contribute to efforts to manage weeds, to preserve rare and
endangered species, to predict the effects of grazers and herbivorous insects
upon particular plant species, and in general to understand and manage plant
species and communities. In addition, the population models to be developed in
this study can be easily modified to be of general use.