* 9615326
* Control of Productivity and Plant Species Segregation by    Nitrogen Fluxes to Wetland Beaver Meadows
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2002
* John Pastor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 02/28/2002
* USD 630,000.00

JOHNSTON et al. DEB-9615326 Ponds and meadows created by beaver are key
components of the regulation of overall water and nutrient fluxes over large
areas in North America. These beaver ponds and meadows occur in landscape
positions ideally suited to receive surface runoff, stream flow, and groundwater
discharge from upstream sources, giving beaver ponds and meadows a hydrologic
control function disproportionately greater than would be inferred by their area
alone. Moist graminoid meadows are a key stage through which beaver ponds pass
during changes in hydrologic regimes which may govern the dynamics of these
landscapes. Building on previous research that has shown N limitation of plant
growth in these meadows, this new research will attempt to quantify the relative
importance of different N sources in beaver meadows, and the effect of N supply
to vegetation on its composition, structure, and productivity. To test these
relationships, a spatially explicit model of hydrology and nutrient budgets
within beaver ponds and meadows will be coupled to a model of plant growth,
canopy allocation, and the vertical light gradient under different nutrient and
water regimes. The model will be parameterized using hydrologic data collected
in Voyageurs National Park and using greenhouse and mesocosm experiments on
species responses to water, light, and nutrients. The model will then be tested
against spatial patterns of vegetation along gradients of water depth and
nutrient availability in several meadows of different hydrology. This research
will provide significant advances in understanding of landscape controls on
plant species segregation and productivity via water and nutrient delivery. It
will also advance understanding of how species segregation and productivity of
graminoid species are controlled in moist ecosystems, in which transient canopy
dynamics, rather than total response to nutrients, may be determining community
dynamics.