* 9616085
* Application of Signal Processing &amp; Dynamic Modeling         Techniques to Modern Microsensors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Thomas McAvoy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2001
* USD 157,779.00

ABSTRACT - McAvoy - CTS-9616085 At present most chemical plants are operated
without the benefit of real time composition measurements. The reasons include
cost, reliability, and robustness of composition sensors. Silicon based
microsensors, hold promise for having a major impact on the operation of
chemical processes. Each microsensor occupies approximately 400 square microns
of surface area, so it is feasible to place several hundred sensors on a single,
small chip. Tin dioxide (SnO2) gas microsensors are being developed at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), with whom the PI's are
collaborating. These sensors have several unique features including their small
size, approximately 200 micrometers in diameter, their fabrication by a
conventional complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) foundry, and the
ability to have their operating temperature changed rapidly, in a cyclic
pattern, to optimize their sensitivity to a particular gas species. There are a
number of problems that remain to be solved before these sensors can be used to
solve process problems. Some of these problems include drift and noise effects,
lack of sensitivity to some chemicals, and material problems. The SnO2
microsensors are nonspecific and they can respond to a number of chemical
species. The research project involves further investigations of SnO2
microsensors. In using microsensors to broad problems need further study: (1)
One can use the sensors to determine whether or not a chemical species is
present, which is a problem in classification; and (2) one can use the sensors
to determine which chemicals are present as well as their specific
concentrations, which is a problem in quantitative analysis. The short range
goal of the PI's research is to apply signal processing and dynamic modeling
techniques to these microsensors to advance their use in the classification
problem. Many applications of microsensors involve classification, e.g.
hazardous leak, odor, and fire detection . The signal processing and modeling
methods planned have the potential to be expanded to the quantitative analysis
problem---thus, the long range goal of the research is to help advance the use
of microsensor arrays for solving the quantitative analysis problem.