* 9616194
* Dissertation Research: Models for Primate Origins: An       Evolutionary Study of the Postcranial Morphology of Tree    Shrews (Mammalis, Tupaiidae)
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Frederick Szalay, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 04/30/1999
* USD 11,984.00

The Asiatic tree shrews (Tupaiidae, Scandentia) are not true shrews but
according to all indications they are the most recent living relatives of
Primates, the order to which humans belong. The family is represented by up to
16 living species which pursue distinctive and highly specific lifestyles. Their
feeding habits range from omnivory to insectivory. This study is the first
modern undertaking that will attempt to find causal relationships between
species specific postcranial traits and the ecology of these animals. It will
serve as a foundation for an extensive comparative study of skeletal variation
in these earliest primates. The project will aim for a detailed explanation for
the specific adaptive origins and multiplication of the various primate stem
lineages that lead to the modern families. The project focuses on a number of
rare species such as Ptilocercus lowei (pen-tailed tree shrew) and Tupaia minor,
two species that are completely arboreal. These are very poorly known species
compared to the terrestrial tree shrews. The two species will be trapped and
closely observed under captive conditions. A potentially significant aspect of
this study is the planned establishment of a captive colony of Ptilocercus in
the Department of Zoology at the Smithsonian Institute. These animals then would
become available for a continued study by a variety of specialists in animal
biology. Using tupaiids as models for the early primate radiation will allow a
more complete understanding of the order Primates, a paramount concern of this
undertaking.