* 9616450
* Collaborative Research: A Magnetotelluric Instrumentation   Facility for Electromagnetic Study of the Continents (EMSOC)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1998,02/28/2005
* Philip Wannamaker, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2005
* USD 253,590.00

9616450 Wannamaker This award provides partial support for the upgrade of a
portable magnetometer system and the acquisition of associated field equipment
by the University of Utah that will become part of a centrally managed pool of
equipment and made available to US researchers for field deployment in projects
using the magnetotelluric (MT) technique to image the Earth's deep interior
structure. The University of Utah is committed to providing the remaining funds
necessary to acquire the equipment. Remote sensing of the Earth's crust and
upper mantle using MT methods recently has made significant progress in
producing images of internal structures with good spatial resolution and with
content (electrical conductivity) that is distinct from seismic images (seismic
velocities). The MT method makes use of the time-dependent natural
electromagnetic fields (EM) induced inside the Earth by the variations of the
Earth's external geomagnetic field. The induced electric (telluric) currents
diffuse into the Earth and are scattered back from heterogeneities in the
electrical resistivity structure. The complex, frequency dependent, relationship
between the horizontal magnetic and electric fields at the surface is called the
MT impedance and can be inverted to solve for the resistivity (or conductivity)
structure of the interior. Conductivity properties of the interior are of
considerable interest because they depend strongly on the presence of conducting
ionic fluids or melts which are difficult or impossible to detect with other
remote sensing techniques. ***