* 9616243
* Best Process for Assessment in Engineering Education:       Symposium to be held April 11-12, 1997, Terre Haute, IN
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Gloria Rogers, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John W. Prados
* 02/28/1998
* USD 47,263.00

Rogers 9616243 Funding is requested for partial support from the National
Science Foundation for a national working symposium on the best processes for
assessment in engineering education. The two-day symposium will focus on both
the processes and tools which can be used in developing and implementing an
assessment plan, appropriate use of assessment methods, and the feedback of
results. The target audience for this workshop is engineering deans, department
heads, and engineering faculty. The context for discussions will be the ABET
Criteria 2000. Each presenter will be asked to frame and develop materials for
their presentations within this context as Criteria 2000 provides a common
denominator for all engineering programs. The Organizing Committee will identify
persons who have had experience in the focus areas of the conference and
encourage them to submit abstracts and outlines of proposed sessions. In
addition, the engineering education community will be invited to submit
abstracts. The overarching criteria for selection will be the practicality and
relevance of the proposed topic to engineering education. A final report will be
submitted to NSF, ABET, and ASEE describing the model and the lessons learned
from the symposium planning process and an analysis of the symposium assessment
results. A WWW page will be established to encourage networking among attendees.
The symposium abstracts will be distributed to all participants and made
available on the symposium Web site. The Symposium is scheduled to be held April
11-12, 1997 on the campus of Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology. Rose-Hulman is
a recognized leader in undergraduate engineering education and has developed
innovative curriculum and outstanding educational facilities. Participants will
be provided on opportunity to experience some of the new state-of-the-art
flexible learning spaces and talk with faculty and students about curriculum
development and projects.