* 9616743
* China - U.S. Bilateral Workshop on Seismic Codes (China, December 1996)
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Vitelmo Bertero, Consortium of Universities for Res in Earthquake Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/1998
* USD 27,980.00

This project support a China-US Bilateral Workshop on Seismic Codes to be held
in China in December of 1996. Approximately ten participants from the United
States will attend, and their international travel costs are to be paid from the
NSF grant for this project. The costs of the Workshop incurred within China,
including lodging, meals, and local travel, are to be paid on the part of China,
who are represented by two agencies: The Institute of Engineering Mechanics of
the State Seismological Bureau and the Institute of Earthquake Engineering of
the Academy of Building Research. The subject of the Workshop extends to a
future generation of seismic codes, rather than merely a comparison of existing
seismic codes in China and the United States. The American participants will be
selected by a three-member Steering Committee, in consultation with the NSF
project officer. Participants will write papers to be included in a Proceedings
of the Workshop. A bilateral working group will develop recommendations for
plenary session discussion at the Workshop, and the recommendations adopted will
also be included in the Proceedings. It is planned that selected key
participants from other key countries will attend, as coordinated by the
American and Chinese organizers; costs associated with those participants and
arrangements for any papers they may write are beyond the scope of this
proposal. This is a project implemented under the US-China Protocol on
Cooperative Earthquake Studies, Annex III.