* 9616833
* Mid-Level Language Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* John Trueswell, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 04/30/2001
* USD 251,279.00

9616833 TRUESWELL This research project will examine the rapid grammatical
decisions that people make during reading, listening and speaking. The
comprehension of a sentence requires readers and listeners to make immediate
decisions about how incoming words combine with other words and phrases, in
order to develop an interpretation of "who is doing what to whom" in a sentence.
In this way, people are able to maintain, in an incremental fashion, an
interpretation of the events and actions described in each sentence. This
research will focus on the processing of temporary syntactic ambiguities, which
occur when a comprehender must choose between two possible grammatical
alternatives of an ambiguous word or phrase. Examining this rapid decision
process can help uncover how the language processing system is organized to
consult linguistic and non-linguistic information. One line of research will
examine how readers and listeners process syntactically ambiguous phrases. The
experiments will test the hypothesis that a comprehender's initial guess about
the intended interpretation of a phrase is determined automatically by
consulting prior experiences concerning how often individual words have appeared
in different syntactic contexts. The experiments will focus on the hypothesis
that recognizing a word includes the rapid retrieval not only of the meaning of
the word but also of probabilistic information concerning how often the word has
appeared in different types of phrases. This research will use a variety of
different experimental techniques which are aimed at uncovering the time-course
of language processing, including the monitoring of eye fixations during reading
and the measurement of the response time to words during listening. A second
line of experiments will examine whether speakers are sensitive to syntactically
ambiguous phrases in their own speech, and whether this impacts the way in which
they produce sentences. In particular, the experiments will examine whether
speakers provide helpful phrasing (prosodic) cues when there is an increased
chance that the listener may incorrectly interpret an ambiguous phrase. These
two lines of research may help the development of computational systems that
interact with humans via language. In addition, furthering the understanding of
how normal adults process language may improve the treatment and education of
those individuals with language impairments. ***