* 9616668
* Novel Platelet Composites for Improved Mechanical Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1997,06/30/2003
* Helen Chan, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 420,962.00

9616668 Chan In recent years, platelet reinforced ceramic composites have
emerged as viable alternatives to whisker and fiber reinforced materials for
many structural applications. It is recognized that there are certain
characteristics of the reinforcement phase and the matrix/platelet interface
which will favor improved toughness behavior, e.g., ease of debonding at the
platelet/matrix interface, high platelet volume fraction, however detailed
systematic study has been limited. Based on recent work carried out at Lehigh,
it is believed that a novel composite system consisting of alumina platelets
coated with calcium hexaluminate (CA6) has the potential to surpass the
properties of conventional platelet composites. CA6 exhibits several
characteristics which make it exceptionally well-suited for the proposed
application. These include the adoption of an epitaxial relationship such that
the weak basal cleavage planes of CA6 align parallel to the (0001) a-alumina
platelet faces, values of thermal coefficients of expansion which favor
debonding, and thermodynamic stability with alumina. Mechanical characterization
of both the bulk composites and the interface structures is proposed. The
processing and mechanical testing will be complemented by high resolution study
of debonded interfaces using TEM. The goals of the program are several-fold. One
aim will be to determine the processing and microstructural parameters of the
composite system which optimize the mechanical properties. On a more fundamental
level, however, the proposed program will enable the direct correlation between
interfacial structure, the toughness, and strength of the interface, and the
mechanical behavior of the bulk composite. %%%% In recent years, platelet
reinforced ceramic composites have emerged as viable alternatives to whisker and
fiber reinforced materials for many structural applications. It is recognized
that there are certain characteristics of the reinforcement phase and the
matrix/platelet interface which will favor improved toughness behavior, however
detailed systematic study has been limited. Based on recent work carried out at
Lehigh, it is believed that a novel composite system consisting of alumina
platelets coated with calcium hexaluminate (CA6) has the potential to surpass
the properties of conventional platelet composites. The goals of the program are
several-fold. One aim will be to determine the processing and microstructural
parameters of the composite system which optimize the mechanical properties. On
a more fundamental level, however, the proposed program will enable the direct
correlation between interfacial structure, the toughness, and strength of the
interface, and the mechanical behavior of the bulk composite. ***