* 9616192
* GOALI: "Compatibilized Polymer Blends"
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Eli Ruckenstein, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2000
* USD 219,119.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9616192 Polymer blends are mostly prepared through melt-mixing. The
compatibilization of the polymers occurs during melt-processing, especially via
reactive extrusion. In this proposal, an alternative approach to the formation
and compatibilization is proposed; namely, the auto-compatibilization via
concentrated emulsions. In this method, two concentrated emulsions are prepared
from different monomers and subjected to partial polymerization. A blend is
formed by mixing the partially polymerized cells instead of melts and subjecting
the mixture to complete polymerization. Some copolymers, block copolymers or
network structures are generated during the latter polymerization near the
surface of the cells, which achieve the "auto-compatibilization" of the
resulting blend. Two types of auto-concentration will be investigated. (1) The
two concentrated emulsions do not contain di-vinyl-terminated macromonomers. The
compatibilization is achieved in this case by the formation of copolymers near
the surface of the cells. (2) The two concentrated emulsions contain di-vinyl-
terminated macromonomers. The compatibilization is achieved in this case via the
formation of compatibilizers with network structures. The most distinctive
feature of the method is that the blended polymers and the compatibilization are
generated simultaneously.