* 9616323
* RPG:  Effects of Attention on Implicit Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Gail Musen, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1999
* USD 18,000.00

9616323 MUSEN When people tell friends about what they have learned, they refer
to facts and tasks that they are "aware" of learning. However, there is evidence
that one acquires information in the absence of awareness. This research will
help determine the conditions under which people can acquire multiple pieces of
information independently of awareness, as well as how much attention needs to
be allocated to each task in order for the information to be transferred to a
more permanent memory store. By understanding under which situations people best
acquire such information, it should be possible to determine how to present
information to maximize human learning. An example of learning without awareness
comes from research with amnesic patients. Although amnesic patients cannot
remember an earlier presentation of a word, they use a word more often to
complete a sentence when it was in fact presented recently than when it had not
been presented recently. This and related findings provide evidence for priming,
a form of implicit memory. Implicit memory is often contrasted with explicit
memory. Explicit tests of memory include recall and recognition, and tap memory
for facts and events that are available as conscious recollections. An important
contrast between implicit and explicit memory is that they appear to be affected
differently by the allocation of attention. If attention is divided between two
or more tasks, explicit memory suffers. For example, if one watches the news on
television while talking on the phone, one will remember fewer of today's news
events than if one watched the news without attempting to carry out another task
simultaneously. In contrast, implicit memory has traditionally been thought to
be less dependent on attention. One can carry out a familiar motor task while at
the same time carrying out a competing task that requires a different set of
mental activities. For example, a skilled typist can type while reading a
familiar passage. Recently, it has been demonstrated that focussed attention is
needed for some tasks that tap implicit memory. Specifically, focussed attention
is not necessary for learning single pieces of information but is required for
learning multiple items simultaneously, such as that "red" and "triangle" go
together. In this situation, the person must attend fully to both of these
attributes and attempt to bind them in memory as a single object, like a "red
triangle." In such cases, cognitive resources cannot always be shared with
another task. Under these and similar circumstances in which separate items must
be integrated and stored in memory, cognitive resources from limited-capacity
short-term memory are required. If cognitive resources are overtaxed, learning
will not occur. The properties of the information to be learned, such as its
familiarity, affect the ability to learn more than one thing at a time. This
research will help determine the conditions under which multiple tasks can be
learned implicitly without hurting performance. ***