* 9616242
* SGER:  Visual Programming Challenge
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1996,12/31/1997
* Allen Ambler, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 12/31/1997
* USD 54,500.00

The Visual Programming Challenge (VPC) is a competition designed to test the
effectiveness of visual/multimodal programming languages at programming certain
problems. The objective of the challenge is to focus research efforts on
visual/multimodal programming approaches that offer the greatest potential of
allowing `ordinary` people to `program` tasks. One of the problems of unfocused
research is that the emphasis tends towards novel, rather than effective. The
intent of the VPC is to promote research that leads to effective solutions. The
particular problem domain of the competition requires real-time control of an
intelligent robot vehicle within an unknown system of roads composed of standard
Lego road tiles. The solution to this problem requires managing a representation
for a 2D data structure (of unknown dimensions), constructing closures over
dynamic data structures (to determine if all paths connect), planning (to find
the best route to an incomplete path needing further exploration), and real-time
control (many of the robot interactions must occur between specific operation
states). The results of visual/multimodal programming have already had an impact
on a number of related fields, including scientific visualization and human-
computer interfaces. This impact will grow as emphasis is increased on bringing
more people into daily use of computers for both business and personal
interests. This challenge serves to help focus research in visual/multimodal
programming languages and thereby to improve the effectiveness of this
technology for everyday use.