* 9616584
* CISE/EHR/ENG/MPS Collaborative Research on Learning         Technologies:  Center for the Integration of Learning       Technologies
* CSE,EIA
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Roy Pea, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 09/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9616584 Pea, Roy SRI International Center for the Integration of Learning
Technologies SRI International has been awarded a 1 year grant for $50,000 to
plan for a model center for collaborative research on learning technology. This
center will eventually address pressing issues in the integration of research
and education, train postdoctoral scholars to work at the intersection of
technology and instruction, support a community-wide dialogue about the future
of educational technology, and develop or refine methodologies that enable this
work. Collaborative partners are SRI International, the University of California
at Berkeley, and Vanderbilt University. Teams will share research approaches and
findings in detail, identify commonalties and differences in finding and
approach, establish priorities, and commission activities. During the planning
year, the team concept will be tried out and evaluated with initial activation
of one theme team. Planning year activities include also the design of a system
for continuous evaluation and refinement of CRLT activities, development of a
plan for postdoctoral interdisciplinary research training, and the establishment
of linkages to leverage the intellectual and financial contributions of other
investigators and institutions, including university scientists, school systems,
industry scientists and groups, think tanks, technology-based corporations and
libraries. The World Wide Web will be an integral part of the Center's
communication and dissemination activities.