* 9616448
* Ingush Grammar, Dictionary, and Texts
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1997,12/31/2002
* Johanna Nichols, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 12/31/2002
* USD 315,082.00

Ingush grammar, dictionary, and texts Ingush is a language of the Northeast
Caucasian (or Nakh-Daghestanian) language family of the northern Caucasus in
Russia. It is closely related to Chechen, with some mutual intelligibility.
There is no accurate or complete description of Ingush; there is an Ingush-
Russian wordlist but no dictionary; no way for Ingush to learn English except
through the intermediary of Russian; and no way at all for an English speaker
(or any other foreigner) to learn Ingush. The present Russian-based orthography
so misrepresents the sounds of the language that even if an an otherwise
excellent dictionary of the language did exist it would be near-useless for
learning or interpreting the language. The project will produce the needed
descriptive materials and make the importance and interest of Ingush better
known to the world through scientific linguistic publications. It will produce a
full-scale descriptive grammar, a bilingual Ingush-English, English-Ingush
dictionary, and a set of texts, as well as several typological, theoretical, and
historical publications. The grammar will be a full, descriptively and
typologically sophisticated reference grammar of Ingush. The PI's pilot work has
produced an all-ASCII phonemic transcription system in Latin script, which would
also make a serviceable practical orthography, and project materials will use
this system. The dictionary will contain full information on grammar
(inflectional paradigms, case government, etc.), pronunciation, usage, and
etymology. A networked electronic database version of the dictionary,
continuously updated, will serve the university users; hard copies (preliminary
pocket dictionary printout, then full published version) will serve the Ingush
community, journalists, and others. Benefits will include improved problem sets
and other materials for undergraduate courses (in linguistics and in courses on
post-Soviet nationalities, Eurasian history, etc.), student training and
visibility, description of an important language, improved awareness of the
Ingush language and culture among American and European linguists, access to
English for Ingush speakers and vice versa, and testing and dissemination of the
proposed practical orthography. The lexical database will be directly applicable
to future work on closely related Chechen.