* 9616720
* Development of an Integrated Intelligent Structural         Monitoring System
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Adriene Jefferson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Alison Flatau
* 02/28/2001
* USD 219,559.00

This project will carry out research toward development of monitoring systems
for civil structures such as buildings, bridges and dams with uncertain
structural properties and which are subject to seismic hazard. Such a
Intelligent Structural Monitoring System will be developed as an integrated unit
consisting of three principal software modules, which will be interfaced with
the physical civil structure: a Decision Support Subsystem (an expert system),
an Identification Subsystem, and a Robust Control Subsystem. These modules will
interact with each other in real-time. The Decision Support Subsystem will
employ advanced damage assessment technology to determine whether corrective
control action is necessary. The Identification Subsystem will ensure that the
(mathematical) models of the structure and control devices are updated at
appropriate acceptable time intervals. The Robust Control Subsystem will
actually synthesize the controller based on the updated structural model and
chosen performance objectives. These objectives will be achieved by appropriate
use of advanced control devices such as active tendons, active variable
stiffness systems, active mass dampers, active base isolators, and others, or
combinations of these. The main objectives of this proposal are: (1) develop a
state-of-the-art expert system capable of inferring the existence, location and
extent of structural damage, with remote data sensoring. (2) build system
identification software tools capable of reliably building and updating
structural models in presence of parameter uncertainties in real-time; (3) study
and incorporate robust control techniques capable of meeting performance
objectives in presence of incomplete information erroneous data, or control
device failures; (4) to integrate the expert, identification and robust control
subsystems into a single intelligent monitoring system; and (5) investigate the
performance and the reliability of operation of such a system through simulation
studies, and to make recommendations for its practical on-site deployment.