* 9616131
* SGER: Discovery Driven Manipulation of NonRigid Objects:    Representation, Sensing and Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* N. Nandhakumar, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 07/31/1997
* USD 49,996.00

IRI-9616131 Nandhakumar, N. University of Virginia $49,996 - 12 mos SGER:
Discovery Driven Manipulation of NonRigid Objects: Representation, Sensing and
Planning This award, in the SGER mode, funds an initial exploration of machine
discovery of motor coordination skills through sensory input. Recent
psychophysical studies have revealed that humans can discover proper motor
coordination skills through sensory input for tasks in which they have had no
previous experience. The PIs are currently developing a spatial Jacobian-based
framework for the design of robotic, nonrigid object manipulation strategies
which emulate this human ability. Unlike existing algorithms, the strategies
derived using this framework do not require the use of a priori deformation
models since the necessary object parameters are learned during the process.
Since the spatial Jacobians of an object are spatially dependent,the critical
obstacle in the framework's continued development is determining the amount of
information which must be recovered in the learning or discovery phase of the
algorithms for accurate reconfiguration. For general flexible objects, the
spatial Jacobian sets will be quite large and not efficiently learnable. Thus,
in this preliminary research we will determine what subsets of spatial Jacobians
must be obtained by the process to move the object from an initial state to a
final state within an acceptable positional error. An experimental investigation
will also determine the possibility of creating a set of canonical shapes to
reduce the configuration space size as well.