* 9616105
* Structural Transformations in Irradiated Silicon            Germanium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Laurie McNeil, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2001
* USD 149,431.00

9616105 McNeil This research project aims to gain fundamental understanding of
an unusual physical transformation in Ge. At very high Kr ion irradiation doses,
Ge converts from an amorphous to a highly networked spongy structure. A similar
transformation is not observed in Si, or most other materials. The approach is
to investigate the transformation phenomena in a Si(1-x)Gex alloy series with x
spanning the range of 1 to 0, and also to investigate and characterize the
optical properties of the irradiated materials. The project is collaborative
between UNC and Argonne National Laboratory, and the research is expected to
provide new fundamental information and insights into radiation effects and
optical properties of semiconductor materials. %%% The project is
multidisciplinary combining materials physics and processing studies with
advanced characterization tools and analysis methods to address forefront
research issues in a topical area of technological relevance. The research will
contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important
aspects of processing and fabricating electronic/photonic devices and integrated
circuitry. Additionally, the knowledge and understanding gained from this
research project is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the
performance of advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental
understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and
materials combinations. An important feature of the program is the integration
of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
and technologically significant area. ***