* 9616331
* The Dynamic Development of Post-Insular Native American     English Varieties
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Walter Wolfram, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 02/28/2001
* USD 241,240.00

Studies of Native American varieties of English indicate that these varieties
may combine source language transfer from ancestral Native American languages,
generalized adaptive interlanguage processes, and even the elements of a more
expansive, pan Native American English variety. Although a limited tradition of
sociolinguistic inquiry into Native American English varieties has now
developed, some essential dimensions of these varieties remain largely ignored.
Curiously, one of the most critical but neglected areas of study with respect to
Native American varieties of English is the extent to which these varieties may
or may not adopt local dialect norms. Such linguistic accommodation is often an
important index of assimilation and may indicate in subtle but essential ways
how such groups situate themselves sociolinguistically and culturally.
Furthermore, the investigation of the types of sociolinguistic boundaries that
exist between vernacular varieties, particularly in tri-ethnic contexts, is
critical in addressing central issues concerning the dynamic nature of
ethnolinguistic boundaries in American English varieties. This research examines
language change and variation in the English of three post-insular Native
American communities in rural North Carolina. The Lumbee, Haliwa Saponi, and
Cherokee Native American communities of North Carolina represent instructive
contrasts in terms of (1) their recognized status as Native Americans
communities, (2) their historic isolation from surrounding communities, and (3)
their past and present language contact situations. These situations thus offer
a unique laboratory for comparing how ethnic groups configure their
sociolinguistic identity over time and space. Extensive cross-generational
sociolinguistic interviews are being conducted in each research site, both with
local Native Americans and with cohort speakers from corresponding contact
varieties. Qualitative-descriptive and quantitative-variationist analytical
models are applied to the emerging data, and the objective analysis of language
variation is complemented by the analysis of data obtained from subjective
speaker identification tasks. The comparative analysis includes both intra- and
inter-regional dimensions in order to determine the dynamic nature of
sociolinguistic boundaries. In addition, data gathered in a variety of speech
situations will be utilized in the examination of intraspeaker variation. The
research seeks to explicate on an empirical basis the principles and mechanisms
that account for language adaptation, variation and change found in language
contact situations