* 9616421
* Collaborative Research: A National Instrument Facility for  ElectroMagnetic Studies of the Continents (EMSOC)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2003
* Martyn Unsworth, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 300,650.00

9616421 Booker This award provides partial support for the acquisition of
portable magnetometers and associated field equipment by the University of
Washington that will become part of a centrally managed pool of equipment and
made available to US researchers for field deployment in projects using the
magnetotelluric (MT) technique to image the Earth's deep interior structure. The
University of Washington is committed to providing the remaining funds necessary
to acquire the equipment system. Remote sensing of the Earth's crust and upper
mantle using MT methods recently has made significant progress in producing
images of internal structures with good spatial resolution and with content
(electrical conductivity) that is distinct from seismic images (seismic
velocities). The MT method makes use of the time-dependent natural
electromagnetic fields (EM) induced inside the Earth by the variations of the
Earth's external geomagnetic field. The induced electric (telluric) currents
diffuse into the Earth and are scattered back from heterogeneities in the
electrical resistivity structure. The complex, frequency dependent, relationship
between the horizontal magnetic and electric fields at the surface is called the
MT impedance and can be inverted to solve for the resistivity (or conductivity)
structure of the interior. Conductivity properties of the interior are of
considerable interest because they depend strongly on the presence of conducting
ionic fluids or melts which are difficult or impossible to detect with other
remote sensing techniques. ***