* 9616067
* Dissertation Research: Pluralism in South Indian            Medical Treatments
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1997,07/31/1998
* Vincent Crapanzano, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1998
* USD 3,431.00

This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the City University of New York. The student will investigate the treatment of
mental illness in south India by three different forms of therapy: Hindu temple
healing, ayurvedic medicine, and biomedical psychiatry. Using structured as well
as unstructured interviews with an experimental group of patients who change
treatment and a control grou pof patients who use only one treatment, as well as
observation of healing sessions, the project will compare the experience of
patients who try one form of therapy to treat their illness to the experience of
patients who try several forms. The hypothesis is that the multiple therapy
approach will empower patients to develop their own prognosis which facilitates
their recovery. This research is important because it will advance our
understanding of how cultural and social factors shape the illness experience.
Recent research has demonstrated that the recovery rate for schizophrenia in
developing counties is better than the rate in the developed world. The
knowledge to be gained from this project will help towards understanding the
specific factors in the illness experience which facilitate healing, and this
knowledge should be valuable in designing healing programs in our own country.
In addition the project will advance our expertise about this important area of
the world.