* 9616552
* Dissertation Research: The Social Organization and Behavior of Black-Mantle Tamarins, Saguinus nigricollis, in Eastern  Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Peter Rodman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2000
* USD 11,425.00

This project is designed to investigate the social and ecological correlates of
mating patterns and intergroup relationships in black-mantle tamarins, Saguinus
nigricollis, in the lowland rainforest of eastern Ecuador. These small New World
monkeys appear to be more monogamous than other tamarin species and, therefore,
offer an excellent opportunity to test the hypothesis that variability in mating
patterns is related to the costs of infant-rearing and the importance of
cooperative breeding in tamarins. The study will use detailed behavioral
observation of several populations to examine the ecological, reproductive, and
social correlates of monogamy in black-mantled tamarins. In addition to its
unusual mating patterns, this species is also distinguished by the fact that
intergroup relationships are non-aggressive and neighboring groups may form
polygroup associations. As a result, this species offers an opportunity to test
the hypothesis that food competition between groups determines intergroup
relationships, as well as hypotheses about the proximate causes, adaptive
benefits, and social consequences of intergroup tolerance. This study will
contribute to our understanding of the evolutionary and proximate relationships
between cooperative breeding and mating patterns in New World monkeys and other
cooperative breeding species.