* 9616578
* Mathematical Sciencs:  Conference on Optimal Control:       Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1997
* William Hager, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1997
* USD 7,500.00

9616578 Hager This grant provides funding for a conference on optimal control
theory, applications, and algorithms. Hosted by the Center for Applied
Optimization at the University of Florida, this conference will bring together
leading researchers working on many different aspects of optimal control and on
diverse applications in areas such as aerospace engineering, superconductors,
robotics, medicine, thin films, and manufacturing. It will also provide a unique
opportunity for cross-disciplinary exchange of research. The conference has
received endorsements from the Mathematical Programming Society and is organized
in cooperation with Working Group T7C of the International Federation for
Information Processing. Problems of optimization and optimal control are
pervasive in modern life, occurring in applications areas as diverse as steel
manufacturing, robotics, flight control, design of materials, film deposition
processes, and plasmas, to name just a few. This conference will provide a forum
for researchers working on different aspects of optimal control to present their
recent discoveries and to interact with individuals working on complementary
aspects of the subject. Papers presented at this conference will represent the
state-of-the- art in optimal control theory and algorithm development. These
papers will be placed in the public domain by the publication of special issues
of refereed scholarly journals. ***