* 9616645
* The Incorporation of Rare Earth Elements in Coral Lattice:  Proxy for Rainfall and Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Edward Sholkovitz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/1999
* USD 234,948.00

9616645 Sholkovitz One of the tasks facing geochemists interested in
understanding how Earth's climate has changed over time is the discovery and
development of tools (paleo-proxies) for deducing what past climates were like.
Paleo-proxies are generally some sort of paleontological (for example, fossil
forminifera) or geochemical measurement (for example, oxygen or carbon isotopic
composition) that is assumed to relate to the climatic phenomenon of interest -
temperature, salinity, oxygen, atmospheric carbon dioxide. The problem is that
the proxies themselves are usually not the result of any one of these
paleoclimatic conditions and thus lead to equivocal interpretations about
ancient climatic conditions. In this project, the principal investigator will
used archived modern coral samples collected from various regions for which
there is also an extensive database of environmental observations such as
temperature, salinity, runoff hydrology, and biology. Since rare earth elements
(REE) are supplied to the ocean by weathering of rock exposures on the
continents, he expects to see the REE signal from river runoff - reflecting
rainfall conditions - preserved in the coral. If successful, he would be able to
extend this study to much older corals form the geologic record and comparison
with other currently-available paleoclimate proxies. The investigator
anticipates that this would lead to the development of a new tool for studying
paleoclimate. ***