* 9616801
* The Use of Animals in Psychological Research: A National Study of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Scott Plous, Wesleyan University
* Continuing grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 06/30/2000
* USD 149,239.00

This project is designed to follow up two national surveys in which
psychologists and psychology students were asked about their attitudes toward
the use of animals in psychological research and teaching. The focus of the
present study will be on an important but neglected aspect of the animal
research enterprise-the role of institutional animal care and use committees
(IACUCs). As mandated by law, these committees are responsible for approving
studies and for assuring that laboratory animals are treated humanely.
Consequently, they provide an ideal vehicle for understanding the decision
processes that underlie scientific and ethical judgments of animal research. In
the proposed study, 50 IACUCs will review four randomly assigned animal research
proposals that have been recently reviewed at another participating institution.
In addition, the approximately 500 individuals serving on these committees will
be asked to evaluate various dimensions of each research proposal (e.g.,
scientific merit, clinical value) and to complete several items from the earlier
survey of psychologists. This combination of committee-level data and
individual-member data will be used to generate statistical models of IACUC
decision making, and they will permit, for the first time, quantitative
estimates of the inter-committee reliability of IACUC recommendations. The goal
of these analyses will be primarily twofold: to understand the psychological
factors associated with IACUC decision making, and to suggest policy-oriented
strategies designed to maximize the reliability of protocol reviews.