* 9616683
* Electron-correlated Calculations of Two- and Three-body Intermolecular Complexes and Their Properties
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1997,05/31/2000
* S. Mark Cybulski, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 05/31/2000
* USD 68,700.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting Professor Mark
Cybulski at Miami University. The main goal of this research project is to
implement a method for analyzing weak intermolecular interactions at higher
levels of Moller-Plesset perturbation theory (MP3 and MP4) and its infinite
order generalization coupled-cluster theory (more specifically, L-CCD and CCD
models). The method involves the joint use of the supermolecule approach and
perturbation theory of intermolecular interactions at one of the aforementioned
levels of theory. The concurrent use of both approaches permits the
interpretation of the supermolecule interaction energies in terms of rigorously
evaluated electrostatic, exchange, induction and dispersion energies. Specific
applications will focus on complexes with unusually large higher-order
correlation effects such as Ar-HCN and NH3-CO. In addition, the magnitude of the
three-body nonadditive effects in an open shell complex Ar2-CH will be examined.
In parallel with calculations of interaction energies, calculations of molecular
properties of the complexes will be performed and the influence of component
energies on molecular properties such as dipole moments and nuclear quadrupole
coupling constants will be carefully examined. There is a growing interest in
understanding weak intermolecular interactions in biological systems. The
interactions are considered `weak` in the sense that the interacting species
retain, to a large degree, their individual character. Intermolecular
interactions are responsible for base-pair formation across the strands of DNA
and RNA. Unfortunately, the information about the energetics of interaction is
not, in general, accessible experimentally. The most promising approach for
studying the energetics of intermolecular interactions is computational
chemistry. The goal of this project is to further develop a method for studying
intermolecular interactions which proves particularly useful in providing
insight into the nature of weak interactions. Applications will, initially,
focus on smaller complexes such as NH3-CO and Ar-HCN, in which interactions were
found to be difficult to interpret.