* 9616637
* Dissertation Research:  Collapse and Development:  A Study  of Late Prehistoric Society in the Nasca Region of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Katharina Schreiber, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, MS Christina Conlee will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct one season of
archaeological excavation, followed by subsequent analysis, at the site of
Pajonal Alto which is located in the Targua Valley in northern Peru. The
settlement covers the time interval from ca. 800 B.C. through the colonial
period and is located on a natural sand mound next to the Taruga River. Flanked
by cemeteries on the east and west the sites covers almost two hectares and
consists of several distinct architectural sectors. Due to heavy rains in the
Peruvian highlands in 1993 and 1994 portions of the site were destroyed and
emergency recording procedures were conducted in response to the deteriorating
condition of the site. They revealed the presence of extensive materials which
date to the Late Intermediate period from ca. 1,000 to 1,500 AD. MS Conlee will
conduct an extensive horizontal excavation in one compound to determine spatial
organization and collect data which will provide information on subsistence and
other aspects of material culture. She will also undertake excavation of
stratified deposits to construct a detailed ceramic sequence and to determine
changes in Late Intermediate site organization over time. Cultural material
recovered during excavation will be identified, counted and weighed. This
information, in conjunction with spatial data, will be analyzed to establish
subsistence practices, trade patterns, economic specialization and social
differentiation throughout the late prehistoric period. While archaeologists
have focused significant attention on how empires arise and are maintained,
relatively little information is available the process of collapse and how
constituent units respond when the larger encompassing system is destroyed.
Prehistoric Peru provides an excellent opportunity to examine this question
because over several millennia it witnessed the rise and subsequent collapse of
several empires. The period which MS Conlee will study begins with the fall of
the Wari Empire, encompasses a period of local development and then ends with
the rise of the Inca. MS Conlee has proposed several models which serve to
explain how the Nasca region was integrated into Wari and how it responded to
the Wari collapse. She has also outlined the material correlates of these
different scenarios and through her fieldwork will collect data to permit
differentiation among them This research is important for several reasons. It
will shed new light on a little known period of Peruvian prehistory and provide
data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase understanding of the
processes involved in devolution of social complexity and assist in training a
promising young scientist.