* 9616203
* Effects of Selection on Offspring Viabilities
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Allen Moore, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2000
* USD 78,523.00

ABSTRACT PI: Gowaty PROPOSAL NUMBERS 9631801 The hypothesis that the research
is designed to test is that female choice of mates for traits that affect the
viabilities of females offspring affects females preferences for particular
mates even in social systems in which females seem unable to chose or in which
females options are ecologically or socially modified. Social behavior that can
interfere with a female s ability to achieve mating \s with her preferred
partners include male- male- interactions female-female s interactions, and
interactions between the female and those males that attempt to manipulate or
modify her choice via forced copulation, aggressive conditioning, affiliative
conditioning, or brokering of food resources in exchange for matings. The
research is specifically designed to test the generality of this hypothesis and
will include comparisons of outcomes from nearly identical experimental
protocols on six well- known and frequently studied species representing
phylongenetically diverse taxa. This research is collaborative and cooperative.
It will include experiments on laboratory populations of Drosophila
pseudoobscura, Drosophilia hydei at the university of Georgia, guppies, Poecilea
reticulata, at Trondheim University Cockroaches, Nauphoeta cinerea, at the
University of Kentucky, mallards, Anas platyrhynchos at the Delta Waterfowl and
Wetlands Research Station, and wild house mice, Mus musculus, at the University
of Southern Illinois at Carbondale. The research protocol involves exposing
females to sets of males, which researchers will pick at random with respect to
phenotypic variation of individuals from populations consisting of virgin males
from diverse sources. Test females will demonstrate preferences in choice
arenas. After Establishing her preferred mate, half of the test females will be
placed in breeding chambers with preferred males and half with non preferred.
The viability (surv ival to adulthood or independence) of offspring from several
types of control manipulations including those from an identical series of male
choice trials. The significance of this research lies in the rarity of studies
of the effects of freely expressed mate choice by females or males on offspring
viability or quality. It will be the first to evaluate 1) the theoretical
assumption that the effects of female choice outweigh the effects of male choice
for species with typical post-fertilization investments in offspring: 2. the
prediction that for a species (D. hydei) with relatively equal post-
fertilization investments that male and female choice are equally important to
offspring viability; 3. how viabilities of offspring vary under freely-
expressed mate choice (By females and males) compared to non preferred matings;
and 4. differences in offspring viability as a function of whether matings are
managed or represent choices made by freely-acting individuals.