* 9616690
* Transition Metal Oxide-Adsorbate Interactions by HREELS, TDSand Photoelectron Spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Marjorie Langell, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 08/31/2002
* USD 701,872.00

This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
focusses on the preparation of a series of mixed transition metal oxide (TMO)
surfaces and the characterization of their composition, redox states, and their
gas absorption properties. TMOs are ubiquitous in nature and their gas
adsorption properties are relevant to a range of heterogeneous catalytic
reactions. During this three year continuing grant, Professor Marjorie A.
Langell and her students at the University of Nebraska will prepare TMOs on well
characterized single crystal substrates and crystalline epitaxies of rocksalt,
spinel and corundum. Substrate-gas interactions will be studied by high
resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS), x-ray photoemission
spectroscopy (XPS), low energy electron diffraction (LEEDS), thermal desorption
mass spectrometry (TDMS), and Auger electron spectroscopy. This work will
contribute to the understanding of important acid-base dependent catalytic
processes that occur at TMO surfaces. Adsorbed gas molecules undergo catalytic
reactions at the surfaces of transition metal oxides. These reactions are
ubiquitous in nature. Professor Marjorie A. Langell and her students at the
University of Nebraska will study these reactions under controlled conditions to
better understand these important chemical reactions. The chemical focus of this
work will be on the reactions of alcohols and organic acids on these catalytic
surfaces and a broad range of surface sensitive instrumental methods will be
used in this work.