* 9616006
* Experimental Evaluation of BCT- A Molecularly-Based Computer Simulation of Signal Transduction in Bacterial Chemotaxis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Robert Bourret, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Randolph Addison
* 04/30/2001
* USD 334,632.00

9616006 Bourret Technical All living cells contain elaborate information
processing systems that continuously monitor important parameters in their
external environment and implement an appropriate response to changing
conditions. Complete analysis of the complicated networks of interconnected
chemical reactions that make up signaling circuits will likely require detailed
computer simulations. This investigator has set up a computer model (BCT) of
bacteria chemotaxis, and proposes here to evaluate and improve this model. Some
important parameters will be measured to replace some assumptions in the current
model, and the accuracy of the simulation will be tested by comparing computer
generated predictions with experimental measurements. Any discrepancies will
indicate areas which need further study. The adaptive response will be
incorporated into a new version of the BCT. This research will improve our
understanding of information processing in bacteria, and will provide the
scientific community with a model to formulate simulations of signaling
circuits. Non-technical This proposal is to improve and experimentally evaluate
a computer model of chemotaxis in bacteria. Models of this nature will be
valuable in understanding signaling networks in biological systems. ***