* 9616555
* Figure - Ground Segmentation and Shape Description
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Gordon Baylis, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/2001
* USD 218,484.00

9616555 BAYLIS Though we all take for granted our amazing ability to see, the
process of vision is a very complex one. In order to understand vision it is
necessary to subdivide it into a number of stages. This project will investigate
the first of these stages, in which visual information is sorted or parsed
initially. The result of visual parsing is that as we look at the world, we
immediately and without effort get an impression of a world that is comprised of
things within a scene. This research derives from a theory of visual parsing,
due to Baylis and Driver, that says that deciding which parts of a visual scene
are objects and determining the shapes of those objects are intermeshed
processes. The experiments will test this theory. Imagine that one is looking at
a cup on a table. Recognizing that it is a cup requires knowledge that there is
a "cup-shaped" object lying on the table. This in turn requires that we
appreciate that the outline of the cup "belongs" to the cup; otherwise we might
think there is a strange "cup-shaped" hole in the table! Baylis and Driver's
theory holds that deciding that the cup-shaped outline "belongs" to the cup, not
the table, is a largely automatic process; from this premise, the theory makes
specific predictions about which perceptual acts will be easy and which will be
hard. The experiments will ask people to make judgments about what they see and
measure the speed and accuracy of their judgments; it will thus test the theory
of visual parsing. The fact that visual parsing in people is very fast,
efficient, and effortless belies the importance of this system. It is not
possible to understand the processes of vision and visual recognition without a
clear understanding of the initial processes of visual parsing. There are many
potential applications of a better understanding of vision, including the
creation of automated vision systems for use in industry and medicine. Many
attempts at machine vision have faile d primarily because of inadequate visual
parsing. For example, an automated system for detecting cancerous cells in a
blood sample needs to be able to "find" which regions of a slide are the cells
and which regions are the spaces between. Similarly, it is easy to see how
catastrophic even a partial breakdown of visual parsing would be to a person's
ability to make sense of the visual world. Many neuropsychological disorders in
patients with brain damage caused by strokes include impaired visual parsing.
Thus, a better understanding of visual parsing and how it relates to other
processes in vision will not only lead to a clearer theoretical conception of
how it takes place, but can also ultimately lead to a better understanding of
how visual parsing breaks down in patients with brain damage, improve the
rehabilitation of patients with these problems, and help in the design of
machine vision systems. ***