* 9616536
* Collaborative Research:  Factors Regulating Below-Ground    Carbon Allocation in Terrestrial Ecosystems:  A Cross-Site  Experiment
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,03/24/1999
* Michael Allen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Edward T. Elliott
* 03/24/1999
* USD 292,089.00

Allen 9616536 Plants devote considerable energy to the production and
maintenance of small-diameter roots and their associated mycorrhizal fungi. How
this below-ground allocation of carbon responds to altered availability of
resources such as nitrogen is fundamental to our understanding of ecosystem
function. There are currently two competing theories: (1) increased N
availability decreases C allocation to roots; and (2) increased N availability
increases C allocation to roots. Understanding fine root production and
mortality is at the heart of this conflict. The overall hypothesis of the PIs is
that the type of root-mycorrhizal association is a dominant factor controlling
carbon allocation to roots, root longevity and the response to root systems to
changes in N availability. The PIs propose to directly and independently
quantify root production and mortality, mycorrhizal community composition and
abundance, root respiration, soil CO2 flux, and above-ground litterfall at four
long-term study sites that represent a range of ecosystems typical of North
America. The study sites capitalize on contrasts between ectomycorrhizal (EM)
and arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) conifers and hardwoods and represent a wide
range of environmental conditions. Experimental additions of N are designed to
address the issue of C allocation to roots at a scale that will resolve the
controversy about how root growth and turnover at the ecosystem level responds
to increasing N availability. By comparing and contrasting EM and AM dominated
ecosystems under a variety of climatic and edaphic regimes, we will be able to
make more universal statements about the factors controlling fine root turnover.