* 9616294
* Learning, Control, and Dynamics in Neural Network Models as Exemplified in Avian Song Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Dorothy Pender, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/1997
* USD 18,682.00

9616294 Pender Adaptive neural network control has many applications in the
engineering arena, such as stabilization in hypersonic flight Sachs '95 ,
bioreactor stabilization Ungar '90 , and avionic autolanders Jorgensen '90 .
Complex engineering problems in control and system identification require
considerable effort form the neural network engineer. Multiple components are
involved, including critic, action, and modeling units. These reinforcement
networks are capable of solving very difficult dynamic problems. Another
fascinating aspect of neuroengineering is applying the concepts of neurocontrol
and neuro-identification to model specific areas and activities of the brain. In
this work, neural network models based on the adaptive critic will be built up
to incorporate the dynamics of avian birdsong learning. The songs themselves are
complex sequences of dynamic information, which must be represented internally
in the brain as a "modeling" component. The "action" component would be
responsible for reproducing or creating a new birdsong, whereas the "critic"
component guides the modeling and action components during the learning process.
Various parts of the avian brain have been identified as taking part in the
learning phase and production phase of avian singing. Multiple factors may be
incorporated into the model, as befits the knowledge of neurobiological
researchers. Lastly, the neural network models created may help direct neural
biologists in their further "wetware" study of the brain. It may provide a model
of the general process of learning , which underlies behavior such as the human
use of language.