* 9616434
* CRLT:  Technology Transfer and Development of Transferrable Learning Technology:  A Center for Collaborative Research   on Learning Technologies Based at Northwestern University
* CSE,EIA
* 10/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Louis Gomez, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 01/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9616434 Schank, Roger Gomez, Louis Northwestern University CISE/EHR/ENG/MPS
Collaborative Research on Learning Technologies Program: Technology Transfer and
Development of Transferrable Learning Technology: A Center for Collaborative
Research on Learning Technologies Based at Northwestern University Northwestern
University has been awarded funding in the amount of $50,000 for 12 months to
plan an NSF Center for Collaborative Research on Learning Technologies with the
theme of "Technology Transfer and the Development of Transferable Technology."
The mission of the Center will be two-fold. The infrastructure mission of the
Center will be to transfer learning technologies developed at Northwestern to
teachers, and content learning for applications to science, mathematics, and
technology education in schools, homes, and workplaces. Its research mission, to
be carried out collaboratively with these teachers and content experts, will be
to develop and investigate tools and technologies for the design and
implementation of education software that truly are transferable - i.e., tools
and technologies that teachers and content experts can really use, even if they
are not expert programmers, to develop new, high quality educational software
applications that meet the needs of their students in science, mathematics and
technology.