* 9616334
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Elastic Scattering and      Pair Production of 1.115 McV Photons, Award in Indian       Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1996,08/31/2000
* S Sen Gupta, North Bengal University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2000
* USD 27,903.00

9616334 Sen Gupta Description: This is a U.S.-India research collaboration
entitled Elastic Scattering and Pair Production of 1.115 MeV Photons. The
project is under the direction of Richard H. Pratt, University of Pittsburgh and
S.K. Sen Gupta, North Bengal University, Darjeeling. Simultaneous cooperative
investigations, both theoretical and experimental, are proposed on aspects of
the related processes of photon atom scattering and pair production, connected
through dispersion relations. The project will focus on Delbruck scattering and
on atomic screening effects in pair production. It is expected that the
combination of new theoretical calculations and new accurate experimental data
will improve our understanding of these important photon atom interaction
processes. Scope: This collaboration is an outgrowth of a previously funded
INT/India Program activity. The workshop on New Directions in the Study of the
Interaction of Energetic Photons with Matter was held in Darjeeling in November
1995. While the subject matter of the workshop is a modern field, the long
tradition of physics research in both countries constitutes a strong basis for
developing ongoing cooperative activities. In addition to the immediate
scientific benefit of the research, the collaboration will promote the exchange
of ideas, provide training of students, and foster their exposure to the
international scientific community. ***