* 9616811
* Dynamic Adaptive Grids for Modeling the Large-Scale         Distribution of Atmospheric Water Vapor
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Joseph Prusa, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sumant Nigam
* 03/31/2001
* USD 183,569.00

9616811 Gutowski Observational studies have shown that the distribution of
water vapor is highly structured relative to other meteorologically important
fields and, as a consequence, may require special numerical treatment for
accurate and efficient modeling. This may be especially so for climate
simulations there computational constraints limit the feasible resolution. The
principal investigators will apply continuous dynamic grid adaptation (CDGA)
techniques to model the horizontal and vertical distribution of atmospheric
water vapor. Development will be done on a limited-area model which will allow
for comparisons between model simulations of the water vapor fields and high
resolution water-vapor soundings obtained during a recent field experiment
called STORM-FEST. Observational studies also suggest that the water vapor
distribution is, at times, confined by isentropic surfaces. The CDGA thus may
produce an isentropic grid in regions where the water vapor field is isentropic
(computationally simpler) and naturally will avoid an isentropic grid where the
distribution is non-isentropic. The PIs will explore the extent to which CDGA
provides a smooth, dynamic means of exploiting isentropic behavior in the
atmosphere without making a priori assumptions about where the transitions
between isentropic and non-isentropic dynamics will occur. This research will
make an important contribution to the goals of the Role of Clouds, Energy, and
Water in Global Climate Change Program. ***