* 9616641
* Mechanistic Diagnosis for Redox Switching of                Electroactive Films
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Stanley Bruckenstein, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2001
* USD 478,500.00

Stanley Bruckenstein, professor of chemistry at SUNY-Buffalo, is supported by
this renewal grant from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program for
theoretical and experimental studies of electroactive polymer thin-films.
Electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) experiments and dynamic
impedance measurements will be used in conjunction with theoretical
considerations based on a scheme of cubes which will yield the rates of the
elementary kinetic steps that occur during a redox switching process in the
polymer films. The approach will permit the identification and separation of
processes involving counterion transfer, co-ion transfer, neutral species
transfer and polymer configuration changes. Polyvinylferrocene is included among
the redox polymers to be studied and polypyrrole is among the conducting
polymers to be used. The investigations will produce structure-function
correlations within and among various classes of polymers. Such relationships
permit rational design of polymers for specific purposes. A fundamental
understanding of the nature and processes occuring in electroactive polymers
continues to be a major objective of studies on these materials because of their
importance in technological areas such as batteries and membranes. This research
provides a theoretical framework upon which to design experiments to examine
these processes. From the experiments, information is obtained which will allow
technological development of polymers for well-defined purposes.