* 9617426
* CISE Research Instrumentation: A Study of an Event Based and Feature Based Approach to Speech Recognition
* CSE,EIA
* 01/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Carol Espy-Wilson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/1998
* USD 33,670.00

96-17426 Espy-Wilson, Carol Y. Boston University CISE Research Instrumentation:
A Study of an Event Based and Feature Based Approach to Speech Recognition The
aims of this study are to develop a speech recognition system based on phonetic
features and to use the development of this system as a tool for understanding
variability. Relative to cepstral parameters, broad-class recognition results
show that a signal representation based on phonetic features is better able to
target the linguistic information and it does so in a more speaker-independent
manner. Furthermore, such a signal representation allows for a direct study of
phonological processes. The proposed equipment will help extend this work.
First, the drastic cut in computation time afforded by the Ultra 2- will speed
up the development and optimization of acoustic parameters using the Fisher
criterion and an automatic classifier, - make feasible experimentation with a
full object-oriented lexicon,- allow experimentation with computationally
expensive algorithms for the extraction of acoustic events and -allow faster
computation of recognition results. Second, the extra disks will allow
investigation of larger data sets and the storage of computed parameters on
line. Third, the workstations will aid analysis by allowing users to listen to
utterances and perform processing locally. Finally, the proposed PC and
synthesizer will allow a study of variability through acoustic modeling and
analysis-by-synthesis.