* 9617392
* An Assessment of Energetic and Kinetic Properties of        Surfaces and Interfaces in Alumina
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1997,12/31/2001
* Andreas Glaeser, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2001
* USD 349,455.00

9617392 Glaeser An experimental technique for determining the equilibrium shape
of pores in alumina has been developed and applied to both undoped and Ti-doped
sapphire. Ti doping changes the Wulff shape of alumina. Concurrently, the use of
pre- perturbed pore channels has elevated studies of the Rayleigh instabilities
to a new level, allowing quantitative measurement of key thermodynamic and
kinetic parameters; a framework for correcting for anisotropy effects in
assessing the surface diffusivity has been developed. Ti doping affects the
morphological stability, but appears to have only a mild effect on the surface
diffusivity. Finally, Ti doping has been shown to promote highly anisotropic
grain growth, leading to the formation of elongated grains, and to substantially
change the grain boundary mobility. The proposed work builds on and extends the
first two components of this prior work. Specifically, by using lithographically
introduced pores and atomic force microscopy (AFM) to assess the equilibrium
pore shape, we propose to determine the effect of Ti, Cr, Ca and Mg additions on
the relative energies and thermodynamic stabilities of a range of low index
surfaces in sapphire. In addition, the instability of lithographically
introduced pore channels with pre-existent finite perturbations of known but
systematically varied amplitude and wavelength will be examined. The independent
effects of dopants and crystallographic orientation on the thermodynamic and
kinetic characteristics of perturbation evolution will be determined. This
method of determining the surface diffusivity, and more conventional scratch
smoothing methods will be used in tandem to compare apparent surface
diffusivities obtained under conditions where the amplitude of the surface
perturbation is increasing with time, and decreasing with time, respectively.
The diffusivities determined using these two complementary approaches will be
compared to the diffusivities that can be obtaine d from an analysis of pore-
boundary separation conditions. The comparison may help to identify which (if
any) of the two approaches used to determine the surface diffusivity provides
data that is useful in predicting and describing microstructural evolution in
ceramics. %%% The proposed research will help improve our understanding of
surface diffusion in ceramics. By studying the effect of dopants and
crystallographic orientation, the energetics of surface diffusion can be
determined, and thus, how the changes in energetics and kinetic properties
impact microstructural evolution in ceramics. These processes are important in
designing optimum microstructures for properties. ***