* 9617198
* ioctoral Dissertation Research:  Mental Hygiene and the     Psychiatry of Adjustment, 1908-1948
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1997,09/30/1997
* Henrika Kuklick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 09/30/1997
* USD 6,612.00

The American mental hygiene movement was a reformist movement characteristic of
the Progressive Era that sought to develop and apply psychiatry, psychology, and
social work to alleviate the problems of modernity. Its advocates defined mental
health as the individual's adjustment to the social environment. According to
its perspective, social problems could be solved either by increasing the
adaptive skills of individuals or through social engineering. In this Ph.D.
dissertation, the researcher investigates the interaction between these ideas,
professional intervention strategies and practices, and cultural ideas about
what constitutes mental health. The institutional basis for the mental hygiene
movement was the National Committee for Mental Hygiene, which was founded in
1909. The NCMH coordinated professional activities, maintained connections with
large philanthropies to organize funding, and disseminated its perspective
within the professions and society at large. The interests of the NCMH moved
from a concern with mental illness to its prevention; then the broadening of the
scope of prevention to include social maladjustment; and finally, the promotion
of adjustment or mental health. These ideals of mental health both reflected
cultural ideals of masculinity, citizenship, and normality, and reinforced them
by their presentation in the neutral language of science and through the
professional practices it developed. M