* 9617997
* Design and Rapid Prototyping of Customized Micro and Macro  Compliant Mechanisms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Ruzena Bajcsy, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2001
* USD 318,686.00

This project focuses on design and fabrication for a novel class of mechanical
system known as compliant mechanisms. Compliant devices replace elements
traditionally assembled using joints and springs with compliant flexible members
that use elastic deformations to transmit motions and forces. This allows the
research to concentrate more on representation, translation, and interface
issues of design and fabrication, and less on issues such as assemble and
manufacturability. The domain of compliant mechanisms allows design and
optimization to be performed on devices at both the macro and micro level (e.g.,
SFF and MEMS-type fabrication processes, respectively), and so will afford a
unique opportunity to study the clean separation of design and fabrication
analogous to the VLSI paradigm. This research targets three primary areas of
compliant mechanism design and fabrication. Fundamental to this study is the
optimal synthesis of compliant devices, both macro and micro. This includes the
design and analysis of 3-D structures and the nonlinearities associated with
large deformations. The ability to form more complex objects based on a library
of standardized parametric components will also be explored. As the processes
are generally not the same, the issue of designing and refining translation
tools to move between representations is a critical component in this research.
The choice of intermediate representations will be critically examined, and the
appropriate translation tools will be developed. The goal here will be to push
towards intermediate formats that are suitable to multiple fabrication
processes, at both the micro and macro scales. Finally, the ability to test and
refine designs for micro structures by the use of macro prototypes fabricated
from the same initial model will be developed, and its utility in the design of
MEMS devices will be carefully examined.