* 9617262
* A Comparative Approach to Study the Evolution of Human Brain Speech/Language Areas in Old World Monkeys and Great Apes
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2002
* Patrick Gannon, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Continuing grant
* Richard Kay
* 01/31/2002
* USD 166,161.00

The objective of this project is to meld the intellectual and methodological
approaches contained within neurobiology and anthropology and arrive at a new
way of looking at an old problem, the origin of human speech/language and its
neural substrate, during primate and early human evolution. The working
hypothesis is that the evolutionary substrate for brain mechanisms which
underlie the unique human form of vocal-auditory communication was already
present in our common ancestor with Old World monkeys if not much earlier.
Further, that this basal neural substructure was incorporated and further
elaborated, when early human ancestors changed from the long-standing primate
pattern of territorial containment to become wide ranging bipeds in a highly
demanding, cognitive and communicative novel environment. This project will use
two modern neurobiologic techniques, 1) Magnetic Resonance Imaging with 3-D,
quantitative, computerized image analysis, to address outstanding issues of
gross anatomic interhemispheric asymmetries in regions of great ape and monkey
cerebral cortex that are homologous to human brain language areas; and 2)
Quantitative Immunocytochemistry to determine, in macaques, whether there is an
asymmetric distribution of various brain chemicals in these brain regions that
would lend support to the hypothesis of already well established hemispheric
functional specialization.