* 9617288
* Exploration of Pad++ for Plant Biology Instruction
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Philip Benfey, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1997
* USD 49,999.00

9617288 Benfey This proposal for a small grant for exploratory research focuses
on the use of the research package Pad++ to explore the use of multi-level
interactive simulations for the teaching of fundamental biological concepts. The
proposed work is intended to address concerns of the panel that reviewed a
proposal entitled "From Genes to Rainforests" and will be performed in
preparation for a resubmission of a larger proposal that integrates simulations
and virtual research environments. Pad++ is a new approach to presenting and
navigating information which could yield significant advances in teaching and
discovering science. The fundamental metaphor of this new approach is the
intuitive notion of 'zooming.' Pad++has several advantages over existing
software for the teaching of fundamental biological concepts. First, zooming can
be used to comprehend three-dimensional organization and to teach the
relationship between levels of organization. Second, Pad's connectivity tools
such as lenses can be used to simulate biological procedures. Third, relevant
databases can be organized spatially on the Pad surface and accessed using Pad
tools such as portals. Our ultimate goal is to use this technology to allow
students to explore cutting-edge issues in plant biology by presenting real
scientific problems faced by three plant biology disciplines: economic botany,
plant systematic and plant molecular biology. This larger application would
serve as a paradigm for using the technology to explore and integrate other
fields of science education. The goal of this SGER proposal is to explore the
use of Pad for the instruction of two basic biological concepts. For this
prototype the focus will be on the role of regulated cell division in generating
organ shape and function and the relationship between genotype and phenotype.
The zooming capacity of Pad++will be used as a tool to demonstrate relationships
between different levels of organization. In particular, multi-level zoomable
simulations will be developed basedon molecular genetic insights into rot
developmental biology. These simulations will be interactive among layers so
that changing a parameter at one level of organization will cause the
appropriate change at other levels. At each level of organization, Pad's
connectivity tools will be available to simulate experimental procedures and to
access relevant databases. The application will be tested on high school and
undergraduate students in an iterative fashion. Using constructivist principles,
students will be guided through the steps of generating experimental data in the
virtual laboratory, hypotheses.