* 9617599
* Empirical Studies of Bidding and Entry
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1997,09/30/1999
* Robert Porter, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1999
* USD 136,346.00

This is a project of empirical research in industrial organization. It consists
of three components. The first and third are joint with Ken Hendricks of the
University of British Columbia. We analyze a data set that we have assembled for
the federal offshore oil and gas lease sales in the Gulf of Mexico from 1954
through 1990. We also develop and analyze a new data set on small business entry
and evolution in Canada. The second component is joint with Doug Zona of
National Economic Research Associates; we analyze bid rigging in procurement
auctions. The first component consists of a study of joint bidding for federal
offshore wildcat tracts. More than half of the bids submitted are joint, and in
1975 Congress banned joint bids involving two or more of eight large oil
companies. The goal of our research is to determine the role played by joint
bids, and whether the ban should have been more or less extensive. Joint bids
may foster entry and competition, by pooling capital or information or by
spreading risk, but they may have anti-competitive effects by allowing firms to
agree to bid less aggressively. This research presents models and results
designed to discriminate between these alternative explanations, in order to
inform policy decisions. This component is potentially informative for public
policy towards research and development, because joint bids are similar to
research joint ventures. The second component is joint with Doug Zona. We have
obtained an extensive panel data set on annual school milk procurement auctions
in Ohio. There is an ongoing antitrust investigation alleging collusion among
some of the potential bidders. The purpose of our research is to determine
whether these allegations have any empirical validity, and, if so, what the
consequences were in terms of excess prices paid by the school districts. The
proposed work describes the incidence and characteristics of bid rigging. We
study the effect of mergers and plant closings on the patterns of bid
submissions, as well as the level of submitted bids. The empirical techniques
employed differ from those used for different auctions, as bid rigging schemes
depend on the auction rules and the nature of the goods being sold, and because
more detailed data on the contracts and on the bidders are available. The
general research issue is whether bid rigging schemes can be detected from
publicly available data. The third component is also joint with Ken Hendricks.
Together with a research team at U.B.C. headed by Raffi Amit, we assemble a
longitudinal data base at Statistics Canada that merges employment and tax
records for all small business start-ups between 1983 and 1993. The data set
allows us to analyze the determinants of small business entry, growth and exit
in some detail; this research complements and extends recent analysis of U.S.
data sets.