* 9617411
* Chemolytic Analysis of Macromolecular Organic Matter--A Proof of Concept
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Stuart Wakeham, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/1999
* USD 104,100.00

One of the most challenging problems in the field of organic geochemistry is the
determination of the chemical and physical structure of fossil organic
macromolecules -- that is, macromolecules originating from living organisms but
no longer contained in them. These 'geopolymers' are often of exceedingly high-
molecular weight and so highly cross-linked that they are difficult to work with
in the laboratory. Coal, peat, and kerogen are important examples. While
technological developments in chemical instrumentation over past three decades
have allowed us to penetrate the structures of a great many macromolecules in
living organisms (e.g., proteins, nucleic acids), the intractable nature of
geopolymers has severely limited extension of the same technology to the study
of coal, peat, kerogen, and other high molecular weight geopolymeric substances.
In this study, the principal investigators will attempt to make inroads into
this problem by studying the fossil organic matter in two sediments: a
relatively young marine sediment from the Peru continental margin, and a Miocene
shale from the Monterey Formation. To keep this difficult task manageable, their
approach will concentrate primarily on just one class of organic constituents
that make up the organic matrix in these sediments - lipids. Using a series of
chemical degradation and solvent extraction steps (chemolysis), the
macromolecular structure will be broken apart and the pieces, especially lipid
fragments, will be indentified and quantified. By carrying out the chemolysis in
a methodological, stepwise fashion, the investigators hope to be able to draw
inferences about the overall polymeric structure, the processes involved in its
formative history, and its reactivity.