* 9617409
* The Hawaii Ocean Time-Series Program: JGOFS Component
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1998,07/31/2004
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2004
* USD 3,643,557.00

This proposal supports the continuation of the JGOFS core measurement component
of the Hawaii Ocean Time series (HOT) program for an additional three years.
This HOT JGOFS proposal includes 4 separate, but fully integrated proposals:
core measurement component (D. Karl, L. Tupas and D. Hebel, co P.I.s), pigment
and phytoplankton component (R. Bidigare, P.I.), inorganic carbon (C.' Winn,
P.I.) and zooplankton (M. Landry, P.I.). Since Oct 1988, a comprehensive suite
of ocean measurements and results of in situ experiments have been obtained at
the oligotrophic Station ALOHA (22'45N, 158'00'W) in the subtropical North
Pacific Ocean. The core measurements were selected to provide a data set to
validate existing C-N P biogeochemical models and, if necessary, to improve
them. Foremost in importance among the various ecosystem processes under
investigation are: the flux of carbon at the air sea interface, the rates and
control mechanisms of primary production and particle export, and the pathways
and intensities of inorganic nutrient (N and P) fluxes. Equally important are
the observed time dependent changes in microbial biomass and biodiversity, and
the relationships of these observed ecosystem changes to the broader
extratropical climate forcing such as El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and
other large scale ocean atmosphere interactions. The emergent data set from the
HOT program is unique, robust and rich with previously undocumented phenomena.
The HOT program data base is fully accessible with unrestricted use by anyone
through the worldwide Internet system (ftp) and, more recently, via the world
wide web with only an approximately 6 12 month processing delay. The scientific
results of the HOT research program have provided an unprecedented view of
biogeochemical cycles in a previously undersampled region of the world ocean.
Numerous HOT related publications and reports have already appeared based on the
research results obtained by a broad spectrum of HOT program associated and
independent scientists. At the same time, this ocean research program has
provided an unique educational opportunity for undergraduate and graduate
students from Hawaii and around the world, both in terms of at sea field
experience and in the classroom working with the computer accessible HOT program
environmental data sets. Funding will be used to continue this successful ocean
time series core measurement program for the period Aug 1998 to July 2001 and
supplement these measurements with an additional mooring.