* 9617884
* Distinguishing between Living and Nonliving Bacteria in the Marine Environment: Evaluation of a Combined Molecular Probe and Vital Staining Procedure
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Peter Verity, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/2000
* USD 150,000.00

Bacteria are thought to be second only to phytoplankton in the role living
organisms contribute to the transformation of organic carbon in aquatic
ecosystems. In open ocean waters, the biomass of living bacteria has been
reported to exceed that of all other living plankton, and even in continental
shelf and coastal waters it is significant. However, these estimates are all
derived from the assumption that all DAPI stained cells are metabolically active
cells. This hypothesis no longer appears tenable: a large fraction of apparent
bacteria are apparently inactive, moribund, or dead. Such a conclusion threatens
to precipitate another paradigm shift in conceptual models of ecosystem
function. At the very least, it would imply that a comparatively few bacteria in
situ are growing (and respiring) much faster than previously thought, and that a
large fraction of `apparent` bacteria is really a component of detritus. We have
developed a novel combination of a fluorescent Vital Stain and molecular Probes
(VSP) which quantitatively identifies those cells with compromised membranes,
and those cells containing sufficient rRNA to be considered metabolically
active. While neither approach alone might be considered adequate to specify
active from inactive, moribund, or dead cells, together they potentially
comprise a powerful tool to investigate the relative importance of these cell
types in situ, and how they change in response to environmental pressures. We
have already demonstrated the validity of the VSP procedure using E. coli, here
we will examine its applicability to marine Gram positive, Gram negative, and
oligophiles. We will then test the accuracy of the VSP to quantify living, non
living, and starved cells in response to nutrients and viruses, and begin to
document patterns of living and non living cells in natural communities. There
is also promise of determining the numerical importance of inactive but living
cells. The results will not only provide a stringent evaluation of the method
for use in the marine environment, but the field data on active cells vs. those
with compromised membranes will provide the first quantitative basis for a
revised conceptual model of the role of bacteria in transformations between DOC,
detritus, and bacteria. +n ±! ?n ¼f + _ Ûª? ÑOh ª' +'ª?0 P + Õ - Ã ? 0 T x À - Þ
, R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT n Bacteria are thought to be second only to ph S
u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ++++++++++++ 3 Ð ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++
++++++++++++ ytoplankton in the role living organisms contribute to the
transformation of organic carbon in aquatic ecosystems James William Ammerman
Joanne MCcreary @ ?Nk+ ? @ -+Y+ª) @ ? -¹ ? L i @ dª Microsoft Word 6.0 7 Õªe =-
e <<<<<<< f f f f f f p f ? 1 z z z z z z z z Á t t t ? = ? = + ? T 3 Ó ? < z z
z z z ? z << z z z z z z < z < z Á P X <<<< z Á z N z