* 9617813
* Electronic Data Documentation:  Complementary SGML and Image Capture Approaches
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2002
* Richard Rockwell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 01/31/2002
* USD 460,000.00

The Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR)
archives the world's largest collection of quantitative data for social and
behavioral science research and teaching. Complete, well-structured
documentation is essential to effective use of these data; today, that
documentation must be electronic and must be search-able on the World Wide Web.
This award will assist ICPSR to complete a major program of research and
development that is intended to produce the next generation of electronic
documentation of social and behavioral science data. Employing the Standard
Generalized Markup Language (SGML), ICPSR is developing a new methodology for
producing structured documentation. This Data Documentation Initiative involves
documentation experts from data archives around the world, representatives of
U.S. statistical agencies, and experts in SGML. During the term of this award,
ICPSR will beta-test this methodology at several locations, develop guidelines
and reference manuals, and integrate the SGML methodology with existing
methodologies. The product of this effort will be a publicly-available Document
Type Definition that may be widely adopted by social science researchers and
statistical agencies around the world. It will materially assist researchers in
preparing their data for public release and will improve the standard of
archived data sets. This award will, in addition, aid ICPSR in producing the
electronic text that underlies structured documentation. As much of ICPSR's
archive is currently documented solely by paper records, ICPSR is investing
considerable resources in the preparation of electronic documentation, to which
NSF is contributing an increment in order to accelerate the conversation of
documentation from paper to electronic forms.