* 9617472
* Molecular Dissection of a Heme Regulatory Complex in the    Yeast Saccharomyces Cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Li Zhang, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 01/31/2001
* USD 277,998.00

9617472 Zhang Eukaryotic cells require heme to use and sense oxygen, to generate
cellular energy by respiration, and to synthesize and degrade lipids, steroids
and related compounds. In addition to its role as a prosthetic group in enzymes,
cytochromes and globins, heme acts directly as a regulator of cellular and
molecular systems that use or sense oxygen, and controls the growth and
differentiation of a wide array of cells in mammals. The goal of this research
is the molecular dissection of the heme regulatory complex in yeast. The yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the only eukaryote in which a master regulator of
heme signaling, heme activating protein-1 (HAP1), has been identified and
cloned. In response to heme, HAP1 activates transcription of genes encoding
respiratory functions and functions required for controlling oxidative damage.
In the absence of heme, HAP1 is sequestered in a high molecular weight complex
with certain other cellular factors. This research will test the hypothesis that
the binding of heme to HAP1 changes the conformation of HAP1 causing it to
dissociate from the high molecular weight complex and subsequently bind to DNA
with high affinity and activate transcription. Both mutational and biochemical
analyses, including the development of a heme-responsive in vitro transcription
system, will be used to characterize the specific interaction of heme with HAP1,
the interaction of HAP1 with other cellular factors in the high molecular weight
complex, and the mechanism by which HAP1 dissociation from the high molecular
weight complex mediates heme regulation of transcription. By unraveling the
mechanism governing the heme-HAP1 induction pathway in yeast, this research will
provide the first molecular description of how a regulatory complex mediates
heme action in eukaryotic cells, and will lay the basis for understanding heme
regulation of fundamental molecular and cellular processes in higher eukaryotic
cells. Eukaryotic cells require heme to use and sense oxy gen, to generate
cellular energy by respiration, and to synthesize and degrade lipids, steroids
and related compounds. In addition to its role as a prosthetic group in enzymes,
cytochromes and globins, heme acts directly as a regulator of cellular and
molecular systems that use or sense oxygen, and controls the growth and
differentiation of a wide array of cells in mammals. By unraveling the heme
induction pathway in yeast, this research will provide the first molecular
description of how a heme regulatory complex mediates heme action in eukaryotic
cells, and will lay the basis for understanding heme regulation of fundamental
molecular and cellular processes in higher eukaryotic cells.