* 9617362
* Development and Deployment of Atmospheric Pressure          Ionization Mass Spectrometer for Determining SO2, DMS, DMSO, and DMSO2 on Aircraft and Ship Platforms
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Alan Bandy, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2000
* USD 453,987.00

9617362 Bandy The objectives of this study are to develop and test
instrumentation for determining dimethyl sulfide (DMS), dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO), dimethyl sulfone (DMSO2), and sulfur dioxide (SO2) with a lower limit of
detection of 1 part-per-trillion-by-volume (pptv) with a signal to noise ratio
of 3 at a sample frequency of 1 per second. The approach to be employed will be
based on atmospheric pressure ionization quadrupole mass spectrometry (APIMS).
Positive ion APIMS for DMS, DMSO, and DMSO2 and negative ion APIMS for SO2 have
been demonstrated in the laboratory. The APIMS instruments will be based on
Extrel Mass Spectrometry quadrupole systems, which have many years of field use
in the investigator's previous projects. The accuracy and precision of these
APIMS instruments will be substantially enhanced by using isotopically labelled
variants of the analytes as internal standards that have been deployed in the
past using gas chromatography - mass spectrometry with isotopically labelled
standards (GC/MS/ILS). Using this approach the precision and accuracy of the
instrument are independent of the instrument sensitivity and other factors, such
as, analyte loss in sampling. Furthermore, because the signal from the standard
is available for each sample and the concentration of the standard is known, the
instrument sensitivity and lower limit of detection can be precisely computed
for each sample. To validate this new instrumental approach for field
measurements of these sulfur compounds in ambient air, the APIMS instruments
will be intercompared to an existing GC/MS/ILS instrument, which was a part of
the NASA-CITE-3 and NSF-GASIE evaluations. To minimize the cost of the proposed
work the mass spectrometers on hand will be used to build and deploy the APIMS
for field tests. This will require some modification to laboratory instruments
to attain airworthiness standards in safety and operation. The end goal is to
achieve measurement times 200-4000 times faster than the curr ent GC/MS
techniques for this suite of sulfur compounds. These new instruments will be
much smaller, lighter, and consume lower power for high altitude aircraft use.
If initial field tests with the single quad APIMS indicate that interferences
are significant, a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer will be employed to
further evaluate the ion chemistry for the required analyte specificity.
Successful tests of the APIMS for initial field measurements of these sulfur
compounds will be followed by development of an APIMS for eddy correlation
measurements of DMS fluxes in regions where significant DMS levels occur.