* 9617389
* Early Agriculture in the Gulf Coast Lowlands of Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Mary Pohl, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2001
* USD 268,675.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Mary Pohl and her collaborators
will conduct three seasons of archaeological and paleoecological research in the
state of Tabasco, Mexico. The earliest Middle American civilization, the Olmec,
appeared in the lowland tropical Gulf Coast region of Tabasco and the team
wishes to understand the process which underlies this development. It is very
likely that, contrary to common archaeological belief, domestication of several
important new world food plants occurred in a lowland rather than highland
context and the group will search for indications of early agriculture
associated with Olmec precursors. Prior work by Pohl and her colleagues in
lowland Belize suggests that environmental changes related to shifts and sea
level and availability of fresh water provided a context which fostered
agriculture and the present project is designed to test and further develop this
idea. The project has two major components. The first involves an intensive
program of core transects along the past and present river channels in the
vicinity of the Olmec site of La Venta. With the sedimentological, pollen and
phytolith data thus obtained it should be possible to reconstruct environment
and determine how it changed over the relevant interval of time. Analysis of
cores often provides information on the presence and importance of agriculture
both through the presence of pollen from domestic species and the amount of
charcoal which is indicative of forest clearing. The group will also conduct
archaeological excavations to recover cultural data. Faunal remains, lithics and
ceramics should provide insight into both diet and group organization. The
`Neolithic Revolution` marked by the domestication of plants and animals
constitutes a central turning point in human prehistory. The process occurred
independently in many parts of the world and provided the basis for the rise of
complex societies. In Middle America archaeologists do not know when or where
such important crops as corn and beans were domesticated. They also do not
understand why after thousands of years as hunters and gatherers people altered
their subsistence practices in such a basic way. Several hypotheses have been
proposed and the data that Dr. Pohl and her colleagues will collect will allow
selection among several. This research is important for several reasons. It will
provide insight into the processes which gave rise to complex Middle American
societies. The environmental and archaeological data which will result will be
of interest to a wide range of scientists.