* 9617348
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Symmetric Multiprocessor for Research on Parallel Architecture, Compiler, Applications   and On-demand Network-Computing Research
* CSE,EIA
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Valerie Taylor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/1998
* USD 20,050.00

9617348 Taylor, Valerie E. Northwestern University CISE Research
Instrumentation: Symmetric Multiprocessor for Research on Parallel Architecture,
Compiler, Applications and On-demand Network-computing This research
instrumentation grant enables collaboration between two universities in four
areas of research:-Hierarchical Processor-and-Memory Architecture for- High
Performance Computing - An Advanced Program Analysis and Compilation
Infrastructure - Characterization of Large (Petaflop) Computational Applications
- Metaprogramming and On-demand Metacomputing for Network-based Computational
Hubs The focus of this project is on advancing the state of the art in high-
performance computing on the four fronts:- the design of high-performance
computers capable of 100 trillion operations per second (i.e. 100 TOPS),-
advanced tools for analysis and compilation of programs for execution on
machines with multiple processors,- the characterization of applications that
require computation rates of 100-1000 TOPS and- the design of a network-based
software infrastructure that allows the use of linked computers and linked
programs (i.e.,metacomputers and metaprograms) through conventional network
browsers. The main ideas currently under investigation are being validated
through extensive computational experiments and computer simulations. The
equipment acquired with the funds provided by this grant provides the
computational speed, memory, storage and communication demands of the
experimental component of this project which would otherwise not be possible or
take unacceptably long times to perform. The experimentation made possible by
the availability of a symmetric multiprocessor is essential to the validation of
research ideas and results pursued in this project. This work is being carried
collaboratively by researchers at Northwestern University and Purdue University.