* 9617122
* Accurate and Efficient Atomic-Scale Simulation of           Structural Evolution in Materials:  Metal Thin-Film Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Kristen Fichthorn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/2000
* USD 198,000.00

9617122 Fichthorn This theoretical research will advance the current
capabilities for long-time, atomic-scale, dynamical simulations of materials by
developing a family of new dynamical methods, based on Smart Monte Carlo. These
methods are applicable to systems whose evolution is governed by rare-event
dynamics. The inherent advantages of these methods are their accuracy, which is
comparable to molecular dynamics simulations, and computational efficiency,
which allows for simulation of long time scales on the order of minutes to
hours. The new and extended capabilities of Smart Monte Carlo could have
applications in the design and processing of many different kinds of materials,
in catalysis, and in separations, where atomic- scale kinetics dictate
macroscopic structure and function. These methods will be used to probe the
relationship between kinetics and morphology in metal thin film epitaxy.
Specifically, we will study cluster diffusion and its role in submonolayer metal
thin film epitaxy for three model systems: Rh/Rh(001), Rh/Rh(111), and
Pt/Rh(111). Recent studies indicate that complicated, many-atom mechanisms may
mediate cluster diffusion in these systems and lead to unexpectedly high
mobilities for large clusters. These findings have ramifications for thin film
morphology, as well as for the development of theories for cluster diffusion and
island growth, since current theories do not account for multiple-atom diffusion
mechnaisms and large cluster mobilities. %%% This research is comprised of both
the development of new computational techniques and the application of these
techniques to the study of the deposition and movement of metal atoms on metal
surfaces. These simulations, and associated theory, will help us understand how
material films grow and form particular structures. The results of this work
will advance computational methods and provide an important design tool for
understanding the growth of materials. ***