* 9617236
* Collaborative Research: Prolonged Production and Trophic    Transfer to Predators:  Processes at the Inner Front of the Southeastern Bering Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/1997,01/15/1999
* Terry Whitledge, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 01/15/1999
* USD 315,649.00

ABSTRACT OPP-9617236 WHITLEDGE, TERRY UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AUSTIN This project is
designed to test the hypothesis that elevated primary production at the inner
front continues longer than in the upper mixed layer of non-frontal waters in
the Bering Sea, and that this production provides an energy source throughout
the summer for a food web that supports shearwaters, salmon, and their
zooplankton prey. To test this hypothesis, the proposed collaborative research
will collect and interpret observations on physical and biological features in
the vicinity of the inner front to determine the availability of nutrients in
the euphotic zone, the physical processes responsible for enhanced vertical flux
of nutrients, primary production, the distribution, abundance and trophic
ecology of near-surface swarms of euphausiids and other zooplankton, the
distribution, abundance, and foraging ecology of shearwaters, and by stable
isotope enrichment in trophic pathways from phytoplankton to shearwaters at and
away from the front. The proposed research is important because it will be the
first examination of the physical processes of the inner front in post-bloom
primary production, focus on the ecological role of this extended production,
and relate the evolution of transequatorial migration patterns of seabirds to
biophysical processes that create predictable sources of prey.