* 9617727
* The General Social Survey:  A National Data Program         for the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1997,10/31/2001
* Tom Smith, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/2001
* USD 4,201,204.00

The General Social Survey (GSS) is a national data program for the social
sciences that charts social indicators and provides scientific data for analysis
by literally thousands of students and researchers. Since 1972 the GSS has
conducted 19 independent cross-sectional surveys of the adult household
population of the United States. In 1994 and 1996, the GSS employed a
scientifically ambitious and cost-effective biennial double-sample design that
essentially administered two surveys simultaneously in alternate years. This
design will be continued under the present grant, with pairs of surveys in 1998
and 2000. The General Social Survey has three fundamental aims. First, it
gathers and disseminates data on contemporary American Society. These data allow
social scientists to monitor and explain trends and constants in attitudes,
behaviors, and social attributes of individuals and families. They also permit
scientists to examine the structure and functioning of society in general as
well as the roles played by various sub-groups. Second, because other nations
have emulated the GSS in their own surveys, the GSS permits social scientists to
contrast the United States with other societies in order to place American
society in comparative perspective and develop cross-national models of human
society. Third, the GSS makes high quality data easily accessible to scholars,
students, policy makers, and others with minimal cost and waiting. The GSS is
divided into six components: 1) the replicating core of items, 2) topical
modules, 3) cross-national modules, 4) mini-modules and supplements, 5)
experiments in survey methodology, and 6) reinterviews and follow-up studies.
The GSS is open to submissions of items from any of the social sciences, and a
Board of Overseers, composed of expert survey methodologists and survey
researchers, works with the principal investigators to select the most
scientifically valuable items and modules for inclusion in each interview
schedule. The General Social Su rvey is a primary source of data for many
branches of social science, second only to the US census in frequency of use by
sociologists. More than 3,000 publications and scientific reports have been
based on the GSS, and articles employing the GSS continue to be published in
central social-science journals at a rapid rate. Directly or indirectly, policy-
makers rely upon the GSS as an unbiased source of information about the changing
nature of American society. The present grant will continue this important
scientific tradition into the twenty-first century. 23