* 9617120
* Spectroscopic and Simulation Studies of Structures and      Mobilities of Icy Surfaces and Adsorbates
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* J. Paul Devlin, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 03/31/2000
* USD 224,900.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Devlin will continue studies on characterizing the structure
of ice surfaces and adsorbates using spectroscopic techniques in order to
provide a detailed picture of the structural and dynamical interactions between
them. FTIR measurements will be used to examine the ability to form stable
nanoparticle assemblies of crystalline ice and other molecular solids at
cryogenic temperatures. Another aspect of the proposal involves theoretical
modeling of the properties of ice, particularly those related to the
measurements. The nature and effect of hydrogen-bonding molecules such as HCN,
NH3, ethylene oxide, HCl, and H2S with the surface and subsurface will be
examined. A study of the mobility of water molecules near the surface and an
extension of these studies to other molecular substances, including binary
mixtures with alcohols, acids, and the like, will be undertaken. This project
entails in part a fundamental laboratory study of processes which take place on
ice surfaces, many of which are involved in natural phenomena of considerable
current interest. Among these are the environmentally urgent issues of the
formation of the ozone hole, acid rain, and smog. In addition, these experiments
will help elucidate such areas of astrophysical interest as the mechanism of the
formation of molecules in interstellar space and the composition of cometary
tails.