* 9617769
* An Experimental Comparison of the Fairness and Learning     Hypotheses
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1997,10/31/1998
* David Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 10/31/1998
* USD 30,000.00

The provision of public goods has long been a important problem in
microeconomics. Roughly, a public good is any item which can benefit a large
number of individuals simultaneously and which it is difficult to exclude
individuals from consuming. Examples of public goods might include public parks,
clean air, or national defense. The central difficulty with the provision of
public goods is the free rider problem; if it is impossible to exclude an
individual from the benefits of a public good, he/she has little incentive to
pay for provision of the public good if others are willing to provide it.
Theorists have proposed a number of mechanisms designed to alleviate the free
rider problem. While all of these mechanisms work in theory, they are no better
than their underlying assumptions about individuals' behavior. Experimental
economics has played an invaluable role in the study of public goods by
providing controlled empirical evidence on behavior in public goods problems. It
is well known that public goods and bargaining experiments yield results which
are at odds with standard microeconomic theory. Two classes of theory, based on
interpersonal utility functions (`fairness`) or on boundedly rational learning
models, have been proposed to explain these results. Neither explains all of the
experimental data or clearly outperforms the other. Our experiments explore
whether subjects' behavior in a public goods game can best be explained by the
fairness hypothesis, the learning hypothesis, or a hybrid model which combines
them. Our experiments are based on the Minimum Contributing Set public goods
game developed by van de Kragt, Orbell, and Dawes. We consider three basic
variations. One is designed to push inexperienced players towards the subgame
perfect equilibrium, one is designed to push players toward the `fair`
equilibrium, and one is designed with either outcome as a plausible outcome. By
having subjects participate in one of the first two games before playing the
third, we control the subjects' prior experience entering the third game.
Examining differences in subject behavior between sessions with differing prior
experience allows us to clarify the roles of learning and fairness in generating
subjects' behavior.