* 9617487
* Gas Tracers of Net Biological Oxygen Production in the      Subtropical Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Steven Emerson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2000
* USD 505,987.00

9617487 Emerson Organic carbon export from the euphotic zone of the ocean
regulates the CO2 content of the atmosphere and controls the redox balance in
ocean chemistry on millenial time scales. One of the fundamental goals of
oceanography is to evaluate the organic carbon flux and determine the
controlling mechanisms so that system can be modeled well enough to predict
responses to changes in forcing. Recent estimates of carbon export by a variety
of methods at the U.S. JGOFS time-series stations indicate that the subtropical
oceans are responsible for 25-50 percent of the global ocean new production.
Progress in estimating the rate of new carbon export from the euphotic zone in
the subtropical north Pacific Ocean now require knowledge of the mechanisms(s)
controlling the supply rate of nutrients. Suggestions of diapycnal mixing,
horizontal transport of dissolved organic matter, and various biological
processes are currently being advanced. The implications of the different
mechanisms regarding the coupling of the biological pump and ocean circulation
are obvious and hold extremely important consequences for our understanding of
the response of the ocean's "biological pump" to physical forcing. This study is
designed to test the hypothesis that the mechanism supplying nutrients to the
euphotic zone in the subtropical north Pacific is diapycnal transport. Focus
will be on two main problems: (1) the role of intermittent transport in
supplying nutrients necessary to create the shallow oxygen maximum, and (2) the
utility of inert gases as tracers of diapycnal transport in the upper ocean. A
fully instrumented deep-sea mooring will soon be deployed at the Hawaii Ocean
Time-series (HOT) and can be used to make continuous measurements of oxygen and
total gas pressure on the mooring to determine whether formation of the shallow
O2 maximum is correlated to short-term intermittent supply of nutrients from
below. ***