* 9617013
* Theoretical Studies of Relaxation, Energy Transfer and      Non-linear Spectroscopy in Molecular Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Robert Silbey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 06/30/2000
* USD 358,070.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting Professor
Silbey at MIT. During the next three years theoretical models will be developed
for the study of several distinct areas. The first involves low temperature
optical properties of molecules in condensed phases, in particular glassy
solids. Spectral hole burning, photon echoes, and single molecule spectroscopy
have all shown that the so called homogeneous line shape of a molecule is time
dependent because of slow fluctuations in the condensed phase. These methods
have different but often overlapping time scales, so that a complete picture of
the time dependence from picoseconds to weeks can be found. The theoretical
interpretations of these experiments based on a quantum statistical mechanical
approach is the goal of the first area of research. The second involves optical
and electronic properties of molecular aggregates in solutions. Molecular
aggregates, such as the light harvesting complexes of the photosynthetic
apparatus, have been under intense experimental study over the past decade. The
advent of femtosecond lasers in the correct spectral range has led to new
experiments studying the time dependence of excitation energy transfer and
vibrational relaxation in these aggregates. The theoretical understanding of the
electronic and vibronic states and the dynamics of energy flow of these
aggregates is the central problem of this phase of the supported research.
Because of experimental advances, second harmonic light scattering from
molecules in solution has reemerged as an important tool to measure the non-
linear optical properties of molecules. However, the interpretation of these
experiments in terms of the molecular and solvent properties requires a modern
theoretical basis, which is the goal of the third part of this grant. In
particular, the description of the fluctuations of the solvent field at the
solute molecule is essential to a correct interpretation of the experimental
results. The optical spectrum of a molecule is a signature of its electronic
structure and the environment in which the molecule finds itself. The effects of
the environment can be profound and can make the identification and
understanding of the optical properties of the molecule difficult. Thus, a study
of these effects provides information not only on the molecular spectrum, but
also on the environment. The purpose of this research is to understand
theoretically the effects of the environment (solvent) on the optical properties
of a molecule. The molecules that will be studied are organic molecules that
have a large linear and non-linear optical response; these include: dye
molecules used in laser research, chlorophyll and aggregates of chlorophyl
(antenna complexes and reaction centers), and conjugated molecules that are
candidates for use in optical switching and communication devices. The solvents
or environments that the molecules are in include normal liquids, solids and
glasses. The theoretical research will be carried out in collaboration with
experimentalists who are measuring these optical properties.