* 9617271
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Application and Evaluation of a Low Cost Parallel Processing Platform
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Suresh Chalasani, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/2000
* USD 40,000.00

9617271 Chalasani, Suresh Agrawal, Rajeev University of Wisconsin-Madison CISE
Research Instrumentation: Application and Evaluation of a Low Cost Parallel
Processing Platform This research instrumentation grant enables the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Wisconsin-Madison to
purchase three 12-port Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) switches and nine
personal computers to support distinct research projects on real-time,
multimedia and parallel computing applications. The following research projects
will benefit from this instrumentation: - Traffic Management in ATM Networks -
Parallel Computing on ATM Networks - Distributed Multi-media Computing on a
Desktop ATM Network - Quality of Service Guarantees to Real-Time Message Streams
For these applications, several traffic management strategies to provide quality
of service guarantees will be evaluated using this equipment. These strategies
combine mechanisms such as admission control, policing, scheduling, and
feedback-based flow control. ATM-based networks of workstations may cause
performance degradation for parallel applications, if different virtual circuits
have unequal bandwidths. The research projects on parallel computing use the
equipment to develop techniques for studying and alleviating this performance
degradation in large parallel applications. For multimedia applications such as
video conferencing, current video coding schemes often cause abrupt, frequent
fluctuation of network traffic rendering inefficient use of network resources. A
low cost video conferencing application will be developed to evaluate the
effectiveness of present and emerging video coding algorithms. The equipment is
crucial for investigating all aspects of competing strategies developed in the
above research projects including performance, complexity, and ease of
implementation. The results from the experimental validation will demonstrate
whether or not ATM-based networks are viable platforms for su pporting diverse
applications.