* 9617566
* Dissertation Research:  Regional Community Integration      During the Maya "Collapse", Ivestigations at Chaa Creek,    Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1997
* Richard Leventhal, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1997
* USD 11,618.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Leventhal Mr. Samuel Connell will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue a program of mapping and
excavation at the archaeological site of Chaa Creek which is located in Belize
near Xunantunich, a large and long-lived Mayan site. Extensive research at this
latter indicates that it prospered until well after 900 AD, a significant fact
because across much of lowland Middle America Mayan civilization began to
collapse about 100 years before that. In his research Mr. Connell will focus on
the relationship between Chaa Creek and Xunantunich to understand how
interactions between the larger and smaller entity changed over this period and
what light they may shed on Xunantunich's continuing viability. Chaa Creek forms
a spatially bounded community with small house mounds as well as larger
counterparts which contain stelae, large plazas and five meter high temple
mounds. Mr. Connell will completely mapping surface features at the site to
obtain an indication of overall size and density and to determine how these
changed over time. He will also conduct extensive excavation on a sample of 30%
of the Chaa Creek community sites. This will provide a strong representative
sample and allow for excavations of multiple instances of each house type.
Horizontal exposures will be large enough to trace the shape of individual
units. Past work has indicated, the most commonly collected artifacts are
pottery, lithics and spindle whorls and on the basis of these as well as house
forms one can gain insight into the social and ideological organization of the
community. It will also be possible to determine how these changed over time.
Mr. Connell has utilized a sociological model which distinguishes between
`mechanical` and `organic` forms of social organization. Because of the
complementary nature of the constituent units, the latter form binds societies
more tightly together and Mr. Connell argues that because of stresses imposed
from the outside, the nature of ties between the larger and smaller sites
changed from mechanical to organic during the Mayan collapse. This is a new and
original way to view such archaeological data and the research is important not
only because of the valuable information about Chaa Creek which will be provided
but also because it will help to establish and evaluate a new and potentially
useful analytical framework. It will also assist in training a promising young
scientist.