* 9617943
* Quenched Disorder and the Consolute Point
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2001
* David Cannell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

9617943 Cannell This is a renewal project in which laser light scattering will
be used to study the length scale and dynamics of order parameter fluctuations
near the critical point of a model system involving isobutyric acid/water
mixtures containing a dilute silica network. The critical point of this system
lies below (in temperature) a region of metastable domain formation, much as the
critical point of a random-field magnet lies below the metastable "frozen-
domain" state. Unlike the case with magnets, a simple method of reaching the
equilibrium state exists for the fluid mixture. (Leaving the gel containing the
mixture in contact with a reservoir of the fluid mixture allows it to reach
equilibrium.) This happy coincidence will permit experiments to be carried out
on the equilibrium system near the critical point, something which is not
feasible for random-field magnets. %%% This is a renewal project in which
experiments will be done to study how very dilute porous materials affect
certain phase transitions. The phase transition to be studied is the demixing of
two liquids, and the porous material will be tenuous network of synthetic quartz
(silica). The experiments will try to relate this system to what is already
known about magnetic systems containing impurities that are fixed in position.
For the fluid system, the silica network plays the role of the fixed impurities,
and with no impurities it is already well known that the magnets and fluids are
closely related. Although this is a very basic research project, a deeper
understanding of how porous materials affect the demixing transition might prove
helpful in situations such as contamination of ground water by organic liquids.
***