* 9617675
* Biogeochemical Consequences of Metal Partitioning in        Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Sergio Sanudo-Wilhelmy, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* David C. Kadko
* 02/29/2000
* USD 216,350.00

9617675 Fisher The biogeochemical cycling of many trace elements in ocean
surface waters is strongly influenced by biological process. Despite this fact,
relatively little is known about what controls the fate of elements once they
are incorporated into biomass. For example, metals can be assimilated into the
food web, or regenerated to the dissolved phase or exported on sinking
particles. Given our lack of understanding in this area, it is difficult at
present to predict the fate and relative importance of different pathways in
metal cycling throughout the wide range of oceanic settings. The principal
investigators propose here to advance our understanding of trace metal cycling
by quantifying for the first time the effects of subcellular partitioning and
metal stoichiometires on metal biogeochemistry in natural systems. There are two
main approaches, consisting of laboratory and field work. The lab studies use
controlled measurements and labeled metal radionuclides to examine carbon:metal
ratios and the partitioning and the fate of metals incorporated into biomass. A
novel dual labeling technique allows the principle investigators to separate
between intercellular and cell surface pools of metals. In the field, natural
assemblages of phytoplankton will be examined for the cellular partitioning of
the various metals, and ship board incubation experiments will be conducted to
examine the rates of metal turnover. The results of this study will
significantly increase our understanding of the role of biological processes in
chemical cycling and transport in the oceans.