* 9617753
* Analytical Instrumentation: Mass Spectrometer for the       Analysis of Carbon and Nitrogen Isotopic Ratios
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Deborah Bronk, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1999
* USD 101,116.00

Bronk 9617753 Mass spectroscopy is a highly sophisticated tool which has
contributed greatly to our knowledge of elemental flows and biological rate
processes in the ocean. This award will allow the acquisition of a Europa 20/20
isotope ratio mass spectrometer with an ANCAautosampler to analyze 15N and 13C
enrichments in samples from aquatic and marine systems. It will be housed in the
laboratory of Dr. Deborah Bronk at the University of Georgia's Department of
Marine Sciences; she will oversee its maintenance, and supervise and coordinate
the processing of samples. This instrument will serve as a valuable resource for
other researchers at the University of Georgia, the Marine Institute on Sapelo
Island, and the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography. Faculty and researchers at
these institutions have research projects in a number of different areas which
desperately need or would benefit from access to the mass spectrometer. These
projects include studies on the relationship between inorganic and organic
nitrogen uptake, contrasting the composition and utilization of dissolved
organic nitrogen at two Land Margin Ecosystem Research sites in Chesapeake Bay
and two coastal rivers of Georgia, refining estimates of new and regenerated
phytoplankton production in the Ross Sea as part of U.S. JGOFS, defining the
nitrogen and carbon content of riverine dissolved organic matter and the
transport and chemical transformations of this material as it moves to the
coastal zone, developing methods to quantify fungal productivity with 13C
tracers, determining rates of denitrification and benthic photosynthesis, and
defining nitrogen budgets on the Southeastern continental shelf. This instrument
will also be used in a semiannual course under development at the University of
Georgia on tracer theories and stable isotope techniques. The University of
Georgia is providing an equal match to the federal support.