* 9617378
* Diagnostic and Process-Oriented Modeling Studies of the     Tropospheric Cycles of S, N and Ozone
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* William Chameides, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 04/30/2000
* USD 600,000.00

9617378 Chameides This project consists of two separate but related
investigations which focus on changes in the oxidative capacity of the
atmosphere and to chemically-induced climate change. The first research activity
will be the diagnostic analysis and modeling of datasets collected in sixteen
flights over the Southern Ocean during the Southern Hemisphere Marine Aerosol
Characterization Experiment (ACE-1). This experiment was carried out to better
understand the chemical and physical processes that control the formation and
climate-changing properties of atmospheric aerosols. Specific investigations
planned using this portion of the ACE-1 dataset include: (i) testing of HxOy
photochemical theory, (ii) assessment of tropospheric ozone photochemistry,
(iii) estimates of ammonia oxidation and its role as a source of NOx, and (iv)
investigations of gas phase sulfur chemistry and speciation and its gas-to-
particle conversion. An added benefit of this study will be the development of a
merged dataset of the relevant airborne measurements from ACE-1 as well as the
modeling products, which will be made available to the international scientific
community. The second major investigation will be a process-oriented modeling
study designed to assess the coupled gas- and aqueous-phase chemistry of
deliquescent mineral aerosols within the continental boundary layer.
Specifically, the viability of aqueous phase oxidation within these particles as
a sink of atmospheric sulfur dioxide and a source of particulate sulfate will be
investigated. Initially, a generalized description for an internally-mixed
coarse aerosol of crustal origin, based on data from the southern United States
and from northern China, will be adopted. These descriptions will then be used
to characterize the deliquescent characteristics of mineral aerosols at high
relative humidity. An existing multi-phase atmospheric photochemical model will
be used to elucidate the coupled gas- and aqueous-phase chemistry of these
systems. Results from this study will be used to assess the role of mineral
aerosols in the atmospheric sulfur budget within a global context using a
3-dimensional Chemical Transport Model developed at the Pacific Northwest
Laboratory.