* 9617366
* Ultra-Low Rate Progressive Coding of Images
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Kenneth Zeger, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 09/30/2001
* USD 399,484.00

Algorithms for progressive image compression seek to represent an image in such
a way that a small fraction of the data file can allow a displayed image to be
recognizable, and a larger portion of the data allows improved image quality.
The main applications of progressive image compression are for browsing of
remote databases, Internet image hopping, and fast remote decision-making tasks
where many images must be scanned. The goal is to compress images to rates so
low as to yield "just-recognizable" quality. The user can then exploit just-
recognizable images while progressively scanning an image database by "quitting"
each image as soon as it is determined not to be the one sought. This research
involves theoretical understanding of ultra-low rate progressive image coding
both with and without channel noise, as well as the development and evaluation
of practical algorithms for applications such as low-bandwidth video compression
and packet network image transmission. One portion of this research focuses on
algorithm development, including optimization of wavelet zerotree coding for
ultra-low rates, and coding using regions or line caricatures. The investigators
are studying the effect of channel noise on progressive coding systems, and are
developing both grayscale and color bit progressive image coding algorithms that
do not exhibit catastrophic breakdown in the presence of channel noise. One
promising approach uses rate compatible punctured convolution codes applied to
images compressed with a wavelet zerotree method. Experimental studies of
response times for human observers of progressive image coders will allow the
researchers to quantitatively compare one progressive image coder against
another, and yield insight into human perceptual responses to just-recognizable
imagery.