* 9617471
* Control of Nucleolar Dominance in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Craig Pikaard, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 02/28/2001
* USD 253,000.00

9617471 Pikaard There is growing realization that gene silencing is probably as
important as activation in the carefully orchestrated expression of genes
essential for proper development of complex organisms. Relevant phenomena
include X-chromosome inactivation, gametic imprinting, provirus inactivation,
co-supression and transposable element inactivation. It is not yet clear how
biased gene repression is first established in any of these epigenetic
phenomena; however, DNA methylation and alterations in chromatin structure are
strongly implicated in gene silencing in both animals and plants. Nucleolar
dominance is an epigenetic phenomenon which is widespread in both plants and
animals. Nuclear dominance is the selective formation of nucleoli on chromosomes
inherited from only one parent in an interspecific hybrid or allopolyploid.
Nucleoli form at nucleolus organizer regions, chromosomal sites where tandemly
arrayed rRNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase I. The cytological
manifestation of nucleolar dominance is the transcription of only one parental
set of rRNA genes. The molecular mechanisms responsible for nucleolar dominance
are not clear. This research will test two hypotheses involving biased gene
repression mechanisms: First, that one set of rRNA genes is selectively silenced
by DNA methylation, and second that nucleolar organizer regions are indirectly
controlled as a single locus or chromosomal domain whose chromatin state
determines gene activity. These models are not necessarily mutually exclusive at
a mechanistic level. This laboratory has developed the biochemical and genetic
tools necessary to test these hypotheses in the model plant Arabidopsis. In the
allotetraploid Arabidopsis suecica, rRNA genes derived from Arabidopsis arenosa
are transcriptionally active whereas rRNA genes derived from Arabidopsis
thaliana are repressed. Since the A. arenosa and A. thaliana genomes can be
combined by a genetic cross, an arenosa x thaliana genetic cross using an A.
thalian a DNA hypomethylation mutant will be used to determine if a causal
relationship exists between DNA methylation and nucleolar dominance. A. thaliana
cell lines with stable integrated rRNA transgenes will be used to determine if
location within a nucleolar organizer region is required for nucleolar
dominance. Progress in understanding the mechanisms responsible for nucleolar
dominance will provide important new insights into chromosomal controls of gene
expression. Gene silencing is probably as important as activation in the
carefully orchestrated expression of genes essential for proper development of
complex organisms. It is not yet clear how biased gene repression is first
established; however, DNA methylation and alterations in chromatin structure are
strongly implicated in gene silencing in both animals and plants. Nucleolar
dominance is the selective formation of nucleoli on chromosomes inherited from
one parent. The manifestation of nucleolar dominance is the expression of only
one parental set of rRNA genes. This research will investigate whether nuclear
dominance occurs by gene silencing mechanisms involving selective DNA
methylation and/or locus-specific chromosomal structure. Progress in
understanding the mechanisms responsible for nucleolar dominance will provide
important new insights into chromosomal controls of gene expression.