* 9617474
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Making of a Regime:    United States Foreign Economic Policy, Intellectual         Property Rights and Economic Development
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1998
* David Cingranelli, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1998
* USD 7,300.00

For nearly fifteen years the United States led the way in advocating a global
regime for the protection of intellectual property rights (IPR). With the
signing of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in
December, 1995, that goal was achieved. The Agreement on Trade Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property, Including Trade in Counterfeit Goods commits all
signatory nations to the strong Western-style IPR system that the United States
has advocated. However the United States' interest in securing a strong IPR
regime is a very recent phenomena. Initial research suggests that early in its
infancy, the United States did not favor strong IPR, particularly in terms of
protecting foreign intellectual property from duplication in the US. This
Doctoral Dissertation Research grant allows an analysis of IPR as a global
policy. The two specific questions addressed are: 1) how did the United States'
position on IPR evolve from one of advocating weak IPR protection to one of
favoring strong global protection of IPR? 2) What is the potential impact of
imposing such a strong global IPR regime on developing countries, given the
United States' early experience with the IPR issue? To this end, the research
answers how the global IPR issue evolved, who were the primary actors in forming
the policy, and what are the potential effects of the new policy. Both
qualitative and quantitative empirical methods of analysis are employed to
address these questions. Qualitative research is used to trace the US historical
experience with IPR, demonstrating the pivotal role that domestic institutions
such as the Congress and interest groups played in elevating IPR to a global
issue. Quantitative research is utilized to test the effects of IPR on the
development process which the US and other countries have argued will be
enhanced by following a Western-style IPR system. This Doctoral Dissertation
Research project promises to enhance substantially our understanding of this
interesting and important problem.