* 9617725
* The Organizational Determinants of Industrial Toxic         Pollution
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1998
* Albert Bergesen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 11/30/1998
* USD 49,300.00

This is a study of how the age and size of industrial organizations influence
toxic pollution. In asking what organizational factors explain why some
manufacturing plants emit disproportionate amounts of toxins, this project draws
upon the literature in the sociology of organizations to identify aspects of
businesses that are theoretically relevant to possible polluting behavior. One
strand of organizational research suggests that older and larger corporations
are the least flexible and therefore the least inclined to adopt environmentally
improved work practices. Size and age of plant may create "structural inertia"
that limit plant responsiveness to changes in industrial technology and
utilization of new information by management. Another strand of organizational
research challenges these predictions, suggesting that older and larger
businesses are actually the most fluid and therefore the most capable of
incorporating environmentally sound systems. This research suggests that many
large and well established businesses have recently enhanced their fluidity by
restructuring themselves to resemble networks. Through spinning off
subsidiaries, selling off unprofitable divisions, subcontracting less essential
activities, and participating in joint ventures, these firms have managed to
create flexible mass production systems. By extension in today's "mean and lean"
economy, the production systems of the large and more established companies may
be most able to conform with environmental regulations. This research will test
these competing theoretical claims about the effects of organizational size and
age on toxic emissions with data from the Toxic Release Inventory collected by
the Environmental Protection Agency, focusing on information concerning the
toxic releases of approximately 4500 chemical plants. This research will provide
new policy relevant information on organizational structure and polluting
behavior. This is an important new departure in the sociological study of
environmenta l issues, for it addresses the core organizational structure of a
firm as the possible source of polluting behavior. Policy makers realize that
"end-of-pipe" pollution control is an inadequate strategy for long term
sustainable economic growth. By understanding the organizational dimensions of
polluting behavior, scientific understanding of pollution will be moved up
stream from "end-of-pipe" to basic core facts of organizational life.