* 9617622
* MRPG: Adults' Perceptions of Different Aged Child Witnesses: Delineation of Stereotypes and Examination of their Impact in a Forensic Setting
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Narina Nunez, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/1999
* USD 17,735.00

Nightingale 9617622 This research focuses on the factors that influence jurors'
perception of child witnesses. In particular, a child's age has been shown to
influence jurors' judgments of the child's credibility. Two pilot experiments
are being conducted at this time. The first is designed to explore the utility
of using q-sort techniques for assessing adults' stereotypes of children of
various ages. In the second, adults will hear testimony of a child. The age of
the child will be manipulated. The range of ages adults find believable will be
evaluated. The results of these pilot studies will inform the development of a
complete proposal designed to advance scientific knowledge of stereotyping and
of jurors' decision making. %%% This research focuses on the factors that
influence jurors' perception of child witnesses. In particular, a child's age
has been shown to influence jurors' judgments of the child's credibility. Two
pilot experiments are being conducted at this time. The first is designed to
explore the utility of using q-sort techniques for assessing adults' stereotypes
of children of various ages. In the second, adults will hear testimony of a
child. The age of the child will be manipulated. The range of ages adults find
believable will be evaluated. The results of these pilot studies will inform the
development of a complete proposal designed to advance scientific knowledge of
stereotyping and of jurors' decision making. ***