* 9617227
* An Investigation of the Evolution of Mechanical Properties  of Materials During Metalworking
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Kumbakonam Rajagopal, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Craig S. Hartley
* 04/30/1998
* USD 52,189.00

9617227 Rajagopol Metalworking processes such as rolling, forming, forging,
extrusion, stamping etc. are a multibillion dollar industry in the USA. In the
recent years, metalworked products are being increasingly used to make a variety
of products ranging from food containers to automobile body panels. The
metalworking processes have a big impact on the performance and reliability of
these products because, microstructural effects (such as evolution of
crystallographic texture, dislocation structures and precipitates) and residual
stresses which are induced during the metalworking process play a vital role in
determining their mechanical properties. The goal of this proposal is to examine
the evolution of the mechanical properties of metals with a special emphasis on
the prediction of evolving anisotropy during sheet rolling and forming
processes. This will be accomplished by first developing a constitutive theory
to model the effect of rolling and sheet forming on the salient mechanical
properties (such as the yield surface) the material. The principal idea of the
theory is that the response of the material depends upon the evolution of
multiple structures (such as the lattice structure, dislocation networks etc.)
These are modeled by assuming that the material possesses more than one evolving
natural configuration. As far as the elastic response and the yield function are
concerned, the evolving natural configurations are the stress-free
configurations of the material. This notion allows for a detailed discussion of
the evolution of the anisotropy of the elastic response and the yield surface.
The yield behavior is the most significant aspect mf the mechanical behavior of
the material -.3ince it determines the formability, necking behavior etc., of
the material. Even a slight error in the modeling of the yield behavior
significantly degrades the prediction of these vital parameters. For the past
three years, there has been a collaboration between Scientists at the Alcoa
Technical Center and the University of Pittsburgh to develop comprehensive
constitutive assumptions to accurately model the changing anisotropy. The
current proposal builds upon this effort and takes it to the next stage, namely
detailed experimentation and validation of the constitutive theory. The
predictive capabilities of the theory are expected to provide researchers with
some of the tools necessary to make reliable estimates of mechanical properties
of the sheet metal product from information regarding the manufacturing
processes that it has undergone. In the process, it will help graduate students
to gain both industrial and academic training.