* 9617887
* Estimating Models with Product Differentiation and          Endogenous Product Characteristics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Steven Berry, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 193,751.00

Proposal Summary In many markets, products are not homogeneous, but
differentiated. Recently, there has been much progress in analyzing and
estimating models of product differentiation. A complete model of a
differentiated products industry would include (i) consumers' valuation of the
differing characteristics of products, (ii) a description of the costs of
producing different products, (iii) an examination of how, conditional on
product characteristics, producers make production and pricing decisions and
(iv) a model of how product characteristics are chosen over time. This proposal
contains a number of projects that extend existing work to better model and
estimate production costs, the product space and the endogeneity of product
characteristics. The first project develops a simple model that relates plant-
level cost data to the characteristics of products produced at the plant,
thereby uncovering the `hedonic cost function`. The model is to be estimated on
Census data for the automobile industry. We explore how, after adjusting for
differences in product characteristics, production costs have changed in the
face of a changing economic and regulatory environment. The project also focuses
on the fundamentals of the production process, such as economies of scale and
learning-by-doing. Finally, the new cost-side estimates are incorporated into
existing demand-side studies. The second project focuses on the correct nature
of the product space in a differentiated products model. Existing econometric
models implicitly assume that the dimensionality of the product space changes
with the number of products. This contrasts with many theoretical models that
hold the dimension of the product space fixed. The proposed research develops
methods for estimating models of product differentiation with fixed dimensional
product spaces and examines the performance of these estimators. Modeling the
choice of product characteristics is much more difficult. This project begins
with very simple product spaces and simple models of entry into those spaces.
One empirical example here is the radio industry. It has long been alleged that
there is excess entry into the radio industry, because new stations often
duplicate the programming of existing stations and therefore steal customers. A
series of increasingly realistic models of the product space are combined with
entry models as a first step toward endogenizing the set of existing products.
The empirical applications examine different policy regimes toward broadcasting
entry. The simplest entry models use cross-sectional data and are really one-
shot `static` models of entry. The last set of projects examines fully dynamic
models of entry into differentiated product markets. These dynamic models are
especially important in the presence of sunk costs. There have been important
recent advances in the theory and computation of dynamic models. These advances
make it possible to compute and estimate the model for relatively realistic
state spaces, such as a list of radio formats and different station quality
levels. This research completes one of the first empirical studies using the
newly possible dynamic industry frameworks;. The proposed empirical applications
are, again, to a variety of industries including radio.