* 9617233
* Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Charles Plosser, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 02/29/2000
* USD 225,000.00

The Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy is designed to foster
research and discussion of major policy issues by economists from academia and
various policymaking organizations. Economists in universities are often
unfamiliar with the constraining effect of institutional arrangements in the
shaping of policy issues whereas economists in government are often less aware
of current research developments and their implications. The principal
objectives of the conference series are (i) to stimulate policy relevance in
theoretical and empirical research in economic sciences, (ii) to encourage
interchange of scientific ideas among analysts with different approaches, and
(iii) to generate greater understanding by academic economists of practitioners'
environments. The conferences have been outstandingly productive along these
lines in the past and recent adjustments in procedures that have been designed
to assure that they will continue to be productive in the future. The
conferences are held semiannually at Carnegie Mellon University and the
University of Rochester. About 50 participants plus faculty and graduate
students from the host institution are invited to each conference. Participants
from U.S. and foreign central banks and U.S. and international agencies attend
regularly, and special care is taken to involve promising young scholars. The
papers and formal discussions are edited and published so as to broaden the
impact of the conference.