* 9617208
* Dynamics of Electronically Excited States. Models for       Chemical Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* David Pratt, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2000
* USD 407,983.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports David Pratt from the
University of Pittsburgh in his continuing studies of the electronic
spectroscopy of van der Waals complexes using rotationally-resolved fluorescence
excitation spectroscopy in molecular beams. The goals are to a) determine the
intermolecular potential energy surfaces of the benzene-water complex in the
lowest two singlet electronic states, b) determine the solvent-induced changes
in the structure of the peptide bond in the formanilide-water complex, c) study
the influence of complex formation on intramolecular relaxation processes, and
4) study conformational control of chemical reaction dynamics. Force field and
ab initio calculations will also be carried out. The more global objective of
these studies is to investigate the point at which one goes from the quantum
mechanical to the classical limit, by studying larger asymmetric rotors with
smaller energy level spacings via excitation deep into the ultraviolet. Matter
exhibits a hierarchy of structures at many length scales, with `assemblies` at
one scale becoming `component parts` at the next. In this hierarchy, van der
Waals interactions and hydrogen bonding play particularly prominent roles,
leading to the aggregation of isolated molecules into assemblies that become the
characteristic component parts of macroscopic liquid and solid phases. Hydrogen
bonding also appears as a ubiquitous feature in the complex three-dimensional
structures of proteins, genes, membranes, and other macromolecular constituents
of living systems. It is therefore important to identify and characterize the
basic `supramolecular` units that form the bridge between the microscopic and
macroscopic domains. This is the purpose of these studies.