* 9617519
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Instrumentation to Support   Image Analysis and Control System Software Research         at Vanderbilt University
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Richard Peters II, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/1999
* USD 32,050.00

9617519 Peters, Richard Alan Vanderbilt Univesity CISE Research Instrumentation:
Instrumentation to Support Image Analysis and Control System Software Research
at Vanderbilt University This award supports the purchase of equipment to be
used in five projects which depend heavily on high performance computing: -A New
Software Framework for the Development of Control Systems for Distributed
Robots- Active Stereo Vision for Robotic Visual Servoing- Mathematical
Morphology for Color Images-Morphometric Analysis of the Brain-Image Guided
Surgery. The first will break a robotic control system into groups of behavior
producing agents and provide arbitration mechanisms to control the resources
used by agents. The second will implement a new algorithm for (robot) visual
control of robot arm motion. The third project will port a software system for
research in mathematical morphology (a branch of non-linear image processing)
from Unix to NT and incorporate new hue-based morphological image operators
recently developed by one of the investigators. The fourth will develop and
rigorously evaluate algorithms to detect subtle changes in the morphology of
brain structures through the computer analysis of 3D imagery. The fifth project
will assist, through computed imagery, neurosurgeons performing tumor resection.
All five of the projects are computationally intensive and will make heavy use
of computer graphics and image processing (both 2D and 3D). Two of six computers
and an embedded Pentium system will be dedicated the first project. One computer
each will be used by the other four. Projects 1 and 5 will use graphics
accelerators and 3D glasses. Project 2 will use a frame grabber. Projects 4 and
5 will use the CD-ROM recorder. Projects 1 and 2 will use MSN developer's
licenses. All 5 will need C++ and will be serviced by the remaining hardware and
software.