* 9617589
* Topics in Immigration and Ethnicity
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* George Borjas, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 140,986.00

The United States admitted over 18 million legal immigrants since 1965, and
additional three million immigrants are believed to reside in the country
illegally. These immigrants changed the skill composition of the work force, may
be responsible for some of the recent changes in the wage structure observed in
the 1980s, have had a profound impact on the demographic and socioeconomic
characteristics of major cities, have set the stage for ethnic skill
differentials that will persist well into the next century, and are sure to
alter the economic opportunities available to American workers for many decades
to come. This project consists of a comprehensive research agenda designed to
increase our understanding of the role that immigration and ethnicity play in
the U.S. economy. The theme that runs through the research projects is that
immigration has both short and long-run effects, and that these effects are
better understood if the analysis is based on a solid theoretical foundation.
The empirical analysis will use the Public Use Samples of the U.S. Census from
1960 through 1990, the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth, and the High
School and Beyond survey. The-main questions addressed by the research project
are: 1. What factors determine which ethnic groups are most likely to live in
segregated neighborhoods--as well as which persons in those ethnic groups are
likely to live in those neighborhoods? What are the implications of ethnic
residential segregation for economic performance? 2. What is the impact of
immigration on native earnings and employment opportunities? 3. To what extent
does the internal migration of native workers attenuate the regional wage
differentials created by immigration? Are native workers sufficiently mobile so
that that immigration has little effect on wage differentials across local labor
markets? 4. What factors determine the socioeconomic experiences of immigrant
children in the United States? Do observed characteristics explain a sizable
part of the differences in academic achievement and work experience between
native and immigrant children, as well as among the various immigrant groups?
What are the long-run implications of these differences?