* 9618564
* Quinones, Radicals and Redox-Active Amino Acids, Gordon     Research Conference to be held on May 4th-9th at II Ciocco, Pisa, Italy
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* Peter Knowles, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* P. C. Huang
* 03/31/1998
* USD 16,000.00

9618564 Stubbe A Gordon Research Conference on "Quinones, Radicals and Redox-
Active Amino Acids", will be held May 4th to 9th at Il Ciocco, Italy, under the
auspices of this support. This will be the fourth international conference on
the subject and will emphasize recent advances in the study of radical and
quinone derivatives generated during post-translational modification of amino
acid residues by several classes of enzymes such as oxidases, dehydrogenases,
reductases, oxygenases, pyroxidases and those involved in molecular
rearrangements like pyruvate formate lyase and lysine 2,3-aminomutase. These
radicals and quinones act as highly reactive cofactors for effecting difficult
catalysis such as C-H bond cleavages. The controlled use of radicals in such
enzymes contrasts with the uncontrolled production of radicals which damage
biological material. The support is to be used to partially cover travel
expenses of scientists attending the meeting, with due priority given to young
scientists and under-represented groups. *** Uncontrolled radicals produced in a
cell elicit damage, but controlled use of radicals by certain enzymes can
produce useful molecules. Quinones and radicals produced by several classes of
enzymes can act as cofactors in effective cleavage of chemical bonds that are
otherwise difficult to break. Studies on these enzymes have attracted attention
of increasing number of scientists, and a fourth international conference on
this subject will be held May 4th to 9th at Il Ciocco, Pisa, Italy. The
conference will organized by Professor Joanne Stubbe, M. I.T.; fifteen speakers
from USA will join a forum of others from England, Italy, Japan, Netherland,
Sweden, and elsewhere. Young scientists and under-represented groups will be
subsidized by this support to participate in this conference, along with
scientists from USA and abroad.