* 9618327
* An In-Situ Study of Carbonate Mineral Solubility            in the Upper Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Yuan-Hui Li, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2000
* USD 216,620.00

9618327 Li For global climate models to accurately predict future climate a
detailed knowledge of carbon cycling through through the oceans must be
achieved. This study will investigate the causes for the elevated
supersaturation of the surface oceans with respect to carbonate minerals and
carbonate dissolution at shallow to mid-depths as a sink for anthropogenic CO2.
The composition of a film which forms on calcite samples in the surface oceans
will be investigated. This film is believed to be responsible for the
supersaturated state of the surface ocean, however, its composition is still a
matter of controversy. In laboratory experiments, carbonate surfaces will be
scanned while submerged in synthetic and natural seawater solutions of varying
composition, via atomic force microscopy (AFM), the formation of films can be
observed in quasi-real time. The acquired surface morphology of these samples
can then be compared to the acquired surface morphologies of samples deployed in
the upper ocean. In order to determine acquired surface composition, samples
generated at sea and in the laboratory will be subjected to X-ray Florescence
Spectroscopy (XFS) and include low grazing angles. In the early stage of this
project, abiotic aragonite, Mg-calcite and calcite samples will be deployed in a
depth profile at station ALOHA in conjunction with the JGOFS Hawaii Ocean Time-
series project. Also, natural assemblages of coccolith tests, foram shells and
pteropod shells will be deployed in a depth profile at station ALOHA in
conjunction with the JGOFS Bermuda Biological Research station in the North
Atlantic. Relevant parameters of the CO2 system are measured as part of HOT and
BAT with a great deal of precision and accuracy. This data will allow for the
evaluation of experimental measurements along side thermodynamic predictions.
Future projects will then take on a global prospective with the aid of other
JGOFS research groups around the world. A fter obtaining measurements in all of
the oceans an assessment of shallow carbonate dissolution as a sink for
atmospheric CO2 can be attempted. ***