* 9618609
* Dissertation Research:  Social Context of Bronze Use at     Thanh Den, Vietnam
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1998
* K. Chang, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1998
* USD 10,450.00

Under the direction of Dr. K.C. Chang, MS Tracy Hoffman will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological excavation at the
site of Thanh Den which dates to the early Bronze Age (1500-1100 BC) and is
located 40 km west of Hanoi. A small portion of the site was excavated in the
early 1980s and this revealed the presence of a village settlement based on rice
agriculture and metallurgical remains including molds for casting implements
such as axes and spear points. It is one of a handful of sites in northern
Vietnam which has yielded metallurgical remains. In collaboration with regional
archaeologists, MS. Hoffman will expand research at Thanh Den. She will excavate
an area of ca. 100 sq. meters which should be sufficient to determine the major
activities that took place as well as to assess the amount of variability in
cultural remains across the site. MS Hoffman will examine: 1. The extent and
nature of bronze working at the site. This will include assessing whether bronze
was imported in finished form or was locally produced; 2. The abundance and
types of bronze as compared to other artifacts and whether bronze is restricted
in spatial distribution across the site; 3. The presence and distribution of
other types of `exotic` items which may indicate the existence of large scale
trade networks. Research will be conducted in two phases. Six weeks will be
spent excavating at Thanh Den in conjunction with field conservation and initial
recording. This will be followed by two months of conservation and analysis in
Hanoi. Southeast Asia is an unusual area of the world in terms of the
development of complex society. By the mid-second millennium BC, communities in
Southeast Asia were practicing cereal cultivation (rice) and the production of
copper and bronze. Despite the fact that these two conditions have been
demonstrated to be important in the development of complexity in other parts of
the world, in Southeast Asia it is only a thousand years later that the
beginnings of social stratification and political centralization can be
detected. Thus Southeast Asia may present an opportunity to develop new theories
and models for the rise of complexity. This research will produce widely used
information on a region which, from an archaeological perspective, is poorly
known; the results therefore will be of wide interest. The project will also
assist in training a promising young scientist.