* 9618025
* Assessment of the Response of the Ocean-Atmosphere System   to the Evolution of the Southern Ocean During the Cenozoic
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Eric Barron, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 01/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract ATM-9618025 Najjar, Raymond G. Pennsylvania State University Title:
Assessment of the Response of the Ocean-Atmosphere System to the Evolution of
the Southern Ocean During the Cenozoic This award supports a study of the role
of southern hemisphere ocean bathymetry and continental configuration in the
evolution of global ocean circulation, climate and the cryosphere during much of
the Cenozoic (14 to 55 million years ago) using general circulation models of
the ocean and atmosphere. In particular, by conducting a series of numerical
experiments of varying complexity (with idealized and realistic ocean bathymetry
and with uncoupled models) this work will evaluate the effects on ocean
circulation and climate of (1) the separation of Australia from Antarctica, (2)
the opening of Drake Passage, (3) the progressive increase in the surface area
of the ocean in the southern hemisphere, and (4) the Antarctica ice cap. An
important component of this study will be the evolution of the models using
paleoceanographic data on ocean circulation and thermal structure for the
Cenozoic. This model- data comparison will also provide a framework for the
interpretation of paleoceanographic data and model-data comparison will help to
constrain the possible causes of the dramatic changes in the earth system that
occurred during this time period. The proposed simulations will also allow the
evaluation of previously proposed hypotheses regarding the development of an
extensive Antarctic ice-sheet.