* 9618797
* STIMULATE:  Generating Coherent Summaries of On-Line        Documents:  Combining Statistical and Symbolic Techniques
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Judith Klavans, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2001
* USD 438,878.00

This project proposes a multi-level process of summarization featuring: (1)
integration of knowledge about a document derived with both statistical and
symbolic techniques; (2) the use of language generation for reformulating this
information into both indicative and informative summaries; (3) summarization
across sets of related articles; and (4) development of techniques for domain
independent summarization. The proposed research comprises both document
analysis and summary generation. Document analysis involves segmenting a
document into topics, using statistical techniques to identify key content
within each section, and constructing a lexical semantic representation for use
by the summary generator. Generation focuses on integration of relevant
information from several data sources, on presentation of contrasting
information from the input articles, and on the use of planning operators to
combine information from the separate representations into a single concise
text. The research includes evaluation techniques for measuring both coverage
and robustness of the analyzer and generator, including conceptual and
linguistic knowledge. Through collaboration with Columbia's Center for Research
on Information Access, the proposed research on dynamically generated, coherent
summarization across domains will ultimately be part of a digital library
interface that filters documents according to a user's interests and needs.