* 9618152
* Exchange Rates in Segmented Markets
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Andrew Atkeson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2002
* USD 209,232.00

Since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system of managed exchange rates in the
early 1970's, there have been large and persistent movements in the nominal
exchange rates between the currencies of the United States, Japan, and the
countries of Western Europe. These movements in nominal exchange rates have been
much larger than the inflation, money growth, or interest rate differentials
across these countries. Moreover, at all but very low frequencies, these
movements in nominal exchange rates are associated with movements in real
exchange rates of roughly the same size and persistence. The purpose of this
research is to develop new approaches to modeling this behavior of exchange
rates and their impact on international business cycles. The project consists of
three parts. The first involves analyzing whether a model used to assess the
impact of monetary injections on asset prices can reproduce the salient features
of exchange rate behavior. The second part involves analyzing the impact of
monetary policy on interest rates, exchange rates, the terms of trade, and the
trade balance using an international business cycle model with segmented asset
markets. The third part develops a search model to analyze the pricing decisions
of multinational firms that produce in a single location and sell their products
to segmented goods markets.