* 9618936
* Science on the Move
* EHR,DRL
* 04/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Sheila Jasalavich, Marist College
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 12/31/2000
* USD 1,189,321.00

9618936 Molloy This 36 month project will provide pedagogical and content
enhancement for 240 different secondary teachers in a three county area of New
York,Dutchess, Orange and Ulster counties. There are a total of 53 secondary
schools in these three districts. The teachers will be teachers of chemistry,
biology, physics, environmental science and computer science. An average of
slightly more than four teachers per school will be involved in the project over
the three year period. Each of the teachers will participate in two-two week
workshops on the Marist College campus which will be content enrichment and
pedagogical transformation. They will work with the actual materials and
instruments which will be delivered to their classrooms as well as the 'van'
drivers who will service their school. A total of three vans will be operating
from year two on with equipment to provide laboratories in chemistry, biology,
physics, environmental science, and computer science. The Boards of Cooperative
Educational Services (BOCES) have committed to providing increasing support in
years two and three of the project and assuming full support in subsequent
years. Significant monetary and gifts in kind have been received and are
promised which will make the cost share approximately 87% of the total reqested
from the Foundation. The project has an actual cost to the Foundation of less
than $5,000 per teacher.