* 9618962
* MSTE:  Integrating Mathematics, Science and Technology in   the Elementary Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2003
* Thomas Liao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel Householder
* 03/31/2003
* USD 4,165,323.00

9618962 Liao MSTE: INTEGRATING MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY IN THE
ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS The project, MSTE: Integrating Mathematics, Science, and
Technology in the Elementary Schools, is a five-year effort based at The State
University of New York at Stony Brook. This collaborative effort also involves
the New York State Education Department, Hofstra University, Brookhaven National
Laboratory, and 20 school districts in New York. The goal of this project is to
develop models for the infusion of technology education into the elementary
schools. To accomplish this goal, activities focus upon the integration of
experiences in technology with contemporary approaches in mathematics and
science in the elementary schools. Participants utilize exemplary curriculum
materials and activities in technology education to enrich the elementary school
experiences in mathematics and science. The project is organized to enhance
teachers' pedagogical abilities; strengthen their content knowledge in
mathematics, science, and technology; and provide leadership expertise among the
20 three-person teams, each representing one of the collaborating school
districts. Each team is comprised of a content specialist in mathematics,
science, or technology and two experienced teachers, one from grades K-3 and the
other from grades 4-6. These teams will participate in two years of sustained
enhancement activities at The University at Stony Brook, Hofstra University, and
Brookhaven National Laboratory. The MSTE Project will prepare teachers in the
use of exemplary curriculum materials to provide instruction that highlights the
rich relationships among the disciplines. During the third and fourth years of
the project, each of the 20 MSTE teams will conduct regional summer enhancement
workshops and academic year meetings for 30 elementary school teachers from
their local geographic areas. An Implementation and Resource Guide is being
developed for use by leadership teams in their summer workshops for te achers in
their local regions. The MSTE Project will devote its fifth year to a statewide
leadership development effort, preparing teams of teachers and content
specialists from across the State of New York to serve as leaders in subsequent
teacher enhancement efforts.