* 9618370
* Modeling International Capital Flows and Exchange Rates     Movements
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Timothy Kehoe, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2000
* USD 178,454.00

The 1990s have witnessed both a dramatic expansion of capital flows into
developing economies-the emerging markets boom-and an equally dramatic
contraction of such flows following the 1994-1995 financial crisis in Mexico.
The purpose of this research is to construct intertemporal general equilibrium
models both for analyzing the capital flows that would follow financial opening
in developing economies and for analyzing financial crises like that in Mexico.
Although much of the proposed research focuses on the case of Mexico, it is
applicable far more widely. This project will extend previous work by the author
on modeling financial crises. It will generalize this work on self-fulfilling
debt crises to allow for consumers who have risk-averse preferences and who
would borrow and lend internationally. Preliminary results indicate that this
extension will capture the capital flight that occurs when the probability of a
debt crisis increased. The research will also develop an alternative, but
related, model of self-fulfilling currency crises. The models of debt crises and
those of currency crises will ultimately be linked through the crucial role that
foreign reserves held by the government play in each model. A central feature of
the proposed crises models is that they will be fully specified dynamic,
stochastic general equilibrium models, as contrasted with the reduced form
models found in the literature. In addition, a dynamic, stochastic general
equilibrium model in which banking crises can occur in equilibrium will also be
contracted and analyzed.