* 9618166
* 3D Coherency of the Barbados Seismic Data Volume: Improved  Imaging of Faults and Fluid Conduits
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* J. Casey Moore, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 02/28/1999
* USD 58,838.00

9618166 Moore Fluid-rock interactions and associated tectonic- hydrologic
processes exert fundamental controls on crustal evolution. Accretionary prisms
incorporate fluid-rich sediments at high strain rates, providing natural
laboratories where tectonic and hydrologic processes are accessible to drilling,
quality seismic imaging and monitoring. Evaluation of tectonic and hydrologic
processes here provides models for deeper level phenomena in both active
tectonic belts and more quiescent sedimentary basins. Faults are conspicuous
fluid migration conduits of the northern Barbados accretionary prism. Fluids
migrating along faults are deeply sourced, alter sediments that they contact,
and mediate structural processes. A recently collected 3D seismic data volume in
this area clearly images the plate boundary detachment or decollement fault and
related thrust splays. As a follow-on effort to previous work on this Barbados
3D seismic volume, we propose application of seismic coherency analysis to the
data, a revolutionary post-stack processing technique. We propose to investigate
the coherency signature of the decollement surface, the boundaries between
reflection polarities along this surface and any coherency anomalies within
areas of like reflection polarity. These analyses will be carried out at AmocoOs
Technology Center in Tulsa Oklahoma, where this processing technique was
developed. ***