* 9618552
* Food Substrates and Digestive Capabilitites of Marine       Deposit Feeders
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Lawrence Mayer, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2002
* USD 238,202.00

9618552 Mayer Deposit feeders play several important roles in determining
whether organic material is demineralized or buried. These animals function to
make surfaces available for microbial growth and move particles both
horizontally and vertically within the seabed at a pace that far exceeds
sedimentation. The central problem in understanding deposit feeders is to
identify the materials that they utilize and to determine the sources of those
materials. The interdisciplinary approach of this project is to combine a
chemical reactor theory of digestion with measurements of the processing of
enzymatically available amino acids, focusing on rates of hydrolysis in, and
absorption from, the gut. In vitro and in vivo fluorometric methods will be
developed to assay enzyme activity in the guts of small deposit feeders; these
methods that will be applicable to planktonic animals as well. Chemical analyses
and deposit-feeder bioassays will be conducted to test whether methionine or
other essential amino acids become more limiting in laboratory simulations of
diagenesis. In a shallow subtidal site the hypothesis that the holothuroid
Parastichopus californicus is limited to feeding during times of relatively high
methionine concentration will be tested. At a 200-m site the hypothesis that the
burrowing urchin Brisaster latifrons will show greater hydrolytic and absorptive
capacity for amino acids after the spring bloom than during winter will be
tested.