* 9618844
* Determining the Reliability of Using Cosmogenic Nuclides to Date Arctic Beach Sediment
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,08/31/1999
* John Gosse, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/1999
* USD 88,318.00

This project is a one year pilot study of determine the reliability of using
cosmogenic 10Be, 26Al, and other nuclides to date beach sediment. The test site,
Prescott Island, on eastern Prince of Wales Island, NWT, has sufficient datable
rocks of different lithologies and clast sizes; persisted above 60o N
geomagnetic latitude since emergence (the latitude at which the production rate
for the nuclides has been approximately constant); and already has a well-
defined emergence curve based on 46 driftwood radiocarbon dates. Forty large
samples representing beaches from <11 kyr to the modern shoreline were collected
during a two week field season in 1995. Support is requested for the physical
and chemical preparation and analyses of these samples for 10Be, 26Al, 36Cl, and
14C. Raised shorelines, especially those with wide backshore zones that span a
long time range and have numerous beach ridges, are used to construct relative
sea level curves for coastal regions that have undergone tectonic uplift or
isostatic compensation for deglacial unloading. Shoreline emergence curves
provide information on the style and rate of uplift, are useful for detecting
local and regional tectonic anomalies, can help delimit the boundaries of
crustal blocks and determine if they have tilted during the emergence period,
provide constraints on paleo-ice mass and thickness, have been used to help
infer deep mantle rheology parameters, and are useful in verifying existing
isostatic adjustment models. Tight and reliable chronologies are required on
suites of beaches to establish accurate emergence curves. Where datable organic
material is not available for radiocarbon dating, cosmogenic nuclide dating may
provide a reliable alternative. It is uncertain how reliable the cosmogenic
nuclide methods can date individual beach ridges or define a relative sea level
curve. Total uncertainties for cosmogenic nuclide ages on single beach levels
must be at least 6 or 7% to be useful. Although this has been achiev ed on
moraines, there are a number of different environmental factors which must be
considered when dating beaches. A test of the utility of terrestrial cosmogenic
nuclides to date beaches has never been formally conducted.