* 9618896
* Renewing Mathematics Teaching Through Curriculum (RMTC)
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Laura Van Zoest, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Paola Sztajn
* 08/31/2002
* USD 1,186,885.00

9618896 Van Zoest Renewing Mathematics Teaching through Curriculum (RMTC) is a
collaborative of fifteen high schools in southwestern Michigan that have
recently adopted the Core-Plus Mathematics Project (CPMP) instructional
materials in their quest to improve mathematics teaching so that all students
can develop mathematical power. In this four-year professional development and
curricular implementation project, all 154 mathematics teachers in the targeted
schools participate in an integrated, reflective cycle of teacher enhancement
activities comprised of eight-day summer sessions, biannual meetings of all
participants, and regular and frequent contact among teachers in school
buildings that includes peer mentoring, class observations, common planning
periods, and small-group meetings. Each teacher participates in an average of
382 hours of professional development over a three-year period. As a Local
Systemic Change through Teacher Enhancement in Mathematics, Grades 7-12,
project, RMTC has five key elements: (1) RMTC is integrally connected with the
exemplary curriculum that the collaborative teachers use in their classrooms;
(2) the approach that RMTC takes to professional development is consistent with
the approach the exemplary curricula take to student learning; (3) RMTC
acknowledges that systemic change in mathematics education requires the
commitment and understanding of the communities beyond the mathematics
department and school; (4) RMTC takes advantage of the unique strengths the
individual schools bring to the collaborative to help in overcoming each other's
weaknesses; and (5) the formation of RMTC was initiated by teachers and
continues to be guided by both teachers and administrators in the collaborative
schools. The project will also produce products to share the ideas generated by
RMTC with other districts that are facing the challenge of implementing an
innovative mathematics curriculum. A WWW site will permit immediate
dissemination of information and, by the conclusion of the project, summary
products will be produced in multimedia format (CD-ROM), as well as paper copy.
Non-federal cost-sharing in the project is over $ 750,000, of which more than $
150,000 is derived from Western Michigan University and approximately $ 600,000
from the participating school districts.