* 9618799
* Residential Segregation:  Beliefs and Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Maria Krysan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2000
* USD 134,074.00

This is a study of residential segregation. Convincing evidence from studies
conducted throughout the last five decades demonstrates that residential
segregation denies blacks many opportunities generally available to urban
whites. Massey and Denton argue that residential segregation created and now
perpetuates an urban underclass in many large cities. Although there were modest
declines in black-white segregation in the 1980s; the primary impression gained
from examining recent investigations of population distribution based on census
data is the persistence of segregation despite changes in federal laws and
improvements in the social and economic status of African-Americans. Analyses of
the individual level factors acting to sustain this segregation are both rare
and inconclusive. Many of these have focused on one metropolis, Detroit, and on
the beliefs and preferences of whites only. The present study engages the
central theoretical issues with fresh data that largely overcome these
limitations. This project presents a conceptual model of the causes of continued
segregation emanating from Myrdal's observation that informal social pressures
are the primary forces sustaining the geographic isolation of blacks from
whites. The model posits that the beliefs individuals hold about their own group
and about other racial groups influence their perceptions of which neighborhoods
are attractive and which should be avoided. With an innovative data set, the
Multi-City Study of Urban Inequality (MCSUI), the research will test hypotheses
about the beliefs and preferences of samples of blacks and whites in four sites
(Atlanta, Boston, Detroit and Los Angeles), samples of Latinos in two (Boston
and Los Angeles) and a sample of Asians in Los Angeles. The abundance of
relevant variables allows testing the model in two ways. First, the research
will examine how characteristics and beliefs influence respondents' preferences
for living in hypothetical neighborhoods with varying racial compositi ons. For
example, are whites who hold stereotypical beliefs about blacks less likely to
remain in their neighborhoods when blacks move in, and are they unwilling to
move into already integrated neighborhoods? Second, respondents were asked to
evaluate the desirability of living in specific locations such as suburbs or
well-known neighborhoods within the central city. If blacks anticipate hostility
from the residents of a particular suburb, do they also view it as an
undesirable place to live despite the presence of affordable housing there? By
asking such questions this research will address how individuals' beliefs and
preferences translate into the multitude of locational decisions that determine
the residential distributions of blacks and whites. The unique structure of the
MCSUI data set also allows the research to investigate whether similar dynamics
are likely to affect the residential distributions of Hispanics and Asians who
are now entering our increasingly diverse metropolises.