* 9618818
* Woodrow Wilson Environmental Science Leadership Project
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2002
* Mary Apodaca, Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 05/31/2002
* USD 4,490,718.00

9618818 Apodaca The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Program proposes a five
year Environmental Leadership Project designed to promote the acquisition of
knowledge, tools and habits of mind that enable teachers of middle and high
school students to implement quality environmental science education. Two
objectives are to enhance the quality of existing environmental education
courses and to infuse concepts developed through the study of environmental
science in key areas of the existing science curriculum. The project includes a
four-year series of summer residential Core Institutes, four for high school and
four for middle school science teachers. Follow-up and networking activities
continues for the life of the project and beyond. A total of 400 science-teacher
leaders are to be involved in the summer Core Institutes. A second tier of
development is in the format of 48 two-week Outreach TORCH Institutes, led by
teams of Core Institute teachers, working in collaboration with colleagues from
higher education at college and university sites. These institutes are to engage
an additional 1,440 classroom teachers in summer programs and academic year
assignments involving a minimum of 100 contact hours of supervised work. All
activities involve laboratory and field work, a range of student learning and
assessment techniques and emphasis on the use of computers and technology for
professional use, classroom use, and instructional purposes.