* 9618401
* Geophysical and Petrological Study of the Northern Chile    Ridge: Investigating Thermal Effects of Transform Offsets onRidge Axis Morphology, Crustal Thickness and Magmatism
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1997,10/31/2003
* Fernando Martinez, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Epp
* 10/31/2003
* USD 525,714.00

Abstract OCE 96-18401 (University of Hawaii: J. Karsten/F. Martinez) OCE
96-18736 (Duke University: E. Klein) This combined program will conduct a
detailed geophysical and geochemical study of the Northern Chile Ridge and
Valdivia Fracture Zone intra-transform spreading centers. A 40-day field program
will use SeaBeam 2000, magnetics, and gravity to map the detailed geomorphology
of the axial region out to the Brunhes-Matuyama magnetic reversal boundary. The
neo-volcanic zone will be sampled at ~125 sites by dredging and wax coring;
lavas recovered will be analyzed by electron microprobe, ICP-MS, DCP, and mass
spectrometry for major element, trace element, and Pb-Nd-Sr isotopic
characteristics. The combined data set for the Northern Chile Ridge will be used
to investigate the relationship of axial depth, crustal structure and lava
composition with thermal effects associated with large offset transform faults.
The Valdivia F.Z. data set will be used to further investigate the extent and
variability of anomalous geochemical features of the Southeast Pacific
discovered in previous studies of the Southern Chile Ridge (i.e., DUPAL isotopic
signatures and MORB with subduction zone trace element characteristics) and to
extend on-going studies of relationships between Pacific mid-ocean ridge basalt
chemistry and axial depth to deeper ridge segments.