* 9618135
* Microbial Food Webs in Marine Sediments: Spatial Motives    Link Bacterivory and Biogeochemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2002
* Slava Epstein, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2002
* USD 273,940.00

*** 9618135 Epstein This project addresses trophic relations between sediment
micrograzers and bacteria of particular biogeochemical importance. It is
suggested that proto- and micrometazoan grazers balance production of sediment
chemo- and photolithotrophs and thus become important players in the dynamics of
reduced and oxidized forms of sulfur, nitrogen, and carbon, and possibly Mn and
Fe. This idea is supported by the results of previously work, pilot data, and
literature information. All these data suggest the following ideas. 1. Major
sediment microbacterivores (flagellates, ciliates, nematodes, and others) are
concentrated in a specific sediment layer, at and immediately below oxic/anoxic
interface. 2. It is exactly in this sediment layer that most sulfide, ammonium,
and methane oxidizing chemolithotrophs, as well as anaerobic photosynthesizers,
are known to concentrate. 3. In this particular layer, which exhibits increased
grazing pressure over bacteria, micrograzers appear to remove daily up to 50% of
bacterial standing stock. Based on the above evidence, the following hypothesis
is advanced. Proto- and micrometazoan grazing controls bacterial dynamics in a
specific sediment layer at and immediately below the oxic/anoxic interface. The
hypothesis will be tested by comparing the rates of bacterivory by sediment
flagellates, ciliates, nematodes, and other micrograzers, with bacterial
standing stock and bacterial production in the identified sediment layer. This
will be done by a combination of classical, modern, and novel approaches.
Seasonality will be examined by conducting the experiments in two different
seasons, which were previously shown to contrast with each other in the
microbial food web structure. At each seasonal time point, experiments will
account for daily dynamics in grazing activity and vertical migrations of
prospective bacterivores. Many key techniques to b e used here have been
substantially improved, and supporting evidence collected, under prior NSF
support. The model community (fine intertidal sands, Boston Harbor) has been
under study for several years and is uniquely suited for the planned research.
This work is one of the first to introduce spatial motives into studies of
sediment microbial food webs. The target of this research are those functional
types of bacteria that are particularly important in sediment biogeochemistry,
nutrient recycling, and sediment-water exchange. The significance of studying
mechanisms governing these bacteria dynamics goes therefore beyond its intrinsic
value for detailing benthic microbial food web structure, and is important in a
much larger ecological context. ***