* 9618099
* Adapting Yup'ik Elders' Knowledge:  Pre-K-to-6 Math and     Instructional Materials Development
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1997,05/31/2003
* Jerry Lipka, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Saul
* 05/31/2003
* USD 1,410,487.00

9618099 Lipka The University of Alaska Fairbanks in collaboration with a Yup'ik
teacher group, Ciulistet Leaders , and Yup'ik elders will develop 15 ancillary
modules or prekindergarten through sixth grade mathematics curriculum. These
modules, which are developed from Yup'ik Eskimo culture, language, and everyday
practice, connect the embedded mathematics in Yup'ik culture to Western
mathematics. These modules will conform to the Curriculum and Evaluation
Standards of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. Previously, this
team developed math manipulative prototypes (the Yup'ik math Tool Kit) based on
Yup'ik language and culture. The Yup'ik Math Tool Kit takes advantage of Yup'ik
conceptions of numeration, nonstandard measures, and patterns. This tool kit
will be refined and will form an integral part of this inquiry-based approach to
teaching mathematics. The team plans to develop computer software that children
can use to copy, identify, analyze, and create Yup'ik patterns. This four-year
project is designed to serve a historically underrepresented group, indigenous
Alaskan students, by linking mathematics with their culture. This project will
also provide these contextually rich mathematics problems to an audience well
beyond the state of Alaska, with the intent of being national in its appeal. To
accomplish this, the project team will pilot and field test the modules in
Alaska among school districts with an almost 100% indigenous population and
outside of Alaska. Lastly, the curriculum development team will form a
partnership with the Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative in developing this
curriculum and in providing teacher enhancement.