* 9618688
* Effective Collaborative Learning in Large Classrooms via    Reconfigurable Virtual Dooms
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Meera Blattner, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ernest L. McDuffie
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

The limited possibilities currently available for interaction with off-site
students lead many faculty to view distance education as a complex and difficult
barrier to overcome, and the off-site students often feel like academic second
class citizens in the process. The steady advance of computer equipment into the
traditional, physical classroom has likewise not yet lived up to its potential,
because inadequate support is provided for the wide variety of interaction
styles typically employed in the classroom by experienced and successful
teachers. Our purpose in this proposal is to pursue our vision of education
tomorrow centering around the virtual classroom, a hybrid physical and
electronic space in which students and instructor(s) come together to learn.
Some are in the same room, but many others are geographically remote. Class size
is likely to be large, but students will still find this a friendly and
comfortable place where they are part of small and cohesive learning teams
rather than mere specks lost in an impersonal and frightening sea of
unrecognized faces. We will accomplish this by developing a Design Conference
Learning Environment (DCLE) that supports numerous interaction styles, in
particular that in which the class is split into multiple problem-solving
groups. The DCLE will allow us to investigate situations such as when a pair of
courses are electronically tied together (in this case UC-Davis, and our
collaborators at RPI) so that students in, say, a graduate course on distance
learning can make use of and, in turn, influence work being done by students in
an introductory programming course. Experiments in teaching actual courses at
both the undergraduate and graduate level using the DCLE will enable us to
derive conclusions regarding the optimal organization of tomorrow's learning
environments. Team members expertise in bilingual education, in making systems
accessible to students with a variety of disabilities (e.g., vision
impairments), and in rigorously and formally evalu ating the efficacy of an
environment, will ensure the broad and comprehensive applicability of the DCLE,
whose software and tools will be distributed freely to institutions for use in
their educational settings as a tangible benefit of the research. It is
important to note this project is a companion to another that is currently being
funded by another division, under grant CDA-9634485. This grant has been awarded
to our companion team at RPI.