* 9618518
* Workshop on the Future of Biothermal Engineering, April     19-22, 1997, Allerton House, Monticello, Illinois
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1997,10/31/1998
* J. Chato, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* ASHLEY F EMERY
* 10/31/1998
* USD 15,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9618518 A workshop will be held at the University of Illinois
Allerton House Conference Center for April 19-22, 1997 to evaluate the current
status and to explore future directions of the field of biothermal engineering.
The program will consist of two and a half days of formal sessions and three
informal evening discussion periods. The first evening session will be rather
informal, except for a keynote speech describing the international picture of
biothermal engineering. The first full day will consist of six tutorial sessions
on the fundamentals as well as the current state of the art of various
biothermal phenomena from biological, medical, and engineering viewpoints. Each
of these sessions will consist of a lecture followed by a discussion period. In
the evenings, following both full day sessions, individual group discussions
will be held on the topics of the day. The morning of the second full day will
be devoted to sub-group discussions of application areas. In the afternoon of
the second full day a plenary session will be held to identify the major issues
for the following discussion sessions. The sessions of the third evening will
also be used to develop reports on the individual topics discussed. During the
final morning, plenary session will be held in which individual reports will be
presented, discussed, and finalized for inclusion in the final report. The final
report of the workshop will consist of a summary of the discussions and
conclusions regarding current status and future work. It will also be presented
at various scientific and technical meetings to serve as a guide to the
researchers, sponsoring agencies, and industry dealing with biothermal
engineering. The report will also contain summaries of the keynote addresses and
a listing of all the participants together with abstracts of their current
research interests. ***