* 9618050
* A Manufacturing Interface for 3D Design
* CSE,EIA
* 05/01/1997,10/31/2001
* Mark Cutkosky, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Mita D. Desai
* 10/31/2001
* USD 1,350,000.00

The goal of this project is to provide students and designers with improved
access to new layered manufacturing processes including MicroElectro Mechanical
Systems (MEMS) and Shape Deposition Manufacturing (SDM) technologies. Together,
these technologies can facilitate the design of new classes of products that
would be difficult, if not impossible, to build with currently available
manufacturing techniques. These processes are capable of generating dense,
multi-material parts with complex shapes; the size of device features may range
over six orders of magnitude; and the range of materials includes metals,
plastics and ceramics. This spectrum of integrated additive and subtractive
fabrication processes will be linked by SDM And MEMS Unified Exchange Language
(SAMUEL) service. The SAMUEL service will provide a common interface and rapid
access to two manufacturing processes: SDM and MEMS. Creating the SAMUEL service
will demonstrate that designers who are unfamiliar with details of the
manufacturing processes can rapidly create physical artifacts and explore new
design ideas. Through a standard interface, designers will able to access the
SDM and MEMS manufacturing sites and quickly incorporate manufacturing process
constraints into their design system. The manufacturing constraints can be
expressed as rules for invocation at the design level.