* 9618011
* Local Population Dynamics of Temperate and Tropical         Reef Fishes at Multiple Scales
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1997,11/17/1999
* Graham Forrester, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/17/1999
* USD 359,597.00

There is considerable debate regarding the major processes that determine
population sizes of organisms inhabiting rocky and coral reefs. Most of these
organisms have complex life cycles that include widely dispersive propagules and
relatively sedentary juveniles and adults, such that the `birth rate` at a
particular reef is equivalent to the rate of settlement of propagules. The
controversy focuses on the extent to which supply of propagules vs. post-
settlement processes determine local population size and dynamics. To resolve
this issue we must know whether, and how, the demographic rates that determine
population size at a particular site (settlement, immigration, mortality, and
emigration) change with population density (i.e., are the changes in these rates
density-dependent). Answering this question is of more than academic interest
because, first, it provides the basis for understanding how local population
size is regulated naturally, which is essential for effective management of
fisheries and other natural populations, and second, it has seldom been answered
adequately for any organism. This collaborative research is designed to answer
the question of what drives local population dynamics in a comprehensive manner
for four species of marine fish inhabiting two very different environments:
temperate and tropical reefs. This multi-species, multi-system approach will
provide some generality which can perhaps be applied to other marine systems,
including demersal and bottom fisheries. Using well-proven methods, the combined
experimental and observational design of this study will examine the roles of
larval supply, settlement, recruitment, immigration, emigration, competition,
and especially predation and its mechanisms, in driving local population
dynamics. Results of the field work will be incorporated into mathematical
models of population dynamics to provide conceptual generality applicable to
other similarly organized systems.