* 9618882
* Toward Greater Understanding of Self-Esteem Instability
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Michael Kernis, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2001
* USD 183,586.00

Project Description. Considerable evidence indicates that (a) people vary in the
extent to which they exhibit short-term fluctuations in feelings of self-worth,
and that (b) these differences in self-esteem stability (or fragility) are
implicated in a wide range of important psychological phenomena (e.g.,
depression, anger and hostility proneness). Not much is currently known,
however, about why people vary in the extent to which their self-esteem is
stable. The proposed research is therefore designed to examine both
dispositional and situational factors that may underlie or promote unstable
self-esteem. On the dispositional side, studies will test the hypotheses that,
compared to people with stable self-esteem, people with unstable self-esteem
will (a) have self-regulatory styles that are primarily introjected rather then
integrated, (b) pay greater attention to potentially self-evaluative stimuli,
(c) react more to feedback even when the task is poorly validated, and (d) have
less well-developed self-concepts, as revealed through a variety of indices. On
the environmental side, studies will examine how feedback importance and
diagnosticity, and contextually heightened ego-involvement, affect individuals'
sensitivity and reactivity to evaluative feedback. Finally, additional
information will be obtained on the convergent and discriminant validity of
self-esteem stability. In sum, the proposed studies will provide considerable
insight into the nature of self-evaluative processes, the extent to which these
processes vary across individuals, and how they are affected by various
environmental conditions. In addition, the research will contribute to greater
understanding (and potential treatment) of a wide range of clinically relevant
phenomena in which fragile self-esteem is implicated (e.g., depression, anger
management). %%% Project Justification. Prior research indicates that people
vary in how much their feelings of self-worth fluctuate from day to day, and
that these individual differences in self-esteem stability (fragility) are
implicated in a wide range of important psychological phenomena (e.g.,
depression, anger and hostility proneness). Not much is currently known,
however, about why people vary in the extent to which their self-esteem is
stable. The proposed research is therefore designed to examine both
`personality` and situational factors that may underlie or promote unstable
self-esteem. The research is expected to provide considerable insight into the
nature of self-evaluative processes, the extent to which these processes vary
across individuals, and how they are affected by various environmental
conditions. In addition, the research will contribute to greater understanding
(and potential treatment) of a wide range of clinically relevant phenomena in
which fragile self-esteem is implicated, including those related to depression
and anger management.