* 9618687
* Dissertation Research: Secular Change of Japanese Occlusion: The Frequency of the Overbite and its Association with Food Preparation Techniques and Eating Habits
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1998
* C. Loring Brace, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/1998
* USD 12,000.00

Until just over 200 years ago, the normal human bite was edge-to-edge. That is,
when the molars were clenched together, the cutting edges of the upper and lower
incisors met each other rather than overlapping as is now considered normal. The
change took place in Europe following the adoption of the dinner fork and the
changes in eating habits it indicated late in the 18th century. Because of the
hiatus in Old World contacts caused by the American Revolution, that change did
not begin to take place until the third decade of the 19th century in America. A
similar change should have occurred in Asia following the change in food
preparation methods that allowed chopsticks, kwai-zi in China and hashi in
Japan, to be used as everyday eating utensils. Preliminary work in China
indicates that the modern overbite occurred in upper class Chinese in the Song
Dynasty. Song cultural influences had a profound effect on life in Japan, and
the purpose of this project is to test whether the adoption of Chinese food
preparation and eating habits exemplified by the use of chopsticks was
accompanied by a change from the edge-to-edge bite of the first Japanese farmers
and their descendants in Yamato Japan which immediately preceded the first major
influences from China. These investigations will help clarify the relationships
between diet, eating behavior, food preparation technology and normal occlusion
of the dentition.