* 9618984
* A Systemic Partnership to Improve the Teaching and Learning of Science for All Children
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2004
* Rachel Wood, Delaware State Dept of Public Instruction
* Continuing Grant
* Robert D. Sherwood
* 03/31/2004
* USD 6,049,999.00

9618984 Wood This Local Systemic Change project is submitted by a Coalition of
nine Delaware School Districts, the State Department of Public Instruction and
the Delaware Science, Math and Technology Education Foundation. Support and
expertise is drawn from the State Legislature, the school districts, business,
industry, and academia. The project will initiate a hands-on science program in
all 58 elementary schools in the 9 school districts. Approximately 1800
elementary teachers in the program will receive professional development in
order to help them fully implement exemplary curricula; FOSS, Insights and
Science and Technology for Children. This program will: * Provide every
elementary teacher with 150 hours of professional development linked to
exemplary curricula in order to deepen their understanding of science content,
strengthen their capacity to teach science and embed science as a central
element in the K-6 curriculum. * Build the capacity to sustain science education
in every district by developing a network of teacher leaders in every school in
the Coalition and creating a core of district Science Specialists throughout the
state to support the Lead Teachers. * Foster partnerships with higher education
to align pre-service and in-service teacher education. The request is for
$5,402,013 for 5 years with cost sharing estimated as $6,700,000.