* 9618957
* Redefining, Reforming, and Enriching Mathematics Instruction through Problem Solving, K-8
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1997,09/30/2001
* Susan Friel, Elizabeth City Pasquotank County Public Schools
* Continuing grant
* Monica B. Mitchell
* 09/30/2001
* USD 1,144,202.00

9618957 Friel The Camden County, Edenton-Chowan, Elizabeth City-Pasquotank,
Gates County, and Hyde County public school systems in northeast North Carolina
collaborate with the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, East Carolina
University, and Elizabeth City State University in a fifty-four month teacher
enhancement project. The project targets all 378 K-8 teachers of mathematics in
the participating districts, each for 196 - 304 hours of professional
development in summer workshops and academic-year sessions, linked with
classroom implementation of exemplary instructional materials in mathematics.
The effort is driven by student needs, national standards, state standards and
new requirements for graduation, and North Carolina's new ABC's Program which
places accountability for student achievement at the building level, with
incentives and sanctions. Submitted under the guidelines for Local Systemic
Change through Teacher Enhancement, Grades K-8, MIPS seeks to (1) implement
consistent and proven mathematics curricula that promote problem solving and
inquiry in the teaching and learning of mathematics, K- 8; (2) implement
instructional models that are student-centered and focus on quality work; (3)
promote and effect an articulated mathematics curriculum that is well integrated
with district classroom instruction; and (4) develop sustainable interactions
among the collaborating districts, along with the necessary support and teacher
leaders to institutionalize the changes made in mathematics instruction, K-8.
The districts will initially focus the elementary teacher enhancement and
curricular components on helping teachers learn and teach statistics through the
NSF-funded Teach-Stat. Elementary teachers then participate in further
enhancement centered around children's mathematical development, leadership, and
implementation of exemplary instructional materials, especially Investigations
in Number, Data, and Space and Everyday Mathematics. Middle grades efforts
center around implementation of the Connected Mathematics Program. Expected
cost-sharing in the project, derived from the five participating school
districts, is approximately 127% of the NSF request.