* 9618589
* Synthetic, Mechanistic, and Catalytic f-Element             Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Tobin Marks, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2000
* USD 487,000.00

Dr. Tobin J. Marks, Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for a study of the organometallic chemistry of the f-elements
(actinides and lanthanides), and closely related early transition metals. The
goal of the project is to design, characterize, and understand from a
structural, mechanistic, and thermodynamic sense novel stoichiometric and
catalytic transformations involving f-element organometallic molecules. The
project consists of four closely interconnected components:(1) Titration
calorimetry will be utilized to quantify the strengths of metal-ligand multiple
bonds, of bonds involving `zero-valent` f-element complexes, of bonds involving
heavier groups 14-16 ligands, and to firmly `anchor` existing bond energy data
compilations on an absolute scale; (2) The scope and mechanism of
organolanthanide/organoactinide-catalyzed reactions in which element-H bonds are
added to unsaturated carbon-carbon bonds will be determined, with focus being
concentrated on thermodynamic feasible hydroamination, hydrophosphination,
hydroboration, and hydrothiolation reactions; (3) The properties of chiral
lanthanide and actinide complexes having C1 symmetric ligation will be
investigated with respect to structure, stereochemical integrity, and efficacy
in enantioselective catalytic transformations of the types described in (2); and
(4) organolanthanide-catalyzed chain transfer reactions in which olefin
polymerization is coupled to element-H/metal-C transposition processes will
utilized to produce a series of heteroatom `end-capped` polyolefins, and unusual
polyolefins in which methylene units are directly appended to polymer backbones.
Transformations involving organometallic compounds are of central importance to
numerous areas of U.S. industrial chemistry, including catalytic processes for
the production of fuels, polymeric materials, pharmaceuticals, and other
economically important chemicals. Developments in this area are crucial to the
development of ever more efficient, selective, environmentally benign, and
economically competitive process technologies. This project focuses on the
lanthanides and actinides. The organometallic chemistry of these elements has
until recently been relatively unexplored, and there is growing interest in
their application in polymerization catalysis and organic synthesis. The goal of
this project is to effect, characterize, and understand unusual and potentially
useful transformations involving f-element organometallic molecules.