* 9618465
* RUI:  Observational Studies of Galactic and Extragalactic   Supernova Remnants
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2003
* Frank Winkler, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 04/30/2003
* USD 177,471.00

Abstract Winkler Supernovae are the cataclysmic events in which massive stars
(more than about 8 times the mass of our Sun) end their lives. They are the most
energetic localized events which now occur in the universe: a typical supernova
explosion releases in a few seconds an energy of about 10 to the 44th Joules,
comparable to what the Sun will expend throughout the entire course of its 10
billion year lifetime. Not surprisingly, such a prodigious release of energy can
have profound effects on the dynamics of galaxies in which supernovae occur. The
shock waves from supernovae are believed to trigger episodes of star formation
when they encounter dense interstellar clouds. Furthermore, supernovae are
responsible for the production and distribution of most of the heavy elements in
the universe. Virtually all the elements from helium to iron, on the periodic
table, were created by nucleosynthesis in the cores of massive stars, and these
elements have been distributed around the cosmos through the supernova
explosions of the stars in which they were originally formed. By studying
supernovae and the remnants they leave behind, we can gain insight into the
processes of nucleosynthesis, the evolution of the universe's chemical
composition, and the effects of such prodigious energy release on the host
galaxies of supernovae. Extragalactic samples of supernova remnants (SNRs) offer
two significant advantages over ones in our Galaxy: (I) the view toward other
galaxies is far less impeded by interstellar absorption than in the Milky Way,
where fewer than a third of all known remnants have been detected at all by
optical means, and (2) all the remnants in another galaxy are at the same, known
distance, making comparisons among them much more meaningful and reliable.
Supernovae searches to be conducted in the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds,
nearest neighbors to our Milky Way, and in M31, the largest galaxy in the Local
Group, should increase the samples of SNRs in t hese galaxies several-fold.
Wide-field digital imaging through the use of CCD cameras on small Schmidt
telescopes at Kitt Peak and Cerro Tololo observatories will be used. A technique
which has already led to the identification of over 100 SNR candidates. These
supernovae candidates will be further studied through spectroscopy and high-
resolution imaging to confirm whether they are, in fact, SNRs and then their
properties will be observed. The expanded extragalactic SNR samples will be used
to study the local environments of supernovae, to probe elemental abundances and
abundance gradients in galaxies, to measure the energy of supernova events, and
to study the effects of supernovae on galactic structure. Detailed attention
will be focused on the handful of young SNRs where uncontaminated ejecta from
the supernova can be identified. In older remnants, which are much more
numerous, shocks driven through the interstellar medium can probe the density,
structure, and abundances of the interstellar gas. Wide-field imaging techniques
will be used to study individual SNRs in our Galaxy in unprecedented detail. The
proposed optical investigations will be combined with new radio and X-ray data
to study the interstellar environments of supernovae and the fundamental physics
of shocks. These detailed studies of a few selected objects will complement the
broader extragalactic surveys. Significant collaboration with undergraduate
students is integral to carrying out the research.