* 9618283
* Physical, Chemical and Electromagnetic Wave-induced         Processes in Microdroplets
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Asit Ray, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 06/30/2001
* USD 284,443.00

ABSTRACT CTS 96-18283 The objectives of the proposed research are to examine
nucleation, photochemical and chemical reactions in homogeneous and layered
microdroplets. Experiments will be conducted on single droplets suspended in an
electrodynamic balance and on highly monodisperse droplets generated by a
vibrating orifice aerosol generator. Elastic and inelastic light scattering
techniques, based on resonances (i.e., intensity peaks) observes in scattered
light, will be used to determine size and refractive indices of homogeneous and
layered droplets. Liquid-solid phase separation processes (i.e., nucleation) in
microdroplets will be examined to understand the mechanisms that control the
structures of solid particles and the formation of layered droplets with
microdroplets suggests that photochemical reaction rates in microdroplets under
resonance conditions enhance significantly. The results of the theoretical
analysis will be tested with experimental data on photochemical reactions
occurring in microdroplets illuminated by light whose wavelength corresponds to
a resonance. Prior experiments on oxidation of SO2 in aqueous solution droplets
containing MnSO4 show that accurate data on reaction kinetics can be obtained.
In this project droplet-vapor reactions used for generation of solid particles
will be examined to determine whether the selectivity of one of the products in
a parallel-series reaction can be altered by the droplet phase reaction.
Finally, reactions between core droplets coated with inert immiscible layers and
gas phase reactants will be examined theoretically and experimentally to
understand the effects of the gas-layer interfacial area and diffusional
resistance of the layer on the overall reaction rate.