* 9618057
* Collaborative Research:  Computer Software for Solution of  Extensive Form Games
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Andrew McLennan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2000
* USD 46,742.00

9618057 McLennan Despite the widespread use of game theoretic models in the
social sciences, there is as yet no software available to solve computationally
game theory problems. This project completed the development and testing of the
first computer programs for analysis of extensive and normal form games. The
computer code (both source and executable code) that developed under this grant
is made available free of charge for use in research and teaching by individuals
in the academic community. This new software is opening up the entire field of
game theory and all of the social science applications of game theory to
computationally intensive research. More specifically, the project develops a
computer program for interactively building and finding sample equilibria for
extensive form games. It also implements new algorithms for finding all
equilibria (for a given refinement of Nash equilibria) for any given extensive
form game. The main program will allow for interactive construction of an
arbitrary finite extensive form game. It will be able to represent games of
incomplete information, as well as certain types of infinitely repeated and
stochastic games. For any extensive form game, the program will compute sample
equilibria of the game, either on the extensive or normal form, i.e., in
behavioral or mixed strategies. In addition to Nash equilibria, the program will
be able to compute various refinements of Nash equilibria, such as sequential
equilibria, perfect equilibria, proper equilibria, and simple stable sets. One
goal of the project is to develop a capability for the program to calculate
closed form analytical formulas for an equilibrium as a function of a specified
parameter of the problem. ??