* 9618007
* Reproduction, Dispersal, and Recruitment of Hydrothermal    Vent Crabs:  A Tractable System
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2002
* Ana Dittel, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2002
* USD 169,933.00

Cary 9618007 Almost 20 years ago researchers discovered unique communities of
organisms inhabiting deep-sea hydrothermal vents located along the Eastern
Pacific mid-ocean spreading centers. The question of how these species disperse
and maintain their populations in these patchy, ephemeral habitats has remained
one of the most interesting and unanswered problems in vent ecology. This study
will be part of the Larvae-at-Ridge-Vents Project (LARVE), which is a component
of the ongoing Ridge Inter-Disciplinary Global Experiments (RIDGE) program.
Central to the success of LARVE is understanding the way in which hydrothermal-
vent species maintain populations. Results of earlier work suggest that vent
species produce pelagic larvae that are responsible for colonization of new vent
sites and for maintaining populations at established sites. However, available
evidence is almost entirely circumstantial. The patchiness of vent fields (in
time and space) compounds the problem and demands innovative solutions that use
the most tractable species as models for dispersal and recruitment. The focus of
the research will be the vent crab, Bythograea thermydron. This crab shares the
life-history characteristics that have made decapod crustaceans the taxon-
ofchoice for a great many shallow-water studies of dispersal and recruitment.
The central hypothesis of the study maintains that Bythograea thermydron
disperses among vent sites via demersal larvae that take advantage of both
subtidal bottom currents and the well developed swimming ability of the larvae.
Understanding the life histories and the biological and physical constraints on
dispersal of crabs from vents sites is critical to establishing credible models
of how these communities are established and maintained along mid-ocean ridges.