* 9619060
* EPWG:  ATHENA
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Pamela Clute, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 03/31/2001
* USD 710,552.00

9619060 Clute The project establishes a comprehensive web of links for women
helping women to create supportive environments across universities and public
schools to provide encouragement, guidance and educational opportunities to all
females involved, focusing upon the areas of mathematics and the sciences.
University faculty are linked with college majors and 7th and 8th grade female
students, and college majors are linked with teacher consultants, 7th and 8th
grade female students, and professional women in organizations such as AAUW. The
ATHENA project is to provide tutoring, instruction, and mentoring services to
annual cohorts of seventh and eighth grade female students. These services are
provided by female college mathematics and science majors to supplement the
mathematics and science curricula at the middle schools. The college majors are
to use the Math and Science Professional Resource Center at University of
California-Riverside to help the 7th and 8th grade female students complete
homework, research papers, and other academic assignments and activities. The
center also is to be used for parent involvement activities to expose them to
the world of mathematics and science and potential careers for women. Through
the project, the female college mathematics and science majors learn about the
teaching profession, receive academic and financial support, obtain experience
in providing classroom instruction, have access to a broad range of resources,
and receive support and encouragement from faculty mentors and teacher
consultants to pursue teaching as a career. Mentoring relationships are to be
created by linking faculty from the University of California-Riverside, who do
research and teaching in their respective fields, with the college majors. Their
training includes specific courses on effective strategies for teaching and
learning mathematics and science. The faculty mentors provide encouragement and
support for the college majors to collaborate in preparing present ations and
research papers for presentation at professional conferences.