* 9619489
* Applications of Weighted Least Squares
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Stephen Vavasis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 06/30/2000
* USD 117,562.00

This project covers the development and analysis of new algorithms for weighted
least-squares problems and their applications. In many practical applications,
the weights vary by large factors, giving rise to ill-conditioned cases. In the
past decade several authors independently proved a norm bound for this case of
an ill-conditioned weight matrix. In previous work the PI followed up on this
norm bound with the discovery of a stable algorithm for weighted least squares.
``Stable'' means that the accuracy of the algorithm is not affected by ill-
conditioning of the weight matrix. The norm bound and the stable algorithm turn
out to have several unexpected applications. For example, a new interior point
method was discovered whose running time, unlike for all previous interior point
methods, does not depend on the numerical data of the objective function. Also,
a way was found to stably solve a class of finite element methods on which
previously known algorithms would have failed. In this research project,
weighted least-squares problems will be pursued along several lines: (1)
iterative methods for weighted least squares will be developed, as well as
improved sparse-matrix methods, (2) results for linear programming will be
extended to semidefinite programming, (3) new algorithms will be invented for
the highly nonlinear problems arising in electric power networks, which have at
their core a generalized weighted least-squares problem, and (4) inverse finite
element problems will be addressed. The outcome of this project will be more
accurate and more efficient algorithms for optimization and simulation problems
arising in science and engineering.