* 9619921
* STIMULATE:  Modeling and Automatic Labeling of Hidden Word- Level Events in Spontaneous Speech
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2006
* Andreas Stolcke, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2006
* USD 2,067,267.00

Most current NLP techniques expect input resembling read or constrained speech.
When applied to spontaneous speech, such techniques encounter two serious
difficulties. First, spontaneous speech contains surface phenomena relating to
non-propositional aspects of the input, such as disfluencies and discourse
markers. Second, spontaneous speech lacks overt punctuation for segmenting the
input into meaningful units. For effective NLP, such phenomena should be overtly
marked in the input; current speech recognizers, however, produce only a raw
sequence of words. The goal of this project is to augment speech recognition
models to output word sequences annotated for these phenomena, termed "Hidden
Word-Level Events" (HWEs). New models are developed to allow recognition of HWEs
to occur in tandem with word recognition. HWE recognition is based on a
combination of acoustic and language models, extending the standard components
found in current systems. The new models also capture prosodic characteristics
of HWEs, including intonation and duration patterns. The prosodic information is
combined with statistical language models describing the distribution of HWEs in
relation to lexical and syntactic units. Results should significantly enhance
our ability to process spontaneous speech automatically; the research will also
further our basic understanding of spontaneous speech.