* 9619019
* National Computational Science Alliance
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2005
* Larry Smarr, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2005
* USD 249,066,609.00

This action executes a cooperative agreement between NSF and the National
Computational Science Alliance (the Alliance) at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), under the direction of Dr. Larry Smarr via NSF award
ASC 9619019. The cooperative agreement will be operational for a period of five
years and is the result of a proposal submitted to NSF solicitation,
"Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure" (PACI), NSF 96-31. The
PACI program builds on and replaces the NSF Supercomputer Centers Program
established in 1985 The program focuses on newly emerging opportunities in high
performance computing and communications, providing flexibility, both to adapt
to rapidly evolving circumstances and to meet the need for high-end computation,
in order to enable continued U.S. world leadership in computational science and
engineering. NSF, through this program, will provide access for researchers to
high performance computing systems, with associated highly trained staff and
researchers necessary to develop and optimize their use. The emergence of
scalable parallel systems, high performance networking and high bandwidth and
large capacity mass storage systems creates the opportunity for a national
infrastructure consisting of a number of geographically distributed sites
strongly coupled to high end computational resources and to each other via high
speed communications networks. The National Center for Supercomputing
Applications has joined with its partners to create an Alliance whose principal
mission is the integration of the many computational, visualization and
information resources into a national-scale "Grid". The Grid links the Alliance
together and provides access to its wide variety of resources to the national
scientific research community. Using high performance networking the Grid will
link the highest performing systems to mid-range versions of these
architectures, and then to the end-users' workstations, thereby creating a
national Power-Grid. The Allia nce Grid will interconnect dozens of
visualization and virtual reality displays, massive data stores, and remote
instruments, while Alliance developed software "glue" unifies them for
collaborative problem solving. The Alliance will also create integrating
structures for information and resources distributed on the Grid, making its
content useful for education, training and outreach. Special emphasis will be
placed on outreach to underrepresented minorities, women and other pertinent
areas. The partnership members have been chosen because of their individual
commitments to work together as a team, enabling advances to be achieved by a
new level of national-scale multidisciplinary collaborative research. The
Alliance will concentrate on providing advanced hardware, enabling technology,
leading edge work in application technology, education, training and outreach.
Included in this award is the first incremental payment to UIUC and its partners
for FY98 which covers general operating expenses including equipment.