* 9619722
* Polyelectrolyte-Colloid Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Paul Dubin, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2001
* USD 290,525.00

9619722 Dubin The interaction of polyelectrolytes with colloidal particles and
surfaces is central to a many industrial processes and biological phenomena,
such as dispersion stabilization and flocculation, and the binding of. proteins
to DNA. Since these interactions are predominantly coulombic,the PI will study
systems in which key electrostatic quantities -- colloid surface charge density,
polymer linear charge density, and ionic strength,--can be systematically
varied. The polyelectrolytes will be both cationic, such as
poly(dimethyldiallylammonium chloride), and anionic, such as
poly(acrylamido-2-methylpropanesulfonate) and copolymers thereof. The colloidal
particles studied will be micelles, vesicles, proteins and dendrimers. Some of
these systems have individual significance, e.g. polyelectrolyte-protein
complexes for protein separations, polyelectrolyte-micelle complexes for removal
of trace organics, and polyelectrolyte vesicle complexes for drug delivery. One
of the goals will be to evaluate two very distinct theoretical treatments. The
first predicts second-order phase transitions for polyelectrolyte adsorption on
oppositely charged surfaces (large particles. The second describes the binding
of charged ligands (small particles) to polyions within the context of
counterion condensation theory. In addition, a number of questlons related to
specific experimental systems will be addressed: (a) Do mlcelies restructure
upon binding to polyions? (b) Can the "spacer effect" of nonionic co-
surfactants be quantitatively explained? (c) What is the state of proteins in
complexes and coacervates, in terms of tertiary structure, rotational freedom,
and enzyme activity? (d) What is the microstructure of protein-polyelectrolyte
and micelle-polyelectrolyte coacervates? and (e) How does polyelectrolyte
adsorption affect liposome permeability? %%%% This project is in the area of
colloidal particles, surfaces, and polyelectrolytes, whose interactions have
importan t implications to a number of biological and industrial processes ***