* 9619117
* STIMULATE:  Multimodal Indexing, Retrieval, and Browsing:   Combining Content-Based Image Retrieval with Text Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2002
* Raghavan Manmatha, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2002
* USD 769,111.00

*** In the rapidly emerging area of multimedia information systems, effective
indexing and retrieval techniques are critically important. In this project, the
Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval (CIIR) will study algorithms and
mechanisms that facilitate the.process of indexing and retrieving images, video,
and associated text. Specifically, the CIIR will: 1) Develop techniques for
browsing and retrieving images and videos by content. Image indexing is an
emerging technology which is poorly understood. New and powerful techniques will
be developed for indexing images and videos using visual attributes such as
color, texture and 'appearance'; 2) Develop techniques for indexing images and
videos using text present in the images. Methods of assisting with manual
annotation of images will also be studied. The text indexing methods will be
combined using the INQUERY probabilistic retrieval engine; 3) Develop and
evaluate interactive retrieval and browsing interfaces for image, video, and
text retrieval. These interfaces will be based on novel visualization and user
interface work done at CIIR. The CIIR will perform user studies to evaluate the
appeal and effectiveness of the interfaces. In summary, the project will
integrate innovative image matching, sophisticated text retrieval and new query
formulation and visualization methods to create a powerful platform for indexing
and retrieving images, video, and text.***