* 9619277
* Chain Structure and Counterion Condensation in Solutions of Flexible Polyelectrolyte Chains
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Andrea Liu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/29/2000
* USD 141,000.00

9619277 Liu The principal objective in this grant is to develop theoretical
understanding of polyelectrolytes. Specifically there are two related components
of this project: One involves further development of a variational formalism to
study the chain structure of a polyelectrolyte solution at arbitrary
concentrations. This is in contrast to past work on the polyelectrolyte chain
structure which has been limited to a single chain, in the infinite dilution
limit. The second part is an application of this formalism to study counterion
condensation. The principal advantage of this theory is that it can treat
fluctuating, intrinsically flexible chains and it does not require restriction
to fixed model geometries such as line charges and cylinders. This work is
expected to resolve some of the most controversial questions in the field of
polyelectrolyte solutions and also pave the way for similar studies of even more
complex systems such as charged self-assembled surfactant systems,
polyelectrolyte complexes, and polyelectrolyte/membrane complexes. %%% In this
grant to a young female researcher in theoretical polymer science, there is
support to study properties of polyelectrolytes. These are the polymers that are
soluble in water, generally found everywhere and especially relevant to
environmentally-benign processing. The work in this project addresses some long
standing questions in the structure of charged polymers and their response to
further charging at fairly high levels. This work uses sophisticated, state-of-
the-art, theoretical machinery and proposes to further build on the PI's recent
development of necessary mathematical techniques. ***