* 9619257
* Workshop:  Power System Outreach For High School Teachers.  To Be Held At Howard University In The Summer Of l997
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Peter Bofah, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 10,000.00

ECS-9619257 The Energy Systems and Control (CESAC) at Howard University is
dedicated to research in Power Systems for Utility and Government foundations
and outreach programs called EESI for High School Students, with emphasis in
Electrical Engineering/Power Systems, and Artificial Intelligence Applications.
We are proposing to extend these outreach activities to include High School
teachers in the Washington, DC Metropolitan area. These teachers will serve as a
conduit for exposing a critical mass of students as to why Power Systems
education and career is important. The proposed work is aimed at a two-week
summer outreach program emphasizing the following: (a) Energy alternatives,
economics consideration and modeling. (b) Basic Power System components and
tools needed for analysis and design. (c) Use of internet for problem solving in
an engineering course such as Network Analysis. The extended EESI Program for
teacher will spread over two (2) weeks and will involve lectures, discussions
and hands-on. The Principal Investigator (PI) and a graduate student in Power
Systems will be involved in the course delivery. The experience obtained from
this workshop will be documented in an IEEE Power System Education Division
paper. ***