* 9619749
* Research Experience in Information Systems and Electrophysics for Undergraduates
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Frank Cassara, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2000
* USD 196,471.00

9619749 Cassara ABSTRACT Polytechnic University seeks continuing funding for an
ongoing research program that for eleven years has been training electrical
engineering and computer science students during the summer before their senior
years in the area of information systems and electrophysics. Students will be
recruited from a variety of other schools, including primarily undergraduate
institutions which are not research intensive. Approximately 50%-75% will be
students enrolled at schools other than polytechnic to provide an opportunity
for a rich interchange of ideas. Every effort will be made to attract at least
40% of participants from the minority and women student body. The addition of a
female faculty member as Co-PI, Professor Yao Wang, will help with recruitment
of additional women interns and early announcement of internship awards will
help attract top minority students who are heavily courted by many other
academic and industrial summer programs. The research environment will be
enriched by additional undergraduate students funded from other sources. Each
participant will have regular meeting with an individual faculty mentor to plan
work and review progress throughout the eleven week program. Project topics in
Information Systems will include image communication, VLSI, multivariable
feedback control, wireless information networks, robotics, cache memories, and
control systems. Project topics in electrophysics will include microwave-plasma
interaction, computational electrophysics, power systems and magnetic
levitation. All will benefit from extensive interactions with participating
faculty and graduate students. Participants will have informative tours of our
research laboratories at both the Brooklyn and Farmingdale campuses. There will
be two or three seminar presentations to the group by leaders from industry,
universities or government agencies. A tour will be arranged at a nearby
industrial lab or National Laboratory. The program will terminate with a two-
day research review during which each student will make a 20 minute formal
presentation and answer questions. A formal final written report of professional
quality will be required of all participants. A monetary prize will be awarded
to the best project. ***