* 9619102
* SimCalc: Democratizing Access to the Mathematics of Change
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Jeremy Roschelle, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 03/31/2002
* USD 3,079,982.00

9619102 kaput Situations involving rates, accumulation, approximations, and
limits occur in every citizen's everyday experience and pervade mathematics,
science, and their use across virtually all arenas of human endeavor.
Furthermore, the actual content of the Mathematics of Change and Variation (MCV)
is sowing at an unprecedented rate in the directions of dynamical systems and
nonlinear science. Yet only technical college students in traditional calculus
courses normally gain access to even part of the MCV. And to do so they must
survive a long series of prerequisites that filters out most of their
classmates, especially those from poorer backgrounds and neighborhoods.
SimCalc's long-term mission is to render practical and widely available to ALL
students the opportunities, experiences and resources they need to develop
masterful understanding and skill with the Mathematics of Change and Variation.
In this project, the SimCalc team expands upon prior work that (a) identified
how to enable learning based on children's prior knowledge and cognitive
capabilities with carefully designed activities, representations and devices (b)
established the power of the MCV to reorganize and energize traditional
mathematics topics, (c) created successful sample lessons in both traditional
and novel content, (d) created a technological base for accelerating and
deepenin@ learning and (e) proved the feasibility of an approach to MCV for
young, inner-city, minority hildren. This project progresses from relatively
brief teaching experiments to long-term classroom engagement, and from testing
of components in small subsets to full integration of physical, simulation and
visualization tools, including inexpensive graphing calculators. This intensive
research effort will develop solutions to three critical problems, each an
undeniable prerequisite for enabling democratic access to the mathematics of
change: A. Classroom-based Research on @arning: How can we best combine the full
range of cog nitive, linguistic, kinesthetic and cultural resources that
ordinary students bring to us, with the affordances of practical new
technologies, to enable extraordinary learning in realistic settings? B. School-
based Research on Curriculum Reorganization: How can integrating the MCV with
important core mathematics produce the curricular efficiency and power
absolutely necessary to make possible the new content needed by students of the
next century? C. Component-based Architecture for Enabling Technology: How can
highly flexible suites of advanced technologies, which are required to learn the
MCV, achieve scalable integration through wide author and developer
participation based on common standards and open architectures? A theme cutting
across each line of research is adapting to diversity and constraint: student
diversity, curricular diversity and pedagogical diversity. Hence SimCalc will
base most of its fieldwork in inner city schools and community centers, seeking
to engage students typically excluded from advanced mathematics under tighter
constraints than obtain elsewhere. We direct our technology development toward
an open, modular, plug and play architecture that provides the flexibility,
integration, and framework for evolution to adapt to this diversity. Finally, we
hold to an overall open project architecture that invites and scaffolds work
with research collaborate s and commercial partners. These commercial partners,
our interface with the larger community, provide both realistic constraints on
the possible, and opportunity for massive national impact. You are invited to
visit the SimCalc web site at http://tango.mth.umassd.edu for more information.
***