* 9619493
* RUI:  Pulsars and the Interstellar Medium
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2001
* Dan Stinebring, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 03/31/2001
* USD 147,721.00

Abstract Stinebring Turbulence in the interstellar medium provides the support
needed to keep the gas from collapsing into a pancake. Evidence from pulsar
observations indicates that a turbulent cascade of energy may exist over 12
orders of magnitude in scale size from 10 to the eighth (one hundred million) cm
to 100 parsec. This turbulent cascade is not well understood, although high mass
stars probably account for much of the energy input to the cascade through
stellar winds, ionization, and supernova explosions. In particular, the
dissipation of turbulent energy into heat at some scale size less than 10 to the
tenth (ten billion) cm must occur, but the details of the mechanism and the
physical conditions under which this happens are sketchy. The research to be
carried out is aimed at determining the strength of the turbulent cascade at a
size scale around 10 to the tenth cm and smaller and to learn more about the
dissipation mechanism. The main technique employed will be the observational
study of radio pulsar scintillation in the weak scattering regime. This is an
opportune time to embark on such a study since both the upgraded Arecibo, Puerto
Rico telescope and the soon-to-be-completed Green Bank Telescope will provide
outstanding opportunities for pulsar observations above 1 GHz. This is the
frequency range in which weak scattering phenomena can be studied effectively.
The phenomenon of image-splitting, in which the pulsar image separates into two
or more distinct pieces due to scattering in the transition regime between
strong and weak scattering, will also be explored. The goals are the same: to
better elucidate the strength of the electron inhomogeneity spectrum in the
Galaxy and to seek evidence for a dissipation scale. High time resolution
studies of bright pulsars will also be undertaken using a well-known VLBI
recording system, the S2 system, to obtain baseband sampled data. These
observations, which can be conducted at several observat ories (and observing
frequencies) simultaneously, will allow high-precision monitoring of pulsar
dispersion measures. This provides additional information about the electron
inhomogeneities in the Galaxy. As a secondary effort, the baseband sampled data
will also be analyzed to study brief and intense radio emission from pulsars in
order to better understand the emission physics. Undergraduate students from
Oberlin College will be centrally involved in all of these projects and will
participate in observations, analysis, and the presentation of the results.