* 9619392
* Electrically-Assisted Flame Aerosol Synthesis of            Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Sotiris Pratsinis, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Cyrus K. Aidun
* 12/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract CTS-9619392 S.E, Pratsinis U. of Cincinnati A combined experimental
and modeling investigation of the effect of electrical charging on the formation
of ceramic nanoparticles in flames will be undertaken. Experiments have shown
that the particle size can be controlled within 1 nm in specific ranges of
particle properties and flame characteristics. Electric fields are created in
region of particle formation at crossflow with flame gases, and the resulted
particles are charged by using a corona discharge to reduce agglomeration. In-
situ Fourier Transform Infra Red spectroscopy will be performed to measure the
temperature of gases and particles in collaboration with the Case Western
Reserve University (Prof. P. Morrison). The evolution of the particle size and
structure along the flame axis will be measured using rapid thermophoretic
sampling in collaboration with the Case Western Reserve University (Prof. C.M.
Magaridis). Particle and concentration characterization will be performed with a
differential mobility analyzer, scanning and transmission electron microscopy,
X-ray diffraction and specific surface area analysis. A model including particle
nucleation, surface growth, coagulation, sintering and charging in three-
dimensional conditions will be developed. The home university and the Ohio State
will provide matching funds in total value of $169,600 for this project. If
successful, this project ill provide a better fundamental understanding of
particle formation processes in flames, a data base for further modeling
efforts, and overall an approach to synthesise non-agglomerated nanoparticles at
high rates and at a relatively low cost.