* 9619456
* A Fully Capable Bidirectional Debugger
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Robert Boothe, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 06/30/2000
* USD 80,000.00

9619456 Traditional debuggers allow stepping along the forward execution path of
a computer program and monitoring the program's state as it executes. They are a
crucial tool in the process of program development, however they also can be
frustrating in many situations when the user wishes to see not what the program
is going to do in the future, but rather what happened in the past to bring it
to where it currently is. This research will investigate and develop algorithms
and mechanisms that can be used in constructing a bidirectional program
debugger. Efficient backwards movement algorithms will be investigated for all
traditional forward movement operations: step, next, finish, and location
breakpoints. The underlying techniques expected to be utilized and developed in
this research are code augmentation, transparent re-execution, I/O replay, and
checkpointing. In addition, this research will investigate efficient
bidirectional algorithms for conditional breakpoints and data breakpoints, which
are currently often inefficient operations or unavailable even in the forward
direction. Debuggers are widely used from introductory programming students
trying to understand why their program has gone astray, to professional
programmers trying to find bugs in large and complicated systems. Development of
better debugging tools will benefit all who are involved in program development
and maintenance. ***