* 9619452
* Numerical Methods for large Eigenvalue Problems:            Parallizable Fast Algorithms and Inner-Outer iterations
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Hongyuan Zha, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 12/31/1999
* USD 128,119.00

This research project consists of two major parts: parallelizable fast
algorithms for large dense eigenproblems and inexact/inner-outer iteration
methods for large sparse eigenproblems. Techniques of rational transformation
and matrix-squaring for designing parallelizable fast algorithms for large dense
eigenproblems have been developed which only use matrix- matrix multiplications
and QR decompositions as building blocks. Now a general theory is to be
established to encompass the class of algorithms developed and to also provide
guidance to the derivation of new algorithms. Error analysis, robust deflation
techniques and stopping criteria which are extremely important for the practical
implementation of the algorithms will be fully investigated. This part of the
research will result in deeper understanding of the theory of a new class of
generalized eigensolvers and deliver a class of algorithms that are truly of
high parallel efficiency and robustness. Efficient algorithms for eigenproblems
of partial differential equations is the major topic of the second part of this
research. Inner-outer iteration type of algorithms will be developed for the
subspace iteration and Lanczos algorithms and the insight obtained will be
applied to the PDE case. It is demonstrated that different iterative processes
behave quite differently with respect to the distribution of the accuracy of
each inner iteration, and each iterative process needs a careful analysis in
order to find the distribution strategy that will give the minimum number of
total inner iteration steps. Two algorithms, the variable-accuracy inner-outer
iteration method and the successive inner-outer iteration method will be further
analyzed and their convergence behavior explained. A PDE eigenproblem will be
solved by putting an iterative process such as the Lanczos method in a Hilbert
space setting. At each Lanczos iteration step, the matrix-vector multiplication
corresponds to solving a boundary value problem for the differential operator,
and different discretizations will be used to enhance efficiency. The research
will result in deeper understanding and provide sound theoretical results of
various iterative processes for solving large sparse eigenproblems in the
setting of inexact matrix-vector multiplication. It will also give more
efficient algorithms for solving large sparse eigenproblems that arise in many
science and engineering areas.