* 9619503
* Research Experience for Minority Undergraduates in Advanced Composite Piping Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Su-Seng Pang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2001
* USD 502,101.00

9619503 Pang ABSTRACT The objectives of this project are to: (1) enhance the
technical and educational backgrounds of minority students by offering more
collaborative research activities; (2) increase the number of minorities
entering graduate school by providing vital information and necessary training
for their admission to, and success in, graduate school; and (3) assist minority
students in their development towards obtaining employment in high level
engineering jobs. Minority student sin their junior and senior years of study
will participate in this project. They will be recruited from Louisiana State
University, the state's flagship institution, and Southern University, the
largest HBCU (Historically Black College and University) in the nation. The 16
selected student per year will participate in several composite piping research
programs of the investigators, funded by various federal and state agencies as
well as industry, including the newly funded NSF Joint Faculty Appointment
Program between Majority Black/Majority White Institutes entitled "Development
of SU/LSU Joint Engineering Research and Educational Program in Composite Piping
Systems." Present programs are currently supporting faculty as LSU/SU, research
associates, graduate students, equipment, and supplies, but without enough
resources for supporting undergraduate students. This REU project, if funded,
will support (minority) undergraduate students who participate in this REU
project with the NSF Joint Faculty Appointment Program and other research
grants, thereby maximizing the benefits and impact. Parallel with the research
component, each participant will receive professional counseling and instruction
necessary for planning to attend graduate school, with particular attention
given to admissions and funding. Participants will attend monthly seminars
dealing with improved technical writing, graduate school survival for
minorities, and ethical issues in engineering. The investigators have confidence
that t he program will be a successful national model of how a historically
black and majority white institution can jointly develop and assist minority
students in developing research skills needed for industry, as well as graduated
school. ***