* 9619373
* Photodynamic Azobenzene Functionalized Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Sukant Tripathy, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2001
* USD 258,402.00

Tripathy 9619373 The principal objective of this grant is the detailed
investigation of a novel phenomenon recently observed under NSF-DMR funding. A
number of NLO polymers with tailored molecular architectures including
Interpenetrating Polymer Networks were fabricated. A large number of the
NLOphores incorporated in these systems were based on azo dyes. In fact azo
chromophores have been extensively employed in designing NLO polymers over the
past decade. In the course of the study on optical recording under NSF-DMR
funding, laser-induced surface relief holographic grating formation on a number
of azo-dye containing polymer films was observed. Large amplitude (&gt;1000 A)
holographic surface relief gratings on azobenzene containing NLO polymer films
were optically produced significantly below the glass transition temperature
without any subsequent processing steps. It has been established that the
recording is not due to a thermal process. Early research also indicates strong
polarization-dependent writing behavior. Such large scale motion of polymer
chains significantly below Tg and its relationship to incident light
polarization and intensity variation is unusual and begs careful study and
interpretation of the phenomenon. The focus of this proposal is 1) to design and
synthesize polymers with different chemical structures and 2) to investigate the
surface grating formation process under a variety of optical exposure conditions
to explore the mechanism of this novel process. The role of each structural
element (i.e., the chromophore side groups, the polymer backbone, and the
spacers between them) will be systematically investigated in these polymers. The
roles of photo-induced processes of the chromophores (such as photoisomerization
and photo-induced orientation of the azobenzene groups) in creation of the
relief gratings will be examined. Cooperative motions of the polymer backbones
along with the chromophores will be investigated. The effect s of changing
wavelength, intensity, and polarization of the writing beams will be explored. A
comprehensive experimental investigation of the mechanism will help establish a
theoretical model for the process. %%% This project will provide fundamental
understanding in the area of novel surface-grating techniques for electro-
optical applications. ***