* 9619852
* SUNFEST: Summer Undergraduate Program for Research Experience in Sensor Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/1997,10/31/2001
* Jan Van der Spiegel, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 10/31/2001
* USD 185,965.00

9619852 Van der Spiegel ABSTRACT The project provides 9 undergraduate student
with summer research opportunities in the area of Sensor Technologies. The goal
is to attract and retain gifted students to a graduate career in engineering.
The REU Site is part of the Summer Undergraduate Fellowship in Sensor
Technologies (SUNFEST) program of the University of Pennsylvania's Center for
Sensor Technologies. The Center provides the infrastructure for faculty and
students to collaborate, exchange ideas, co-supervise students, and share
resources. Students are selected by a faculty committee based on their academic
potential, interest in pursuing a research career, attitude towards graduate
studies, advisors' recommendations, membership in under-represented groups, and
research opportunities in the mother institution. It is anticipated that about
two thirds of the students will come from outside Penn. The undergraduate
students participate actively in a research project under the guidance of one or
more participating faculty and graduate student. Special emphasis is placed on
broader interaction and communication of these SUNFEST fellows with the graduate
students and faculty members. The projects suggested to the students are chosen
for their educational value, scientific merit, appropriateness for
undergraduates, and the prospects for continued involvement after the summer.
Project topics include: chemical, optical, mechanical, and neural network based
sensors; micromechanical systems, phenomena and micromachining; and sensor
interfacing. The students will also participate in a variety of hands-on
workshops in order to give them the tools to do first rate research or enhance
their oral and verbal skills. These will include seminars on "Giving effective
presentations", "Writing research reports", "Ethics in Science and Engineering"
and "Use of electronic database searches". Students will also have the
opportunity to participate in social activities organized with faculty advisors.
***