* 9619965
* Mathematical Sciences: Enhancing Diversity in Graduate      Education (EDGE):  A Transition Program for Women in the    Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1998,12/31/2001
* Rhonda Hughes, Bryn Mawr College
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

Bryn Mawr and Spelman Colleges have established a program whose explicit purpose
is to increase the number of women and minority students who successfully
complete graduate programs in the mathematical sciences. This program, entitled
"Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education (EDGE)," is designed to strengthen
the ability of the targeted student population to successfully negotiate the
transition from undergraduate to graduate education in mathematics, and to
succeed in those graduate programs. The program focuses primarily on recent
graduates of undergraduate mathematics programs who will attend graduate
programs in the mathematical sciences the following fall. For the past four
years, the Principal Investigators have co-directed the NSF-sponsored Spelman-
Bryn Mawr Summer Mathematics Program, aimed at identifying and encouraging
talented young women to pursue careers in the mathematical sciences. Now, as a
continuation of this effort, the two institutions are addressing a persistent
problem that continues to thwart the efforts of earlier intervention programs,
namely the attrition of talented women and minority students from graduate
programs in mathematics. Attrition for these groups is disproportionately high,
and students who are not successful in one program are often lost from the
pipeline altogether. In order to realize its goals, the program helps students
develop a stronger background in the basic areas of analysis and algebra. In
addition, the program establishes mechanisms to provide prospective female
graduate students with (1) a clear understanding of what will be expected of
them in graduate school, (2) the basic tools needed to increase both their
confidence and their ability to compete in graduate school, (3) a support
network aimed at keeping them in the mathematical sciences once they have begun
their graduate work, (4) a broad perspective about mathematics and its
connections to other disciplines, and (5) an understanding of their own
strengths and weaknesses under stress, in group study, and in a competitive
environment. The structure of the program involves two basic components: (1) an
intensive summer program, and (2) a follow-up mentoring program. The summer
program includes two six-week core courses; four one-week minicourses on
exciting areas of mathematical research; and problem sessions aimed at preparing
participants for graduate qualifying exams. The mentoring program involves
graduate institutions in the identification of appropriate mentors who will
serve as advocates for the participants from the beginning of their graduate
study. A continuing support network is provided by the Principal Investigators,
student participants, and graduate student mentors. In addition, the project
includes a comprehensive study, done in conjunction with a sociologist
experienced in investigating issues involving gender and science in higher
education and at the professional level, whose aim is to determine the
effectiveness of the program in helping students to negotiate the various stages
of their graduate education. Over a period of four years, between forty and
fifty women, at least half of whom are from underrepresented minority groups,
will be directly supported in their efforts to persist to the Ph.D. degree in
the mathematical sciences. As a result, it is expected that the success rate of
women and minorities in graduate programs in the mathematical sciences will
increase, beginning with the rates at participating institutions. The evaluation
process will also provide the mathematics community with intensive data about
the experiences of minorities and women in graduate programs in the mathematical
sciences.