* 9619033
* The Austin Collaborative for Mathematics Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2003
* Mary Ann Rankin, Austin Independent School District
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn B. Chval
* 01/31/2003
* USD 5,059,324.00

9619033 Fox The Austin Collaborative for Mathematics Education is a 54-month
NSF Local Systemic Change project at $5,059,324. Austin Independent School
District collaborates with the College of Education and the College of Letters
and Sciences at the University of Texas at Austin and with the Charles A. Dana
Center at the University of Texas. Estimated cost-sharing from partners is $
2,906,011. The project targets all approximately 2400 K-8 teachers of
mathematics. Each teacher will participate in at least 126 hours of formal
professional development in summer workshops, institutes with students, and
academic year sessions along with at least 120 hours of campus level support and
classroom coaching, linked with the implementation of comprehensive, standards-
based instructional materials in mathematics - Investigations in Number, Data,
and Space in grades K-5 and the Connected Mathematics Project in grades 6-8. The
Austin Collaborative seeks to 1) build on sound and proven practice in
mathematics education, 2) implement consistent and proven mathematics curricula
by providing a common learning experience for every teacher in every school, and
3) create a professional development strategy that is intensive, on-going and a
part of every teacher's day, every day. Intensive staff development will be
conducted by grade level, beginning with grades 5 and 6 in the first year and
moving outward each year so that once a student starts, there will be no gaps in
the delivery of the new standards-based mathematics program. In year 2, grades 4
and 7 are targeted. The summer institute will coincide with a lab school
experience in which teachers and principals try out some of the new materials
and strategies with summer school students. Release days during the following
school year will give teachers the opportunity to share experiences, reflect and
ask questions. Cohort teachers will come together in the second summer and the
following school year. The third component will be campus based and will include
work of designated campus mathematics specialists who conduct training and coach
or team teach with teachers in the building. District level mathematics
specialists are attached to implementing schools for regular classroom visits
and coaching. Campus mathematics specialists and principals will have a minimum
of 102 hours of leadership training above the content and pedagogy and materials
training that all teachers will have. Evaluation of the Austin Collaborative for
Mathematics Education will focus on student achievement of all student groups,
including scores on the state mandated assessment, TAAS; percentage of students
passing pre-algebra and algebra; end-of-course exam results for Algebra 1; and
enrollment in advanced AISD mathematics courses. Other indicators of the
Collaborative impact will be the administrative support on each campus for
teacher collaboration time, community support, coordinated districtwide
professional development, the retention of new teachers, and electronic
communication among teachers and their presentations at professional meetings.