* 9619881
* Southwest Regional Workshop on New Directions in            Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Bruce West, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 02/28/1999
* USD 19,976.00

9619881 This award is for support of a conference/workshop in dynamical systems
at the Department of Mathematics of the University of North Texas. Speakers at
the workshop will include Professors Katok (Penn State), Keane (CWI, Amsterdam),
Przytycki (IM PAN, Warsaw) and Strein (University of Amsterdam). Participants in
the workshop will include scholars form the Southwestern US and Northern Mexico.
Dynamical systems theory describes processes that develop over time. In
particular, dynamical systems arise in physics (Lorenz map), biology and
environmental studies (population dynamics) and chemistry (e.g. modeling the
Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction). The development of the system depends on its
initial state and parameters coming from the "environment." It is of great
importance that we understand the future behavior which may be exhibited by the
system for the "majority" of its initial states; this corresponds to the
description of so-called attractors to which the first part of the project is
devoted. Also in the first part of the proposal we study how properties of some
important dynamical systems depend on "environmental" parameters. Sometimes
phenomena exhibited by a system are related to one another and information about
some of them allows one to make a judgment about the existence of others; in
other words phenomena coexist. A good example here is periodicity, i.e. cyclic
occurrence of the same states in the system. It turns out that the existence of
a cyclic process with a given period for some initial state guarantees that
another cyclic process with a different period can be realized for a different
initial state and the same environment. In the second part of the project we
plan to thoroughly study this relationship between different periods of cyclic
processes in the same system.