* 9619339
* Customizable Head Related Transfer Function
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* V. Ralph Algazi, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2001
* USD 564,250.00

When a acoustic wave propagates from a sound source to the ear drum, wavelength-
dependent diffraction by the torso, head and outer ears or pinnae produce major
changes in its spectrum. The nature of this transformation depends on the
location of the sound source relative to the head, and is completely specified
by the so-called head-related transfer function. Because the head- related
transfer function completely characterizes the acoustic information available
for sound localization, it has become central to any scientific study of spatial
hearing. The character of the head-related transfer function varies from person
to person. These inter-subject variations are often quite significant, and
individualized head-related transfer functions are needed to obtain a faithful
perception of spatial location. It is hypothesized that a physically-based model
of the head- related transfer function requires a small number of free
parameters, and that these parameters can be adapted or customized to individual
listeners by statistical matching against experimentally measured head-related
transfer functions, and by correlation with anthropometric measurements. This
effort will develop and validate head-related transfer function models using a
combination of the physical and mathematical approaches. Extensive psychological
experiments will be performed to validate the adequacy of the resulting filters.
This research has significance for the development of novel man-machine
interfaces and interactive systems, for three-dimensional auditory displays as
well as for some biomedical applications.