* 9619671
* Applying Earth Science Methodology to Solving Environmental Problems - A Summer Course
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1998
* Robert Blair, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 03/31/1998
* USD 62,273.00

Frodeman 9619671 The "Southwest Earth Studies Program" will be a 6 credit hour,
5 week Summer program for 20 upper-division college students (half from the
sciences, half from the humanities) from colleges and universities throughout
the U.S. The goal of this Program is for science students to grasp the
philosophic (e.g., epistemological and ethical) implications of scientific
issues, and likewise for humanities students to better appreciate the role
scientific information can play in philosophic and public policy debates. This
will be accomplished by having students gather and evaluate data; discuss the
philosophical issues surrounding the interpretation and use of this data; and
combine this data with philosophic perspectives for the devising of public
policy alternatives. This will result in an increase in the student's capacity
to critically analyze controversial environmental problems, thereby helping to
overcome the current estrangement between the sciences, the humanities, and the
problems of contemporary society. Three controversial environmental issues will
be studied in successive years: 1) the effects of dam projects on ecosystems and
communities, (the Animas La Plata dam project); 2) the scientific and social
issues surrounding the extraction of energy resources, (coal-bed methane); and
3) scientific and ethical problems surrounding the extraction and control
pollution from mineral resources (acid mine drainage.)