* 9619163
* EPWG:  Project Advance:  A Collaboration for Equitable      Classroom Climate, Quality Instruction, and Role Models     for Female Students
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Frederick Rudolph, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/2001
* USD 882,196.00

9619163 Rudolph To increase representation of females in science, engineering,
and mathematics professions, Project Advance has been designed to improve
classroom practices with respect to engaging and developing the interests of
female students, primarily in science and mathematics classrooms, and to provide
encouragement and role models for young women interested in these areas. The
project has three major components: (1) K-12 teacher/ administrator training to
address gender equity in the science and mathematics classroom; (2) elementary
teacher training to improve the overall quality of science and mathematics
instruction; and (3) a mentoring program for female secondary students. The
training targets administrators, secondary mathematics and science teachers, and
all elementary teachers at the 44 campuses of the Central and Southwest
management districts of the Houston Independent School District. Mentoring will
target female students interested in science/mathematics and will create a
network of secondary and university students and female professionals from
universities and other local institutions. The anticipated outcomes include
higher quality instruction in science and mathematics in an atmosphere that
provides female students with opportunities to succeed from kindergarten to high
school graduation and an institutionalized support network for female secondary
students interested in science and/or mathematics.