* 9619887
* Two Dimensional Polymerizations in Supramolecular           Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Neal Armstrong, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2001
* USD 285,000.00

9619887 O'Brien Several methods to polymerize supramolecular assemblies have
been introduced in recent years. These new and evolving chemistries open
opportunities to prepare novel biomolecular materials with particular properties
of interest to both biological and material sciences. Success in the design and
reproducible preparation of new materials requires a clear understanding of the
polymerization processes used to modify the assemblies. %%% The objective of
this proposal is to advance our understanding of polymerizations in organized
media in a manner that permits the utilization of the emerging information to
control the properties of polymerized supramolecular materials and to prepare
novel macromolecular architectures. The reasonably well-developed understanding
of linear polymerizations in bilayers is complemented by the emerging picture of
crosslinking polymerizations in bilayers. Polymerization of monomeric lipids in
an assembly proceeds in a linear or crosslinking manner depending on the number
of polymerizable groups per monomeric lipid. Lipids that contain a single
reactive moiety in either of the hydrophobic tails or associated with the
hydrophilic head group yield linear polymers. Polymerization of lipids with
reactive groups in each hydrophobic tail yields crosslinked polymers. In
contrast the polymerization of lipids that have different reactive groups
(bifunctional amphiphiles) in the same hydrophobic tail does not necessarily
yield crosslinked polymers, because if the groups are insufficiently separated
the correlation of the polymerization paths could produce ladder polymers rather
than crosslinked polymers. The preferred reaction path will depend on several
factors including the nature of the spacer group, the extent of conformational
and diffusional freedom within the molecular assembly, and the reactivity of the
polymerizable groups. In order to obtain a clearer understanding of the effect
of these factors on the preferred p olymerization process in organized media
this research will examine each in turn with a family of newly designed
bifunctional amphiphiles. The findings from these studies will be used to select
bifunctional monomers for the preparation of ladder-like copolymers composed of
dissimilar polymers, e.g. poly(diene) and poly(acrylate). The objective is to
utilize our understanding of the polymerization process in organized media to
create novel soluble copolymers that are not readily available through solution
polymerizations. In addition these polymerization studies will aid in the design
of bifunctional fatty acids for the crosslinking polymerization of monolayers or
multilayers in a manner that does not modify the hydrophilic head group of the
amphiphile. Finally the research will utilize the understanding of crosslinking
processes in organized assemblies to prepare novel phthalocyanines for the
stabilization of discotic liquid crystals. ***