* 9619649
* Computer Graphics Tools for Understanding Tensor-Valued     Volume Data:  A Painting Metaphor
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/1997,03/22/1999
* David Laidlaw, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 03/22/1999
* USD 139,620.00

This multi-disciplinary research project will investigate, apply, and evaluate
new computer graphics tools for understanding vector- and second-order tensor-
valued volume data. The efficacy of the tools will be evaluated by the extent to
which they generate insight into several specific physical phenomena: fully-
developed turbulent flow, the progression of disease in a mouse analogue of
multiple sclerosis, and the neonatal development of the mouse brain. The
application of the new techniques and collaboration with researchers in other
fields provides the opportunity to validate the techniques and ensure that they
are responsive in addressing the scientific problems. The techniques will be
developed using a painting metaphor. For centuries artists have used a divide-
and-conquer approach to creating paintings, representing different aspects of a
scene in different layers of paint. In addition, artists use brush strokes, with
their many characteristics of texture, size, shape, color, and opacity, to
represent important features of a scene on a canvas, depicting the essence of
the scene and eliminating unnecessary detail. Both techniques, and the
collective artistic experience in using them, can be applied to computer
graphics in the context of displaying volume data. Techniques for understanding
vector-valued and tensor-valued volume data stand to benefit particularly,
because volumes contain so much information and because tensor and vector values
have many relevant, interdependent aspects. Existing techniques are limited in
their ability to abstract the data effectively and to display the many relevant
aspects of the data simultaneously, but the new techniques will address both of
these problems. As a result, they will be more effective in generating insight
into the physical phenomena measured as well as in communicating the insight.
Because the techniques will be developed with application to three specific
problems in two disciplines, they are likely t o have broader application.