* 9619020
* National Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2005
* Sidney Karin, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Fillia S. Makedon
* 09/30/2005
* USD 259,735,662.00

This action executes a cooperative agreement between NSF and the National
Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure (NPACI) at the University
of California - San Diego (UCSD), under the direction of Dr. Sid Karin via NSF
award ASC 9619020. The cooperative agreement will be operational for a period of
five years and is the result of a proposal submitted to NSF solicitation,
"Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure" (PACI), NSF 96-31. The
PACI program builds on and replaces the NSF Supercomputer Centers Program
established in 1985 The program focuses on newly emerging opportunities in high
performance computing and communications, providing flexibility, both to adapt
to rapidly evolving circumstances and to meet the need for high-end computation,
in order to enable continued U.S. world leadership in computational science and
engineering. NSF, through this program, will provide access for researchers to
high performance computing systems, with associated highly trained staff and
researchers necessary to develop and optimize their use. The emergence of
scalable parallel systems, high performance networking and high bandwidth and
large capacity mass storage systems creates the opportunity for a national
infrastructure consisting of a number of geographically distributed sites
strongly coupled to high end computational resources and to each other via high
speed communications networks. NPACI will lead the deployment and evolution of a
national-scale metacomputing environment that will benefit the national user
community in all fields of computational science and engineering. This
infrastructure will integrate compute and data servers, and employ the talents
of computer and computational scientists to guide its evolution. It will
leverage the activities of many projects. The metacomputing environment will be
extended to enable not only numerically intensive but also data-intensive
computing. To that end, infrastructure will be developed and deployed to enable
analysis of extremely large data collections from application output, remote-
sensing and instrumentation-derived data, and data in widely scattered,
discipline-specific databases. Three technology areas which are central to
creating a metacomputing environment will initially be the basis for NPACI:
Adaptable, Scalable Tools/Environments; Data-intensive Computing; and
Interaction Environments. Several scientific applications have also been chosen
that will motivate, guide, and validate development and integration of the NPACI
infrastructure. Molecular Science, Neuroscience, Earth Systems Science, and
Engineering will initially be focused on as areas ripe for scientific discovery
and technology development. NPACI will integrate computational science and
engineering education activities into the infrastructure, building on successful
education and outreach efforts within the partnership. Particular emphasis will
be placed on outreach to underrepresented minorities, women, and new
communities. The Partnership will concentrate on providing advanced hardware,
enabling technology, leading edge work in application technology, education,
training and outreach. Included in this award is the first incremental payment
to UCSD and its partners for FY98 which covers general operating expenses
including equipment.