* 9619009
* PLAN-IT EARTH (Paring Learners and Nature with Innovative   Technology)
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Marylin Lisowski, Eastern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 03/31/2001
* USD 533,484.00

9619009 Lisowski PLAN-IT EARTH is a partnership between teachers (grades 9-12),
and scientists from the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Science
Coordinators from the Illinois State Board of Education and the Illinois
Regional Offices of Education, science educators from the Environmental
Education Association of Illinois and the Illinois Environmental Education
Advocacy Consortium. The design of this project facilitates the development and
strengthening of teachers'/students' background knowledge of basic science
concepts and enhances inquiry pedagogy through environmental field-based
learning experiences. The teacher enhancement sessions will provide experiences
that will highlight ecological concepts, processes and related teaching
strategies. Classroom and field instruction will focus on science concepts and
processes associated with prairie, wetland, stream, agro, urban and forest
ecosystems. Through this program, established teacher leaders will coordinate
and implement a series of field-based environmental monitoring projects and
classroom activities on these six ecosystems. The Monitoring of projects is
aligned with the efforts of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources'
Critical Trends Assessment Project (CTAP). Teachers and students alike, will be
involved in contributing to a systematic base of empirical information.
Validated indicator protocols will allow for data analyses that identify and
describe the contents and conditions of Illinois' forest, streams, prairies,
agro, wetlands, and urban systems. The intensive residential summer program,
offered at three regional sites (North, Central, Southern Illinois University),
will engage 30 participants per site annually. Each will focus on two Illinois
ecosystems per year. Participants will focus on science concepts, instructional
strategies, technological applications, and research techniques. Eight follow-up
sessions will engage participants at each of the regional sites mo nthly for all
90 participants. Follow-up sessions will focus on continued enhancement of
science content and science instruction, mentoring strategies, technology usage
and dissemination strategies. Data submission will occur on an established basis
from all estimated 6,000 participating students. Maintenance of a network system
for sharing will occur through a home page on world wide web, newsletters
specifically for the project and special sessions at the anual state science
conventions.