* 9620074
* Stony Brook:  Integrating Research and Education
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,09/30/2001
* Robert McGrath, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/2001
* USD 500,000.00

The State University of New York (SUNY) at Stony Brook has been selected as one
of ten recipients of the National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for
the Integration of Research and Education. Stony Brook has a long-standing
tradition of research collaboration between undergraduates and faculty. Due in
part to an undergraduate research office, approximately 40% of the large
undergraduate student body participate in research through a variety of
mechanisms and programs. Undergraduate research programs for first-year women
and minority students have increased retention in these traditionally
underrepresented groups. Another program prepares graduate students to use
research and discovery-based activities in their teaching careers. The
university's tenure and promotion decisions now consider a faculty member's
effectiveness in integrating research and teaching in addition to the quality of
their research. Stony Brook's efforts to integrate research and education were
designed with specific outcomes in mind: increasing the numbers of undergraduate
students enrolling in research courses; proliferating upper-level research
courses in different departments; and increasing the numbers of advanced science
and engineering courses taken by female and minority students. The university
has documented noteworthy success in achieving these goals. The university is
being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding, documenting, and
disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three years. Plans for the
use of the award funds include: expanding the pool of research funds for student
research projects; making competitively awarded mini-grants to academic
departments for development of new research methods courses or for seeding new
initiatives; evaluating the impacts of programs; and publishing results.