* 9620042
* Integrating Research &amp; Education: Contemporary Research in  the Education of Teachers
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2002
* James Coffman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/2002
* USD 520,309.00

Kansas State University (KSU) has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of Research
and Education. KSU has distinguished itself through its efforts to integrate
research experiences with faculty and discovery-based learning into the
undergraduate education of future K-12 teachers and the post-graduate
development of inservice K-12 teachers. Innovative courses for current and
future teachers have been developed through collaborations between faculty in
science departments and the College of Education. Science and education faculty
also collaborated in providing a capstone research experience for elementary
education students. Through these collaborations, faculty and students in the
College of Education are enriched by involvement in cutting edge research and
members of the science faculty learn the results of the latest research on
learning and teaching. The products of these collaborations include innovative
new courses in genetics and quantum physics as well as a heightened awareness of
pedagogy among science faculty. This will facilitate a wider conversion of
science and engineering courses to the discovery-based approach. The
university's vision is to expand this approach to all students. The university's
efforts to integrate research and education were designed with specific outcomes
in mind: increasing the science content knowledge of K-12 teachers; increasing
the confidence level of current and future K-12 teachers in their ability to
learn and teach science; improving the performance of student teachers in their
first classroom teaching experience; and publishing research papers documenting
the initiatives and their results. The university has documented noteworthy
success in achieving these goals. The university is being awarded $500,000 with
the goal of expanding, documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices
over the coming three years. Plans for the use of the award funds include:
establishing the KSU Program for Integrating Education and Research dedicated to
expanding faculty participation in integration activities; documenting the
process used to create new courses; creating and presenting workshops at
professional society meetings and other universities to highlight this approach;
creating multimedia versions of the workshop for distribution on CD-ROM and
through the World Wide Web; and developing new research-based introductory
science and engineering courses and courses for teachers in other science and
engineering disciplines.