* 9620091
* Learning as Problem Solving
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Indira Nair, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/2001
* USD 500,000.00

Carnegie-Mellon University has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of Research
and Education. The university has made cross-disciplinary problem-solving a core
activity in the undergraduate curriculum and has created many mechanisms that
support institution-wide implementation. A Center for Teaching Excellence and a
Center for Innovation in Learning encourage and support faculty efforts to use
problem solving as a vehicle for learning. In addition to course-based problem
solving, an increasing number of students pursue independent research throughout
their undergraduate careers through formal courses, paid work-study, senior
honors programs, internships, and independent study. The university provides
significant support for undergraduate research projects and organizes a student
research symposium at which 200 student projects were recently presented. The
university's efforts to integrate research and education were designed with
specific outcomes in mind: increasing student retention in science and
engineering programs; increasing the proportion of students engaged in
independent research; increasing student satisfaction with their science and
engineering education; and enhancing the capabilities of graduates in the
workplace. The university has documented significant success in achieving these
goals. The university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding,
documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three
years. Plans for the use of the award funds include: establishing a freshman
seminar that introduces students to the culture of interdisciplinary problem
solving; expanding support for the undergraduate research program; engaging
graduate students as research mentors for undergraduates; developing new courses
that use interdisciplinary problem solving; developing outcome-based assessment
tools for evaluating new courses using problem solving as a core activity;
developing and documenting an exportable model for teaching through
interdisciplinary problem solving; and disseminating the model through
workshops, conferences, a handbook, and resources made available through the
World Wide Web.