* 9620082
* Research-Based Education:  A Template for Promoting         Discovery Learning on Today's College Campuses
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2002
* David Roselle, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/2002
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Delaware has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of Research
and Education. The university has implemented a systemic and realistic approach
to integrating research into the undergraduate curriculum. The university
engages as many undergraduates as feasible in meaningful research projects with
faculty, and an office of undergraduate research promotes broad participation.
More than 60% of the total faculty and 90% of the science and mathematics
faculty participate. Special efforts are made to engage students from
underrepresented minorities in this program. Some students begin their research
activities in their first year at the university, and most begin in the
sophomore year. Opportunities for summer research internships in industry and
national laboratories are offered following the junior year. All senior honors
research theses are read and evaluated by a Faculty Board and are presented at a
university-wide research symposium. Recognizing that not all students will have
access to true research experiences, the university provides discovery-based
courses for all students. These courses take varied forms, including research
apprenticeships, group research projects, engineering design courses, and a set
of new interdisciplinary courses that use Problem-Based Learning. The University
of Delaware's efforts to integrate research and education were designed with
specific outcomes in mind: enhancing the skills, understanding, and personal
characteristics gained by students through a research experience; increasing the
numbers of students engaged in faculty research; increasing the proportion of
undergraduate research participants who go on to graduate study; maintaining
high levels of faculty participation; and expanding the number of PBL-based
courses. The university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding,
documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three
years. Plans for the use of the award funds include: creating a challenge grant
to increase support for summer research projects; increasing staff support for
the undergraduate research coordinating office; conducting a longitudinal study
of a sample of students during their undergraduate research experiences;
surveying undergraduate research alumni; producing a video on PBL methods for
pre-service teachers; and disseminating information through conferences and Web-
based resources.