* 9622277
* On-Line Monitoring of Weld Pool Depth with Laser Ultrasound
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* I. Charles Ume, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/1999
* USD 193,831.00

9622277 Ume Pulsed laser generation is a thermoelastic process when the laser
energy is below the ablation level. The laser deposits heat on the surface
causing a local expansion and contraction which in turn results in ultrasonic
stress waves. This principle has been successfully demonstrated by the
investigators to simulated welds using phased array laser in a prior NSF funded
research. Phased array was the novelty in the prior work which allowed for
control of beam width, direction and focusing and the directionality of the
emanating ultrasonic waves as well as generation of one type of wave motion,
such as the surface (Raleigh) wave, shear wave, or longitudinal wave. In the
detection of molten weld pool this last feature can be taken advantage by using
the distinguishing feature of liquid, which can not carry shear waves unlike
solids. In the current research, the detection will be carried out by
electromagnetic acoustic transducer. Weld pool depth during an actual gas metal
arc welding process will be attempted by lining up the phased laser array and
electromagnetic acoustic transducer behind the welding torch in a programmable
automated welding system. In order to understand the process sufficiently to
automate the on-line monitoring of welding, an analytical model will be
developed for array sources and combined with published work on effects of
ultrasound propagation through temperature gradients. Industrial researchers
with expertise in welding have come forward with the donation of an automated
welding equipment system as well as shown a commitment to provide on-site
consulting. This kind of close working relationship between industrial
researchers and academic faculty and students should be invaluable not only
transferring the technology to the commercial sector but also in training the
future engineers in a relevant customer pull manufacturing project. Current
state of automation in welding is limited to open control by monitoring the weld
quality as a post-processing step bec ause of the very aggressive environment
(splattering of molten metals surrounded by hot gases) during the welding
process. This research has the potential to make possible closed loop control
whereby a very high quality of the weld could be achieved. Such a manufacturing
process has far reaching consequences in the welding industry in terms product
quality, rework reduction and thus lower process cost. Considering that welding
is used extensively in a wide variety of manufacturing from ship building to
construction, the impact on the national infrastructure could be enormous.