* 9622889
* Mathematical Sciences:  Large-eddy Simulation &amp; Mathematical Analysis of Non-equilibrium &amp; Non-linear Processes in      Mantle Convection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* S. Balachandar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

Balachandar 9622889 The investigator and his colleague develop numerical methods
to study problems of mantle convection. The main thrust of this collaborative
effort between the areas of computational mathematics, fluid dynamics and
geophysics is investigating a class of challenging problems in mantle dynamics,
which involves the application of several modern mathematical and computational
techniques to large-scale numerical simulation, data-processing, and scientific
visualization. The geophysical problems they investigate entail the exploration
of convection in the high Rayleigh number regime. Particular interest is in the
investigation of various transitions the flow undergoes under non-equilibrium
conditions as the system evolves from its initial state of very high Rayleigh
number and as the convective vigor of the system decreases over time due to
cooling. Among these transitions are (1) the flush instabilities induced by
phase transitions, and (2) the appearance of enhanced toroidal surface velocity
fields in variable viscosity three-dimensional convection. A large eddy
simulation methodology is developed and implemented to accurately simulate the
very high Rayleigh number complex dynamics of the young Earth. Mathematical
tools that the investigators develop, adapt and employ in these problems include
iterative techniques based on Krylov subspace for treating the variable
viscosity convection in the context of spectral transform method, domain
decomposition methodology for efficient spatial resolution, and proper
orthogonal decomposition and wavelet transform techniques for efficient post-
processing of the results. An important question that has arisen in the last few
years is the possibility of global gravitational instability that develops in
the Earth's interior due to internal phase transition. This instability results
in episodic eruption of superplumes from the lower mantle and associated intense
volcanic activity at the surface. Th ere are increasing evidences from
correlation between past trench sites and cold anomalies in the lower mantle,
inferred from seismic tomography, that such instabilities on global scale could
have occurred in the past 100 million years. This provides a possible
explanation for the extinction of the dinosaurs, but there are many aspects of
this gravitational instability still needs to be explored. Recent large-scale
high performance simulations have also revealed that localized patches of
concentrated shear and rotation about a vertical axis can be generated with
variable viscosity under vigorous convection. This is an important step towards
a self-consistent explanation of the interaction between the surface plates and
mantle. This project extends these recent findings under idealized equilibrium
conditions to more realistic non-equilibrium conditions, as the vigorously
convecting young Earth cools over time. Incorporation of modern numerical
techniques and recent developments in mathematical methods are essential for the
successful investigation of these complex phenomena. Finally, it is of interest
to investigate what the effects of these instabilities are on the long-term
thermal evolution of the Earth and Earth-like planets.