* 9622547
* Mathematical Sciences: Chaotic Attractors and Repellers:    Rigorous Results
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Nikolai Chernov, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1999
* USD 45,124.00

Abstract Chernov The project is devoted to chaotic dynamical systems. It focuses
on nonequilibrium statistical physics, chaotic attractors, and repellers. A
major goal of this project is to find effective bounds on correlation functions
for continuous-time hyperbolic dynamical systems with singularities, such as
periodic Lorentz gas. This will make it possible to derive rigorously transport
laws for related models of nonequilibrium thermodynamics. These include Ohm's
law, the Einstein relation and the Green-Kubo formula for a charged particle in
the periodic Lorentz gas subject to a small electrical and magnetic field. These
also include Newton's law for shear viscosity for the model of two hard disks on
the torus. Another major goal is the study of repellers and conditionally
invariant measures for smooth chaotic maps with small holes. This aims at
chaotic billiard tables with pockets and then solving the Pianigiani-Yorke
conjecture of 1979. The project includes certain numerical experiments on
nonequilibrium dynamics of hard disks in a box with the so-called Maxwell demon
boundary conditions. The mathematical theory of chaos and dynamical systems has
grown dramatically over the past 40 years. It started with foundations of
statistical physics created by Boltzmann, Maxwell in the XIX-th century. It has
covered basic biological models (dynamics of population), various problems in
engineering, earthquake prediction, traffic control, neural networks for
computer data processing, optimization of manufacturing and management tasks,
and has countless other applications where long-time behavior of complex systems
is in question. Universal features of chaos exhibited by various processes in
nature and society make it possible to describe and predict such phenomena by
the means of one theory. In particular, the concepts of attractors and repellers
(as structures or patterns determining long-time ev olution of complex systems)
are basic categories in the theory of chaos. Mathematical theory of chaotic
attractors and repellers is still very young and quite different from the old,
classical mathematics. This is one of the areas where mathematical research is
currently not only most active but serves the direct needs of other modern
sciences and human activities.