* 9622977
* Mathematical Sciences:  Equilvalence Relations Induced by   Polish Group Actions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Greg Hjorth, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/2000
* USD 108,000.00

DMS 9622977 Greg Hjorth, UCLA The notion of group is a central one in modern
mathematics, specifically that of a group acting on a set. This induces an orbit
equivalence relation : for the group G we have that the orbit of a point is the
set of all gx where g is in G . This in turn cues mathematicians to the abstract
study of the orbit equivalence relation, now isolated from the original
investigation of the action. While work of some researchers on the edge of
ergodic theory illuminates the case when G is locally compact, the branch of
logic known as model theory is intimately concerned with the orbit equivalence
relations induced by the infinite symmetric group S of all permutations of the
countable set N, equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence. Hjorth's
project is directed towards unifying these very diverse areas under the study of
continuous actions of separable metrizable topological groups, commonly known as
Polish groups. This class of groups includes some familiar topological groups
which fail to be locally compact, such as: S, the homeomorphism group of the
unit interval, and the group of automorphisms of Hilbert space. The notion of a
group action can be understood by the following simple analogy. Suppose a fleck
of sand is travelling through space, and we know its position and velocity at a
given time, call it t. In principle it should be possible to calculate the
position and velocity of the same fleck at a later time, call it t + s. In this
sense we can say that the real number s "acts" on the collection of all possible
positions and velocities. From any position and velocity at time t, the number s
produces the position and velocity at time t+s. All possible states reachable
from a specified starting point is what is called an orbit. The terminology
suggests an analogy: rather than looking at the position of a planet at one
fixed time, we look instead at the collection of all positions it can occupy
throughout its year: in other words, its orbit. Hjorth's project considers group
actions and orbits in a very general context, with particular focus on
complicated groups which arise from logical considerations. Certain
classifications are provided these group actions and orbits, to give an
understanding of when one is more complicated than another. This research is
foundational. A central goal is a deepened understanding of the subtle nature of
many mathematical objects, such as orbits of points in space.