* 9622923
* Mathematical Sciences:  "RUI:  Magnetohydrostatic Problems  Relevant to Current Sheets and Heating of the Solar         Corona"
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Peter Laurence, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 67,500.00

9622923 Stredulinsky The main goal of this project is to give a careful
mathematical analysis of a theory due to E.N. Parker on solar coronal heating.
According to Parker the main source of heat in the solar corona consists of very
thin regions of intense current (current sheets) which arise as a mediation
between the tendency of coronal plasma to relax to equilibrium, and certain
topological constraints. Such constraints arise due to the near perfect
conductivity of the coronal plasma, and the anchoring of magnetic field lines at
their footpoints or ends in the dense gas of the photosphere, the footpoints
being convected by the turbulent motion of the photosphere. In attempting to
understand the phenomenon of current sheet formation in Parker's model a
variational approach associated with energy minimization will be used which
relies on decompositions of magnetic fields as a means of characterizing and
prescribing field line topology. A careful study will be made of which field
line topologies withstand the weak Sobolev space limits associated with the
relaxation of a plasma towards minimum energy. A general two-dimensional theory
will be developed and applied to the analysis of well known examples of current
sheet formation in the astrophysics literature. Beginnings of a fully three-
dimensional theory will be described with special emphasis on localized vector
potential analogs of the flux function representation of plasmas in two
dimensions. Also topological constraints involving helicity, and more refined
measures of field line topology measuring higher order linkage will be explored.
%%% One of the outstanding open problems in solar astrophysics is the existence
of enormously high temperatures in the sun's atmosphere (corona), on the order
of two million degrees Fahrenheit, which have baffled astrophysicists for
generations. Though a number of reasonable models of coronal heating have been
explored the issue still engenders intense debate. In this project one of the
leading models of coronal heating, due to E.N.Parker, will be analyzed on a
rigorous mathematical level. It is hoped that this will help resolve
uncertainties, and clarify the basic physical mechanism involved in coronal
heating. Due to the relationship with sun spots and solar flares(violent
disruptions in the solar corona which propel plasma and associated magnetic
fields toward the earth), the issue of coronal heating is directly tied to
practical issues of variations in the earth's climate and electromagnetic
interference. ***