* 9622563
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Mathematical Topics Related to     Fluid Instabilities
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Susan Friedlander, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 66,099.00

9622563 Friedlander S.Friedlander in collaboration with M.M.Vishik will
continue her investigation into mathematical problems that arise in fluid
motion. It is proposed to study the spectrum of small oscillations of an ideal
fluid about a given steady flow: this leads to the study of the spectrum of a
degenerate non-elliptic differential operator. The exact location of the
unstable continuous spectrum will be determined purely in terms of dynamical
systems quantities. Examples of fluid instability due to the discrete part of
the spectrum will be studied analytically and numerically. It was recently
proved that,under certain assumptions, linear instability of a steady inviscid
flow implies nonlinear (Lyapunov) instability. It is proposed to extend the
range of applicability of this result.Another line of research is the study of
instabilities for the augmented system of fluid equations that govern
magnetohydrodynamics. A sufficient condition for instability has been derived in
terms of a system of local PDE. It is proposed to apply this criterion to
demonstrate instability of certain astrophysical models. %%% All fluid motions
are continually subject to small disturbances ( eg, think of a tank of water in
a laboratory that is "disturbed" by a truck driving by outside ). A natural
question arises as to whether the the effect of the disturbance dies away
leaving the fluid in the same state as before --this is called stable--or the
effect of the disturbance is to change the configuration of the fluid--this is
called unstable. The question of fluid stability/instability is a classical one
that has received much attention in the scientific literature for more than a
century.It is fundamental to studies in meteorology, oceanography, geophysics
and astrophysics ; in particular, instabilities at the air/sea interface are
significant to any study of the global change of the environment. The
mathematics of fluid instabilities is governed by a system of partial differ
ential equations that are remarkably challenging and interesting. Despite a
century of study there are many open mathematical questions connected with these
equations. This proposal will continue to address some of these open problems.
***