* 9622441
* Ship Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Richard Pittenger, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 12/31/1997
* USD 9,076,906.00

9622441 PITTENGER In 1996 Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will operate the
research vessels ATLANTIS II, KNORR and OCEANUS in support of NSF- sponsored
research. The KNORR will finish the WOCE Indian Ocean work in early 1996. Two
multibeam cruises will utilize the new multibeam capability of the ship. The
Knorr will support a chemistry cruise off the coast of Brazil before heading to
the "Rainbow Site" off Barbados. The Navy will use the vessel in the Baltic and
then it will return to WHOI for an extended maintenance period . OCEANUS will
support a variety of cruises in the northeast Atlantic and one cruise off
Bermuda. The vessel will support 211 operational days of which 75 are in support
of NSF-sponsored programs. The remaining 136 days are in support of Navy and DOE
programs. ATLANTIS II provides support for the Deep Submergence Vehicle ALVIN,
all 1996 AII cruises are in support of the unmanned submersible. The schedule
begins with two cruises off the coast of California with a 2 month stand-down
period between the cruises. The vessel will support a series of cruises off the
East Pacific Rise before transiting to the Atlantic to support cruises off the
east coast of the US and one cruise off Bermuda. The vessels operated by WHOI
are part of a fleet of ships used by the National Science Foundation in support
of marine science. Oceanography requires highly specialized equipment that is
required to be permanently installed on the vessel, thus specialized ships.
These vessels do not operate in the same general mode as cargo/fishing vessels.
As a result, NSF supports the operation of a variety of vessels specifically
dedicated to oceanographic research that are operated by universities and
institutions around the country. ***