* 9622212
* A Research-to-Practice Symposium on Repair and              Rehabilitation of Bridges and Pavements
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1997
* Benjamin Colucci, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 02/28/1997
* USD 49,952.00

9622212 Colucci This project is a symposium to facilitate the implementation of
innovative research products and techniques for the repair and rehabilitation of
bridges and pavements by State highway agencies affiliated with the Northeast
Association of State Transportation Officials (NASTO). The one-and-a-half-day
symposium, to be held in Providence, Rhode Island, in Spring 1996, will feature
a day of presentations by invited researchers, followed by a half-day of
interactive discussions with an audience of approximately 28 NASTO-affiliated
engineers representing the 11 northeastern states, Washington, D.C., Puerto
Rico, and the Virgin Islands. The objective of the symposium is to inform bridge
and pavement engineers from NASTO-affiliated highway agencies of successful new
techniques and materials which laboratory and field tests have shown can offer
highway agencies solutions to bridge and pavement repair and rehabilitation that
are more superior in performance and cost-efficiency to standard practices.
After a day of presentations on successful new techniques and materials, the
researchers will engage the audience of practicing engineers in a dialogue to
(1) clarity their understanding of the new research products, (2) address their
concerns about the feasibility of these products, (3) discuss barriers to
implementation of these new products, (4) identify strategies to overcome
obstacles and implement the new techniques and materials in pilot projects, (5)
determine future research needs. A proceeding of the symposium will be published
in the summer of 1996, and in 1997 NASTO will issue a follow-up report on the
implementation efforts undertaken by the engineers in their respective highway
agencies. ***