* 9622688
* Fundamental Studies Involving Matrix-Assisted Laser         Desorption/Ionization Mass Spectrometry  of Biomolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* James Reilly, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 03/31/2000
* USD 328,639.00

In this project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, a
fundamental study of the mechanisms of matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization (MALDI) will be conducted. Although MALDI is one of the
more widely used methods for preparing large biological molecules in the gas
phase for subsequent characterization by mass spectrometry (MS), this process
remains poorly understood. Together with this fundamental study, efforts to
optimize MALDI preparation of DNA for MS analysis will be conducted in order to
increase the production of these large molecules in the gas phase. Additionally,
kinetic studies of large biological molecule ion fragmentation patterns will be
pursued so that reactions of DNA and proteins with small organic and inorganic
substrates can be better understood at the molecular level. The primary goal of
this research is the elucidation of the mechanisms of matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization which is a broadly used but poorly understood process for
preparing gas phase samples of large biological molecules for mass spectral
characterization. Optimization of these ion-forming processes is also an aim of
the project. Achievement of the goals of this research will advance
significantly the application of MALDI/MS in the study of complex reactions
involving large biological molecules.