* 9622138
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Real-Time Scheduling via   Large-Scale Problem Reformation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Joseph Pignatiello, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 05/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9622138 Boyd Acquisition of a The equipment requested is a Silicon Graphics
Power Challenge L Deskside Server with four 75 Mhz processors will support
research in the areas of: (1) real-time scheduling via large scale problem
reformulation; (2) design of robust manufacturing systems using simulation; (3)
real-time job flow control in non-concurrent queueing networks; and (4) safe and
energy-efficient natural gas networks. Real-time scheduling problems are
naturally formulated as integer programming problems and are commonly inadequate
for solving even small problems. Reformulation of these problems with new sets
of variables and constraints shows promise, resulting in large-scale problems to
solve. A robust system design based on a goal seeking expert system and
utilizing a new and unique simulation environment for manufacturing systems in
small and medium size operations is sought that satisfies multiple performance
criteria and is insensitive to uncontrollable environmental or noise parameters.
Improved job throughput, while holding job sojourn times to within an acceptable
range, based on mathematical foundations in the context of non-concurrent
queueing networks require numerical procedures suitable for implementing real-
time control. Recent research in discrete optimization and large-scale integer
programming will be brought to bear on evaluating tradeoffs between network
safety and throughput and in designing safe and efficient natural gas networks.
The acquired equipment will be networked within an existing ethernet system to
permit maximum utilization fro four important research projects. The success of
the research problems is contigent upon the availability of high-performance
computing equipment.