* 9622319
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Gene Targeting of RBCS18in Arabidopsis thaliana
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1996,11/30/1997
* Wilhelm Gruissem, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1997
* USD 51,050.00

9622319 Jelesko This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. John Jelesko, a
Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of California Berkeley Plant Biology
Department, with Dr. Masaki Furuya, at the Hitachi Advanced Research Laboratory
(HARL) in Japan, in order to develop a tractable approach to generate specific
gene targeting (gene knockout) events in plants. Project funding will allow Dr.
Jelesko to participate in a six month research collaboration in Dr. Furuya's
laboratory. During this time, Dr. Jelesko will use single photon counting video
imaging equipment to measure in vivo luciferase activity in transgenic plants
which have undergone a specific gene targeting event. Successful development of
a gene targeting technology will provide Dr. Jelesko and Dr. Furuya with a
powerful genetic technique to dissect the role of individual members of highly
homologous plant multigene families. This proposal brings together research
scientists from the USA and Japan working in the area of plant molecular
genetics. The US scientist will have an opportunity to become familiar with
research techniques, equipment, and facilities unique to HARL as well as
contributing to the overall research efforts of Dr. Furuya. Therefore, this
proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of
scientific knowledge through international collaboration. ***