* 9622603
* Tracing Riverine Inputs and Ventilation Processes of the    Upper Arctic by Means of Submarine Mounted on-line Chemical Sensors
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1999
* Kelly Falkner, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/1999
* USD 295,943.00

Proposal Number: OPP 9622603 Principal Investigator: Falkner, Kelly ABSTRACT
Among the outstanding issues regarding Arctic Ocean circulation are the fate of
its riverine inputs and the nature of the processes ventilating sub-surface
waters of its interior. Circulation and material transport and transformation in
the Arctic needs to be more completely characterized because of the potentially
critical role the Arctic plays in global themohaline circulation and on a more
immediate timescale, because of the need to predict the fate of pollutants,
including radioactive and industrial wastes and pesticides, in this sensitive
environment. It is proposed to develop and apply new means to address these
issues by adapting methodologies for mapping geochemical tracer fields in real
time using the submarine platform, in combination with more conventional
chemical hydrography conducted from the ice upon surfacing with the sub.
Specifically, a sea-going fiber optic UV spectrometer, will be mounted on the
hull of the submarine. This instrument will continuously monitor the humic
fraction of dissolved organic matter along track during the SCICEX-96 field
season (August 1996) and monitor multiple parameters during the SCICEX-97 field
season. In addition discreet samples will be taken via ice-based hydrocasts from
the ice for calibration purposes and continuation of a related study to track
Arctic river waters by geochemical means. This dataset will allow an
unprecedented examination of the carbon cycle and circulation questions in the
Arctic.