* 9622788
* Collaborative Research: Interactions Between Plant          Chemicals and Microbial Communities through Forest          Succession in the Alaskan Taiga
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Rex Cates, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Mazer
* 05/31/2000
* USD 175,000.00

The proposed research investigates the impact of plant chemical inputs on soil
microbial processes in the Alaskan taiga forest. Studies will focus on tannins
produced by alder and balsam poplar, two species that form part of the
successional sequence in the floodplain forests of Alaska. Tannins of varying
chemical structure will be isolated from these species and added to soils from
both alder and poplar sites. Their effects on a suite of microbial processes
including respiration, nitrogen mineralization, and enzyme activities will be
measured. The specific structure of the chemicals will be linked with their
biological activities to improve our understanding of the ecological function of
these chemicals. Tannins will be applied from each species to each soil to
determine whether the microbial communities can adapt to the chemicals coming
in. These studies will greatly improve our understanding of how plants affect
the soil processes that control nutrient availability and therefore plant
succession in the Alaskan taiga. We will improve our understanding of forest
community dynamics, controls on litter quality and decomposition, plant-microbe
interactions, and the role of microbial community composition in ecosystem
function.