* 9622516
* Advanced Monitoring System for Long-Span Bridges
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1997
* ming wang, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 04/30/1997
* USD 173,685.00

9622516 Wang In recent years, various monitoring and diagnosis hardware have
been developed for applications to civil infrastructures. It is now possible to
design an automated and reliable system, which can both continuously monitor the
structural performance of a bridge and assess its status of damage or
deterioration. This project conducts a three year research effort to develop an
automated monitoring system implements on a long suspension bridge in China,
which will make available to the project personal assistance such as technicians
and logic supports required for the field experiments. The effort will be
focused on the design and development of a self displacement measurement device
and a wireless data communication system. The diagnosis techniques include
finite element modeling of the suspension bridge, modeling and measurement of
strong wind,earthquakes and traffic loading, analysis of the ambient vibration
data through the use of NExT technique to eliminate the use of an exciter, a
global damage diagnosis technique to identify the damage, and selection of
sensors and techniques to detect localized damage and defects. A section model
of the suspension bridge will also be constructed and tested in the wind tunnel
at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in order to determine some of
the aerodynamic parameters and to calibrate and optimize the sensor locations.
This investigation involves international team of researchers including
industries, universities and national laboratories. The ultimate goal of the
research is to design and develop an advanced system that can be practically and
efficiently installed into a long span bridge to monitor day to day activities
and to detect the damage or give a warning when a critical stress has been
reached. Although a suspension bridge will be selected on line condition
monitoring in this project, the developed system is expected to be also
applicable in other large structure systems includin g truss bridges and tall
buildings under severe loading conditions such as earthquakes and strong winds.
***