* 9622772
* Structure, Generating, and Counting Problems in             Combinatorial Families
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Carla Savage, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 12/31/1999
* USD 70,000.00

9622772 Savage Efficient generation and counting of combinatorial structures
requires not only good algorithm design techniques, but also some insight into
the mathematical structure of the combinatorial family involved. On the other
hand, investigations in combinatorial mathematics are at times hampered because
the objects get large so quickly that it is hard to view them or to gather any
data about them. This investigation continues work on efficient combinatorial
generation and counting, with a new emphasis on classical problems in
combinatorics. Novel application of recursive decomposition techniques have been
the key to results in earlier phases of this work. The results and techniques
will be applied to address directly some outstanding structural problems in
related areas of combinatorics, graph theory, and group theory. Specifically,
the investigator will address open problems in combinatorial Gray codes,
efficient listing algorithms for several combinatorial families, efficient
algorithms to count and tabulate combinatorial families, Hamilton cycles in
vertex transitive graphs and Cayley graphs, asymptotic and bijective
relationships between certain families of integer partitions, and matchings and
symmetric chain decompositions in posets of partitions and permutations. This
research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely
important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in
computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
combinatorial research.