* 9622927
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Problems in                Piezocomposites for Transducer Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Leonid Berlyand, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

9622927 Berlyand The investigator will study a variety of mathematical problems
which arise in the study and design of polymer piezoceramic composites for
transducer applications. He will attempt to use methods of homogenization theory
in combination with the Bloch-Floquet expansion to understand various types of
resonances for wave propagation in composite materials consisting of an array of
piezoceramic rods embedded in a polymer matrix. He will study two main classes
of such problems. The first is where the acoustic wavelength is comparable with
dimensions of the composite microstructure (long wave approximation). Here he
will attempt to find the dependence of the quality of electromechanical power
conversion on the frequency and the volume fraction of the piezoceramic phase
and explain theoretically existing numerical data for the thickness-mode
resonance. This includes the "backing effect, i.e., the dependence of the
resonance frequencies on the stiffness of the backing medium. The second main
class of problems that the investigator will study is the high-frequency regime
when the acoustic wavelength is comparable to the microstructure scale. The main
effort here is to extend homogenization ideas to the range of frequencies where
the composite material exhibits significant "cross-talk" between piezoceramic
rods. He will also study the transitional behavior between these two frequency
regimes. The proposed work lies at the frontier between mathematics and
composites, and the investigator is planning to support theoretical results by
experimental and numerical data obtained at the Penn State Materials Research
Lab. %%% A composite material is a mixture of two or more single phase materials
(constituents) whose properties are far better than that of each constituent.
That is why composite materials are widely used in many areas of modern
technology and manufacturing. In particular, piezocomposites are the principal
elements of modern acous tic transducers. High-frequency acoustic transducers
are used for ultrasound medical imaging and non-destructive testing of damaged
materials. Low- frequency transducers are used for underwater acoustics (so-
called hydrophones) as well as for finding fish, tracking vessels and deep-sea
seismology. Rapid advances in mathematical sciences within the last 30 years
open the possibility of understanding the general principles and relationships
linking the overall properties of such composite materials to the properties of
their constituents. This in turn makes it possible to design more efficient,
lower cost transducers. However, progress has been hampered by expensive and
time consuming experiments and by the enormous complexity of the phenomena. Huge
improvements in the ability to measure the properties of composite materials
have led to better characterization of their properties. However, this precision
of measurement has not been matched by corresponding improvements in the
mathematical theory, which could guide the experimental study and industrial
design of the transducers. This project will involve devising and improving
mathematical techniques and methods for the study and design of piezoceramic
composites for transducer applications. The investigator will attempt to use
modern mathematical techniques and tools to understand various types of
resonances for wave propagation in polymer piezoceramic composites. This study
will provide practical recommendations for increasing the sensitivity and
resolution range of the transducers. ***