* 9622777
* Dissertation Research:  An Archaeological Investigation of a Long-Term Culture in the Falemme (Upper Senegal Region)    A.D. 1000-1900
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Susan McIntosh, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1999
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Susan McIntosh, Mr. Ibrahima Thiaw will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will focus on a ca. 50 kilometer-long segment
of the Falemme River Valley in Senegal and conduct both archaeological survey
and excavation. Although economically marginal today, in the past the region had
important trade links with both Northern Africa and the Atlantic coast. The
research is designed to recover information on changes in subsistence,
technology, trade and material culture over the last thousand years. Mr. Thiaw
will conduct an extensive foot survey of the study area to recover reliable data
on the number, chronology and location of archaeological sites to determine
distribution, chronological relationships and functional variability. In
addition he will carry out controlled stratigraphic excavation at three second
millennium sites discovered in the course of a previous reconnaissance.
Recovered local and imported artifacts and paleoeconomic data will be combined
with information on context and chronology to permit the establishment of a
regional chronological sequence and to provide insight into change through time
in subsistence economy, technology and participation in trade networks. The
research is directed at two important anthropological questions. The first
concerns the boundary between history and prehistory. One school contends that
prehistoric cultures functioned as basically independent agencies unaffected by
larger scale geographic interactions and can be studied as isolated units. Only
with the onset of history did this situation significantly change. Thus,
according to this argument, there is a clear divide between historic and
prehistoric periods and it is extremely difficult to use historic patterns to
project back into the prehistoric past. Another group of anthropologists sees
the prehistoric period as changing and dynamic and not significantly different
than its later historic counterpart. Because Mr. Thiaw's research will encompass
significant periods on both sides of this gap, he will be able to examine this
issue directly. Secondly, Mr. Thiaw's research will also provide important
information on the rise of complex societies in sub-Saharan Africa and help to
determine the extent to which trans-Saharan trade played a role in the rise of
African kingdoms. This research is important for several reasons. It will
provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will contribute
significantly to the development of archaeological methodology and will assist
in the training of a promising young scientist.