* 9622748
* Mathematical Sciences:  Asymptotic Estimates for Boundary-  Value Problems in Linear and Nonlinear Continuum Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Cornelius Horgan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 70,000.00

9622748 Horgan The asymptotic behavior of solutions in continuum mechanics is a
broad topic of considerable mathematical and technological interest. For the
specific geometries of a three-dimensional cylinder or a two-dimensional
rectangle, the spatial decay of solutions of elliptic partial differential
equations (or systems of equations) arises in consideration of the classic
Saint-Venant principle in elasticity theory. Such problems also arise in entry
flows for viscous incompressible fluids. Generalizations to include principles
of Phragmen- Lindelof type are also of interest. In this proposal, it is planned
to analytically investigate a sequence of boundary-value problems for second-
order and fourth-order elliptic partial differential equations. Both linear and
nonlinear, isotropic and anisotropic problems are considered. The results of
such investigations have widespread technological impact. In particular,
rigorously obtained asymptotic estimates for the rate of decay of solutions of
continuum mechanics problems are immediately applicable in engineering analysis
and design. The problems to be investigated involve mathematical models for
advanced composite materials and structures. %%% Structures of technological
interest such as automotive and aircraft parts, rocket casings, helicopter
blades, hollow shafts and containment vessels, are often constructed of layers
of anisotropic, filament or fiber-reinforced materials which must be designed to
remain elastic. The proper analysis of such structures in current high-
performance technology requires careful mathematical analysis of basic issues.
It is proposed to study the safe and efficient performance of these structures
using results from the theory of partial differential equations. In particular,
simplified, cost-effective asymptotic methods will be used. The scope of the
investigation will include both linear and nonlinear problems, and one of the
underlying goals is that of efficient use of materials. It is known, for
example, that considerations of nonlinear effects in composites often lead to
striking differences from predictions of linearized theories. In view of the
rapid utilization of advanced composite materials in current technology,
mathematical studies on large deformations of such materials promise to have
widespread impact on the mechanics and materials knowledge and technology base.
Applications to specific composite architectures of interest, for example, to
the Boeing Company and NASA will be made. ***