* 9622733
* Study of Transition Metal-Carbon Mixed Clusters:  From Gas  Phase to Condensed Phase
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Lai-Sheng Wang, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9622733 Wang This project will investigate the structure and formation of metal
carbide clusters (MxCy, where M is a metal and C is elemental carbon) in the gas
phase, as well as the nanomaterials formed by these clusters in the condensed
phase. The gas phase study involves anion photoelectron spectroscopy, which will
provide fundamental understanding of the structure and bonding of the MxCy
clusters in a wide size range. The technique is also sensitive to subtle
differences in bonding and structures between carbon and different transition
metals. The condensed phase study involves preparation of MxCy nanocluster
samples by a novel laser vaporization deposition technique and characterization
using various modern microscopies (TEM, STM, AFM). The gas phase studies will
lead to insight into the formation mechanisms of three classes of novel
materials: endohedral metallo-fullerenes, single-shell carbon nanotubes, and
metallo-carbohedrenes. Through the combined gas phase and condensed phase
studies, this project has the potential to discover new carbon-metal
nanoclusters with novel electronic and catalytic properties and efficient
methods to synthesize them. The project involves major collaborative work at the
Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories. The project is co-funded between the
Condensed Matter Physics Program and the Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics
Program NSF. %%% Carbon and metals form a class of metal carbide materials with
unusual properties that find applications in electronic materials for making
faster computers, in catalysis, such as automobile catalytic converters, and in
tool hardening manufacturing processes. These properties can be enhanced or
modified when the materials are made of small carbide particles, called
nanoclusters, some of which are composed of new, stable metal-carbon molecules.
This project investigates the mechanisms of formation of such carbide
nanoparticles and the new metal-carbon molecular forms, and al so will study the
unique physical and chemical properties of these clusters. Understanding the
formation mechanisms will lead to more efficient methods to tailor the design of
the nanoclusters with desired properties. The project involves major
collaborative work at the Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories. The project
is co-funded between the Condensed Matter Physics Program and the Atomic,
Molecular and Optical Physics Program NSF. ***