* 9622910
* Mathematical Sciences: Computation, Optimization,           Singularity, and Vibration Analysis of Polygonal Elastic    Thin Plates
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Zhonghai Ding, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 44,258.00

This research focuses on computation, optimization, singularity and vibration
analysis of polygonal elastic thin plates. The following studies will be carried
out: (a) the analysis of singular behavior of polygonal thin plates near
corners; (b) the study of corner effects in boundary value problems for
polygonal thin plates, and associated numerical computations; (c) vibration and
stabilization analysis of polygonal thin plates; and (d) optimal boundary
control for polygonal thin plates with point sensors at corners. The research
utilizes layer potential techniques for solutions of boundary value problems on
Lipschitz domains, weighted Sobolev spaces, microlocal Fourier analysis and
boundary element methods. %%% Elastic thin plates of polygonal shape occur
naturally in structural mechanics. The presence of corners may result in corner
effects such as singularities in surface stresses and displacements, and the
absence of certain modes of vibration. Such considerations are of great concern
in the design and manufacture of various mechanical systems and structures. For
example, due to singularities in stress concentrations at corners, repeated
loading may cause fatigue which can shorten the service life of certain
structural components such as those found in many aircraft. This makes
understanding, quantifying, and controlling the behavior of singularities at
corners of thin plates imperative. This research will build such a theoretical
foundation as well as demonstrate through numerical simulations the singular
phenomena that can occur and how it may be controlled.