* 9622458
* Combinatorial Representation Theory:  Constructive and      Integral
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Robert Liebler, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/2000
* USD 60,000.00

Liebler This award supports an investigation into a variety of detailed research
programs, including cyclic and non-abelian difference sets, Williamson matrices,
finite geometries from special p-groups, cyclotomic association schemes and
integral Hecke algebras. Although each is of substantial interest in its own
right, further study of each of these topics will also contribute to the broader
goal of development of an integral representation theory for association scheme-
like structures that can be used constructively. This investigation is
computation-intensive, relying heavily on the high-level computer software
packages. This award also supports guest speakers at an interstate Algebraic
Combinatorics Seminar. The biweekly seminar benefits students and faculty from
universities along the front range of Colorado and Wyoming. This research is in
the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of Combinatorics is to find
efficient methods of studying how discrete collections of objects can be
arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely important to modern
communications. For example, the design of large networks, such as those
occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in computer science
deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial
research. The broad goal of this research is to narrow the gap between the known
examples and theoretical limits on certain types of highly symmetric discrete
systems.