* 9622297
* Signal Processing and Target Images in Bat Sonar
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* James Simmons, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/1999
* USD 256,905.00

9622297 Simmons The general objective of the proposed research is to identify
activity in the brain that causes perceptual images to have their particular
content. The specific question is how specific numerical values for parameters
of neural responses manifest themselves in corresponding numerical values for
perceptual dimensions of images. This project uses target ranging in the
biological sonar of the big brown bat, Eptesicus fuscus, as a "test-bed" for
addressing questions about the formation and content of perceived images. Sonar
and radar systems offer an especially well- developed body of theory about
signal-processing and display of information that can be used to understand the
mechanisms of biological systems evolved for the same purpose. Moreover, the
exceptional real-time performance of biosonar systems in well-defined tasks of
target localization, tracking, and classification make it obvious that there are
technological advantages to understanding how echolocating animals achieve this
performance. The starting point for the project is that bats have unusually good
echo-delay accuracy of 10-15 ns and "two-point" echo-delay resolution of s. The
initial problem is to account for this seemingly implausible performance with
neural responses, which from physiological single-cell recording experiments
appear to be 2-3 orders of magnitude less precise. New physiological experiments
in the bat's midbrain and auditory cortex reveal that the "missing" high-
precision temporal information is carried by the latencies of multi-cell neural
responses using expanded time scales. There are two prominent competing
hypotheses about neural substrates of perception which differ in the relative
importance of response-rate and response-timing for determining image content.
These hypotheses yield widely- divergent predictions from neural data for what
bats should be able to perceive about target range. The combination of
behavioral and physiological data from Ep tesicus leads to rejection of the
hypothesis that relies exclusively on response-rate to represent information in
images, while sustaining the hypothesis that response-timing may be "read out"
directly into perception. The proposed research will examine these competing
hypotheses in more detail because rejection of the response-rate model has
widespread implications for neuroscience and for bioengineering, specifically
for development of man-made systems that seek to emulate animal sonar
performance. The proposed experiments will use 3-D video reconstructions of the
bat's flight in sonar-guided interceptions to quantify how well the bat can
locate and recognize targets in complex multiple- target sonar "scenes." New
psychophysical experiments using electronically-simulated targets will measure
the structure of the bat's sonar images to determine whether specific
combinations of single and multiple overlapping echoes delivered from different
directions lead to predicted echo- delay values appearing in the images. New
physiological experiments will record and analyze the response in the bat's
inferior colliculus that carry fine echo-delay information on expanded time
scales to learn how these responses are combined to form images. A large-scale
computational model of the bat's sonar will be used to evaluate experimental
data in the context of emulating the bat's performance. ***