* 9622958
* Mathematical Sciences: The Incompressible Euler Equations,  the Vlasov-Poisson Equations, and Numerical Methods for     Their Solutions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2000
* USD 57,000.00

9622958 Majda The Vlasov-Poisson equations form the simplest system of equations
which describe the microscopic properties of a plasma. Therefore, this system is
the starting point for any prediction about the microscopic properties of a
plasma. The Vlasov-Poisson equations also play another very important role.
Recent research which involved the proposer demonstrated a close relationship
between the Vlasov-Poisson equations and the two dimensional Euler equations in
vorticity form. The Vlasov-Poisson equations have a simpler mathematical
structure than the Euler equations which makes the Vlasov-Poisson equations
easier to analyze and solve numerically, and leads to many explicit solutions.
Consequently, the Vlasov-Poisson equations form an excellent system of model
equations to study before considering any open problems for the two dimensional
Euler equations. The proposer will consider some fundamental problems for the
Vlasov-Poisson equations pertaining to the lack of uniqueness and singularity
formation for weak solutions and to the theory of statistical equilibrium
solutions. Many (but not all) of these problems are related to unsolved problems
for the Euler equations. The proposer will also study some fundamental open
problems for the Euler equations with vortex sheet initial data, using Vlasov-
Poisson results to motivate and guide this work. Finally, the proposer will
study some interesting issues regarding the numerical solution of both the
Vlasov- Poisson and Euler equations. Fluid dynamics is the study of continuous
media like air and water. Scientists formulate problems in this field by
applying the fundamental laws of physics such as the conservation of mass,
momentum and energy. For most problems this procedure leads to sets of
mathematical equations which are too complicated to solve. Based on physical
and/or mathematical intuition the scientist then tries to find a simplified
formulation of the original problem which is simple enough to solve and
sufficiently complicated to describe the essential features of the original
problem. The mixing process between layers of fluid which have different
densities, like air and water, or layers of fluid moving at different velocities
is very complicated and occurs in a wide variety of important applications in
fields including aerodynamics, meteorology and oceanography. For example, the
flow of air over an airplane is very complicated. In order to predict the
trailing wake behind an airplane, or the mixing process in a fluid, scientists
often use a simplified model of a fluid called a vortex sheet. This is the
simplest realistic description of this and many other problems. Unfortunately,
despite the wide-spread use of vortex sheet models in many problems in fluid
dynamics, many mathematical properties of vortex sheets remain poorly
understood. The goal of this proposal is to provide answers to many of the
fundamental questions about the mathematical properties of vortex sheets.
Successful completion of the proposed work will lead to an increased
understanding of the strengths and limitations when using vortex sheets to model
complicated flows. The starting point for this work is the simplest set of
equations which describe a plasma, a fluid in which the microscopic properties
of charged particles are modeled. Therefore, this study should also lead to an
increased understanding of the properties of a plasma containing a concentrated
beam of electrons.