* 9622695
* Mathematical Sciences:  Geometric Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Jean-Pierre Rosay, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 68,856.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9622695 PI: Rosay. Rosay plans to work on several topics
in function theory; more specifically, in several complex variables and in
partial differential equations. He is presently working with E.L. Stout on the
basic question of boundary values in the sense of hyperfunctions, trying to
develop a very concrete local intrinsic theory. He is extremely interested in
questions related to uniqueness in the Cauchy problem, especially for the Lewy
operator and its perturbations. This has of course a link with the study of
abstract CR structures. Several questions concerning automorphisms of C^n, and
polynomial convexity will also be studied, in particular in collaboration with
F. Forstneric. He is presently working on the problem of separating (reducible)
analytic sets, in connection with embeddings problems. The field of several
complex variables has applications to many areas of mathematics: approximation
theory, Fourier analysis, and, most importantly, partial differential equations.
This latter area of partial differential equations is of central importance in
physics and engineering. In fact, partial differential equations are the natural
tool for the study of many processes in physics and engineering; prediction and
understanding in physics and design in engineering are often based on partial
differential equations. It is thus of great importance to have incisive
knowledge of this area. There are many approaches to the study of partial
differential equations, but one of the most important approaches is via several
complex variables. The cultivation of several complex variables is thus
important. The research proposed by Rosay will clarify several issues in several
complex variables, and thereby advance partial differential equations. The
applications of several complex variables are not as direct and immediate as
those of some areas of mathematics. The history of mathematics, however, is
replete with examples of mathematical results whose utilitarian valu e was
recognized only many years after their basic development. In fact, this is often
the case with the best mathematics--mathematics that avoids the esoteric and the
frivolous, but is grounded in reality and persistently asks and attempts to
answer the most basic and fundamental questions. It is for this reason that
mathematics must be regarded as a long term investment.