* 9622290
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Recursion Theoretic Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Leo Harrington, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/2000
* USD 144,000.00

DMS-96-22290 Harrington, U. Cal-Berkeley This project studies the recursively
enumerable (re) sets of integers, in a way which is independent of their
enumeration and independent of how integers are viewed as coding information. It
is the study of re sets purely in relation to each other. The main ingredients
of this study are: automorphisms of the collection of re sets - the symmetries
that exist among re sets; and invariant sets - the walls that prevent
symmetries. These two ingredients naturally go hand-in-hand. The main method
used in this field is called `priority arguments'. This is a technique for
performing computable constructions that ensure appropriate non-computable
properties. A current guiding problem is: if an invariant set has non-trivial
minimum information content then each of its members must have maximum
information content. It is known that settling this would involve an extension
of current automorphism techniques. A set is "re" (recursively enumerable) if it
can be computably listed. For example, the set of all possible theorems of
mathematics (deduced from the usual axioms) is re. This project studies the re
sets themselves. Penrose, in his book The Emperor's New Mind, suggests an
analogy between computing and consciousness. This projects seeks possibilities
in the more strained analogy between re sets (independent of their enumeration)
and the timeless aspects of consciousness. There are existing results which can
be seen as indicative of this direction. The main method used in this field is
called "priority arguments". This is a method whereby a common purpose can be
achieved by establishing an extensive field of "world views", all working
towards the common goal in their own separate ways, most of which are
conflicting. One interesting feature of the method is that all reasonable world
views must be allowed, including those that deny the common purpose (those world
views do their jobs by working towards their own ne gations). Success in this
project would strengthen the potentially profound implications of the analogy
linking consciousness with a priority argument -like universe.