* 9622768
* Implicitization of Rational Surfaces with Base Points
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Thomas Sederberg, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to investigate a new technique for finding the
implicit equation of a rational surface. Standard implicitization techniques for
rational surfaces are based on resultants. But resultants vanish in the presence
of base points. Therefore, when base points are present, the implicit equation
can be recovered using resultants only by carefully perturbing the parametric
equations to eliminate the base points. But such perturbations generally
introduce extraneous factors, which then need to be painstakingly removed. Thus
base points seriously complicate implicitization using resultants. On the other
hand, base points simplify the implicit equation of a rational surface by
lowering its degree. Preliminary work has roughed out a new implicitization
technique based on algebraic "moving surfaces" that "follow" a rational surface.
Not only is this new implicitization technique impervious to base points, it
also simplifies in the presence of base points. Moreover this new method
generates a more compact matrix representation for the implicit equation than
methods based on resultants. Currently this new method is substantiated only by
several Mathematica examples and some preliminary theorems. It is proposed to
develop the theoretical foundations of the new method and then to apply the
method to solve a variety of practical problems in computer graphics, geometric
modeling, and symbolic computation. A wide variety of additional problems in
elimination theory might also be attacked by these new techniques including, but
not limited to, inverting a rational map, computing the singular locus of a
rational surface, intersecting rational curves and surfaces, and intersecting
algebraic curves and surfaces. ***