* 9622593
* Research in Multithreaded Dataflow and Hybrid Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Krishna Kavi, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 05/31/1998
* USD 228,589.00

The overall objective of the research is the investigation of architectural
features for cost-effective, mainstream computing based on multithreading. In
this vein, this research will focus in two directions; investigation of
multithreaded dataflow paradigm, and the adaptation of the results to hybrid
dataflow-von Neumann architecture. The dataflow model is ideally suited for
multithreaded architecture since it facilitates instruction level context
switching and fine-grained parallelism. A clear understanding of the issues in
supporting multiple threads in dataflow environment will permit us to adapt them
to hybrid dataflow/control flow architectures. Hybrid systems present the most
interesting opportunities in the area of multiprocessing - they directly address
problems that will be faced by future superscalar processors, such as long
memory latencies, context switching overheads, multiple active instruction
streams, fast and efficient support for task synchronization. Initially, this
project will investigate the use of cache memories for multihreaded dataflow
architecture, and compiler techniques for improving the performance of such
machines. This project will then study architectural support for multithreading
including support for thread management, thread scheduling, communication and
synchronization among threads. Simultaneous multithreading in the context of
dataflow and hybrid architectures will then be investigated. Finally, this
project will explore the suitability of the most significant architectural
features for use with convectional RISC technology.