* 9622506
* ENGINEERING RESEARCH EQUIPMENT:  A Combined Fluorescence    Optical Microscope/Non-Contact Atomic Force Microscope      for Monolayer and Multilayer Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* Joseph Zasadzinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9622506 Zasadzinski New modes of imaging with scanning probe microscopes - non-
contact, tapping, and friction or lateral force modes - have made it possible to
image a variety of surfaces that had previously been difficult or impossible to
OseeO. These new imaging modes take advantage of variations in surface
chemistry, friction, compliance, charge, etc. to develop image contrast in
addition to simple surface topography. For many of these modes, the AFM tip is
either not in contact with or is gently tapped on the sample surface. Hence,
much softer surfaces can be imaged than with conventional contact mode AFM and
there is less tendency to rearrange loosely supported materials. It is proposed
to upgrade the current contact mode AFM by purchasing a Nanoscope Multimode AFM
and the necessary accessories to do non-contact and tapping mode imaging. These
new imaging modalities will be applied to the ongoing studies of self-assembly
and pattern formation in surfactant, lipid and proteins. These new imaging modes
are proving to be extremely useful in examining complex fluid interfaces,
surfactant, protein, and polymer adsorption, lateral phase separation in
membranes, protein localization and diffusion, the kinetics and structures of
self-assembled films, etc. This new apparatus will also allow us to characterize
more realistic model membrane surfaces for force measurements with the Surface
Forces Apparatus. To fully implement the new imaging modes, it is necessary to
identify areas of interest on the surface prior to engaging the AFM. The best
way to do this is by coupling the AFM to a high resolution optical microscope
capable of fluorescence imaging. Fluorescence microscopy is one of the best ways
of identifying lipid domains, specific proteins (via antibody labeling),
adsorption etc. at the micron level. It would be a major advance to directly
correlate the fluorescence images with molecular resolution AFM images. A custom
fluorescence microscope has recently been built for examin ing monolayers at the
air-water interface. A very similar instrument can be constructed to examine
thin films on substrates prior to and during AFM imaging. With this combined
capability, the principal investigator should be able to localize proteins,
phase boundaries, etc. and correlate them with their macroscopic effects on
bilayer properties. The transfer of the spontaneous patterns formed by various
lipid mixtures at the air-water interface to substrates to be used as
lithographic-style templates, the patterns formed by competitive self-assembly
of mixtures of adsorbing species, and the initial stages of mineralization of
surfaces, can also be studied. ***