* 9622663
* Neuropeptide Analysis using Multidimensional Separation and Detection Methodology
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Alexander Scheeline, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 05/31/1999
* USD 280,000.00

Urbana-Champaign This project, directed by Assistant Professor Jonathan V.
Sweedler of the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, is focused on
identifying and quantitatively measuring neuronal releasates and assaying the
contents of individual peptide vesicles. Support is provided by the Analytical
and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry and by
Neuroendocrinology in the Division of Integrative Biology and Neuroscience. The
work will develop new wavelength resolved fluorescence detection methods for
microseparations that allow neuropeptides and classical neurotransmitters to be
identified and quantitatively measured without the need for chemical
derivitization, provide methods to assay the contents of individual peptidergic
vesicles, and develop a separation approach which allows the time course of
peptide release to be followed. These measurements are all concerned with the
dynamics of cellular communication and the studies are designed to lead to
improved understanding of the nervous system. The bag cell neurons of the marine
mollusk, Aplysia Californica, will serve as a model system. An understanding of
the chemical pathways involved in the transmission of a nerve impulse is
essential to our gaining full knowledge of how the nervous system functions.
This work will explore such pathways by developing the measurement techniques
needed to follow peptide neurotransmitters which are typically present in very
low concentrations and which are found in the presence of many other biological
compounds.