* 9622942
* Linear and Semilinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Daniel Tataru, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 66,351.00

Abstract Tataru 9622942 The proposed research focuses on three interconnecting
subjects, namely (i) unique continuation for solutions to nonelliptic partial
differential equations, (ii) semilinear (mostly hyperbolic) partial differential
equations and (iii) hyperbolic mixed initial-boundary value problems. The
research in unique continuation is oriented towards semilinear problems and
problems with unbounded potentials. In the area of semilinear hyperbolic
equations, the main effort will be directed towards the study of a class of
weighted Sobolev spaces attached to (mostly) hyperbolic partial differential
operators. These spaces adapted to the hyperbolic operator seem to be the
natural setting for the study of semilinear equations; it appears that they are
the key to further progress in the field. A main goal is to understand the
multiplicative structure of these spaces, including null forms estimates. The
first aim of the research on hyperbolic boundary value problems is to complete
the ongoing PI's study of the trace regularity properties for solutions to such
problems. This is a key step for the second part, whose goal is to understand
the Strichartz type estimates for solutions to hyperbolic boundary value
problems, and subsequently, to use this in the study of semilinear hyperbolic
boundary value problems. It is the PI's hope that in the long run this research
program could also lead to progress in the study of quasilinear hyperbolic
equations. A partial differential equation is an equation which describes the
relation between rates of change of quantities which depend on more than one
variable. Such equations are used to model many phenomenas in physics,
economics, etc. The aim of this project is to investigate some specific
properties of solutions to certain partial differential equations. Part of the
work is motivated by problems arising in control theory and in inverse problems;
there one tries to reconstruct information about either the state of a system or
th e equations governing the system, based on partial observations. Another goal
of the project is to reach a better understanding of some fundamental equations
which insofar have proved extremely difficult to study; for instance, Einstein's
equations, which describe the structure of the relativistic space-time.