* 9622530
* A Hybrid Computer-Intelligent and User-Interactive Process  Planning System for Four-Axis Computer Numerical Control    Turning Centers
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Dharmaraj Veeramani, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2000
* USD 261,330.00

This grant provides funding for research on computer-aided process planning for
four-axis computer numerical control (CNC) turning centers. The presence of
multiple-turrets and spindles in this new generation of CNC machines introduces
process planning considerations and complexities that are non-existent in
earlier machine tools. The goal of this research is to investigate a hybrid
process planning framework that integrates computer-intelligent decision-making
along with interactive expert user input at various levels so that an optimal
process plan can be identified quickly in a large combinatorial solution space.
This research will be done in close collaboration with industry and will entail:
(1) formulation and development of representation schemes, algorithms and
methods for process plan generation and optimization, and (2) demonstration and
validation of the process planning technology by application on real industry
data. The process plan optimization problem that arises in the context of four-
axis CNC turning centers is unique and does not match classical optimization
problems. A Tabu Search based optimization approach will be used. Because of the
lack of process planning systems for four-axis CNC turning centers, these highly
flexible machines are being used in industry typically as dedicated machines for
mass production of one or two parts. The successful completion of this project
could lead to the availability of a process planning system that would make it
convenient to process a large variety of parts and thereby increase the
acceptance and use of these machines in industry. This in turn could enable
companies to reduce their manufacturing lead times and enhance their
responsiveness to customers and thereby become more competitive in the global
marketplace.