* 9622649
* GOALI/IUCP: Laser Scribing of Metallic Glasses to Improve   Efficiency of Electric Motors and Transformers
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Palaniappa Molian, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 05/31/1999
* USD 90,000.00

9622649 Jiles Rapidly quenched metallic glasses such as Iron-Born-Silicon (Fe-B-
Si) have found applications as soft magnetic core materials in electrical
transformers and motors due to their intrinsic low energy losses under a wide
spectrum of frequencies. Specifically, they exhibit low dc hysteresis loss and
low classical loss (associated with low thermal conductivity). The current
research aims to reduce the excess eddy current portion of the total core
losses. The approach is to modify the magnetic domain structure on the surface
by using laser scribing. Thermal modeling will be attempted taking into account
the rough surface and low thermal diffusivity of metallic glasses. The combined
modeling and experimentation is likely to lead to a better understanding of
laser interaction with metallic glasses. If the hypothesis to reduce eddy
current losses by laser scribing is proven, it will be an attractive
manufacturing process for the transformer core manufacturer who is actively
participating in this research providing both monetary and researcher's time.
Electric power conversion inefficiencies in transformers and motors is a major
drain of energy running into billions of dollars. A major source of waste lies
in the energy loss of magnetic cores in these devices. This research offers an
innovative manufacturing process step which has the potential to reduce the
energy loss in a new class of magnetic materials. The US manufacturers of
electric transformers and motors could gain a major competitive lead. In fact,
one manufacturer has given substantial commitment. In addition this
collaborative industry/university research is likely to facilitate, an exchange
of ideas between academe and industry and enhance the educational process of
students.