* 9622798
* Mathematical Sciences: Models and Linearization for         Freeness in Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Alexandru Nica, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 46,400.00

9622798 Alexandru Nica The problems addressed by the project are in free
probability theory - a line of research in operator algebras which parallels
aspects of classical probability, in a context where tensor products are
replaced by free products, and independent random variables are replaced by free
random variables. The proposed research reflects the interplay between two main
directions in the development of the theory, namely that: while (on one hand)
studying the parallelism between freeness and independence is of intrinsic
interest, we have (on the other hand) that free probability is a powerful tool
for attacking hard problems on free products of operator algebras. The main
object of study, called the R-transform, is a free non-commutative analog for
the logarithm of the Fourier transform of a (multivariable) probability
distribution. In recent work, the multivariable R-transfopm has emerged as an
elegant and at the same time far-reaching instrument in the study of the
freeness phenomenon; we present problems that naturally come in the continuation
of this promising direction of research. Problems related to a remarkable
interpolation, depending on a parameter q in 0,1 , between the R-transform and
its commutative counterpart; and problems related to an asymptotic model for
freeness, based on random permutations, are also discussed. The notion of random
variable, and the concept of independence for random variables are basic
elements in the language of probability theory. Random variables can be added
and multiplied together, and built in their definition is the fact that the
product of two random variables f and g does not depend on the order in which
they are considered (always fg = gf). In the field of free probability, the
latter assumption is dropped, and the concept of independence is replaced by the
one of freeness - a condition originally inspired from the study of certain
algebras associated to free groups. While free pr obability was started in the
80's as part of an effort to approach some long-standing problems in operator
algebras, it is at present clear that we have to do with a fertile mathematical
theory, connected to other branches of mathematics and science; recent
contributions in the field were made, e.g., by quantum physicists and algebraic
combinatorists. The present project is concerned with topics from free harmonic
analysis - the `free analog' for the Fourier analysis methods classically used
in the study of random variables.