* 9622457
* Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Jon Kraus, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2000
* USD 68,400.00

DMS-9622457 Kraus SUNY @ Buffalo For discrete groups G, there is a close
connection between approximation properties of the group von Neumann algebra
VN(G) and properties of G. In particular, VN(G) is injective if and only if G is
amenable. The proposer and Uffe Haagerup have defined a property for locally
compact groups (called the approximation property, or AP) which is weaker than
amenability, and have shown that a discrete group G has the AP if and only if
VN(G) has the weak* operator approximation property (the weak* OAP). The weak*
OAP is a normal matricial version (for dual operator spaces) of the
approximation property for Banach spaces. A dual operator space has the weak*
OAP if and only if it satisfies the slice map property for arbitrary weak*
closed subspaces of B(H), and so von Neumann algebras with the weak* OAP behave
well with respect to taking tensor products with such subspaces. Notions of
amenabilty have been defined for homogeneous spaces, correspondences and Kac
algebras. The proposer has defined appropriate versions of the AP in each of
these cases and during this project will investigate a number of problems
concerning the weak* OAP and approximation properties for groups, homogeneous
spaces, correspondences and Kac algebras. Von Neumann algebras are an important
tool in the study of quantum mechanics and quantum field theory, and also play
an important role in the study of group representations (which themselves are
used in quantum physics). The von Neumann algebras that arise in these
applications are usually infinite dimensional spaces. One way of obtaining
information about the structure and properties of such infinite dimensional
objects is to approximate them in an appropriate way by finite dimensional
objects. The approximation properties of von Neumann algebras that will be
investigated in this project are of this type. The weakest (least restrictive)
such property is weak enough that it is satisfied by a large class of von
Neumann algebras, but strong enough that knowing it is valid gives us important
information about the von Neumann algebra. In the case of discrete groups, much
is known about the connection between properties of the groups and approximation
properties of the associated von Neumann algebras. The theory of Kac algebras
can be viewed as a generalization of the theory of group representations. One of
the goals of this project is to investigate to what extent the results
concerning approximation properties for groups can be extended to the more
general setting of Kac algebras.