* 9623984
* Mathematical Sciences:  Geometric & Probabilistic Aspects   of Convexity and Functional Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Stanislaw Szarek, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2001
* USD 75,088.00

NSF PROPOSAL # 9623984 Dr. Stanislaw J. Szarek Case Western Reserve University
ABSTRACT The project involves continued research on the geometric, probabilistic
and combinatorial aspects of functional analysis and convexity theory. Many of
the problems considered are expressed in the language of the asymptotic theory
of finite dimensional normed spaces or, what is essentially equivalent, as
"isomorphic" statements about high dimensional convex bodies. Some questions
have motivation in the theory of operator algebras, mathematical physics,
operations research, computer science or probability and statistics. Typical
research topics include: entropy of linear operators, existence of nontrivial
linear operators on general Banach spaces, norms of random matrices, some
problems in the "local" operator theory, Gaussian correlation of convex sets,
balancing vectors in normed spaces and other questions on the border of
probability, combinatorics and convexity. On an elementary level, analysis is a
study of "functions", or relationships, between quantities and the parameters on
which they depend. As it happens, very many naturally appearing relationships
are linear or at least convex. Thus a good understanding of convex functions
(and consequently of convex sets) is a prerequisite for understanding those
relationships. Depending on whether the set of parameters is finite or infinite
(the latter may also be an "idealization" of "very large"; real life problems
usually do depend on very many parameters), we are dealing with either finite
dimensional convexity or infinite dimensional functional analysis. The
"isomorphic" asymptotic theory was, over the last twenty years or so, quite
successful in identifying and exploiting "approximate" symmetries of various
problems (involving high dimensional convex sets) that could not be analyzed
with earlier more "rigid" methods. One example of a specific link to
applications is a recent advance (in computer science) in the area of efficient
computation of volume of high dimensional convex sets, which utilized results
and ideas from the asymptotic theory.