* 9623350
* Dissertation Research:  The Ecological Genetics of Autogamy in Arenaria uniflora
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* Donald Stratton, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 04/30/1998
* USD 3,420.00

9623350 Stratton Plant breeding systems act as filters on the quantity and
quality of individual reproduction and influence population genetic structure,
demography, and ecology. In turn, both ecological factors and genetic
interactions shape the evolution of plant breeding systems. Previous analyses of
plant mating system evolution have concentrated on the role of genetic factors
and little is known about the role of pollination ecology in mating system
evolution. This project fills that gap with experimental comparisons of the
reproductive success of selfing and outcrossing plants. Using the polymorphic
granite outcrop endemic Arenaria uniflora as a model system, three integrated
experiments will be conducted. First the analysis of inbreeding depression in
selfing and outcrossing individuals will indicate forces opposing the spread of
self-fertile genotypes. Second, paternity analysis using marker alleles will
measure the loss of male reproductive success associated with selfing. Third,
the value of automatic selfing in conferring reproductive assurance under
conditions of pollinator scarcity will be tested experimentally. Findings will
provide an integrated analysis of the costs and benefits of each mating strategy
under different ecological conditions. This information will be of value in
predicting population responses to changes in pollinator abundances under
habitat fragmentation or other forms of environmental degradation.