* 9623276
* Mathematical Sciences: Mass Transfer, Heat Flows with       Constraints, Moving and Free Boundaries
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Mikhail Feldman, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 79,700.00

Abstract Feldman The project is devoted to the study of variational problems
with constraints, moving and free boundaries. The first area of the research is
the study of evolution problems with pointwise gradient constraints, related to
Monge-Kantorovich mass transfer problem. One such evolution problem arises as a
model of collapsing sandpiles, and there are other examples, including models of
compression molding and type II superconductivity. In the joint work of the
proposer with L.C.Evans and R.F.Gariepy, the collapsing sandpiles model was
related to a geometric evolution problem where the velocity of a moving surface
at each point is determined by both local and nonlocal geometry of the surface.
This geometric problem possesses some "parabolicity" properties of nonlocal
nature. The main idea of the proposed research is to construct viscosity
solutions of the geometric evolution problem, to study regularity and asymptotic
properties of these solutions, and to study connections of the geometric
evolution problem with the original variational evolution problem. The second
area of the research is the study of another class of variational evolution
problems with constraints - heat flows for harmonic maps. In the previous work
the proposer has proved partial regularity for heat flows into spheres
satisfying some stability condition - a variational condition of entropy type.
The next steps include the study of existence and uniqueness of such heat flows,
and the study of heat flows into compact manifolds other then sphere. The third
area of research is to try to extend some of celebrated results of L.Caffarelli
on regularity of free boundaries in two-phase problems for linear equations to
some classes of nonlinear elliptic equations. In previous work the proposer
proved regularity for anisotropic two-phase problem with Lipschitz free
boundary, i.e., in the case when the solutions satisfy two different linear
elliptic equations in two subregions separated by free boundary. Many problems
in science and engineering lead naturally to mathematical models that have the
form of variational evolution problems with constraints. One class of such
problems, the evolution problems with pointwise gradient constraints, includes
models of collapsing sandpiles, of compression molding, of type II
superconductivity. Qualitative properties of solutions of evolution problems are
of interest by itself and with respect to possible applications. Typical
properties of variational evolution problems with pointwise gradient constraints
include formation of moving free boundaries. The first area of the proposed
research is the study of these moving boundaries by relating them to a geometric
evolution problem for a moving surface and studying solutions of this geometric
problem. Free boundary problems arise also in the static case. In this case the
free boundaries can be viewed as a model of the interface between two different
substances. The second area of the research is the study of regularity
(smoothness) properties of such boundaries for some nonlinear static problems.
Another class of variational evolution problems with constraints is heat flows
for harmonic maps. Such problems arise in geometry and their solutions have
interesting properties. These heat flows represent one of the models of liquid
crystals. The third area of the research is the study of existence and
uniqueness of heat flows for harmonic maps of certain classes.