* 9623827
* The Physics of Epitaxial Crystal Growth:  A Quantitative    X-ray Scattering Study
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2002
* Paul Miceli, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 267,758.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9623827 Miceli The physical behavior of epitaxial
crystal growth will be studied through experiments which critically test current
theoretical predictions as well as motivate new ideas for fundamental inquiry.
Using x-ray scattering instrumentation located at the University of Missouri and
at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) at Brookhaven National
Laboratory, the research quantitatively investigates height f1uctuations of a
growing crystal surface which arise intrinsically from the growth process, as
well as induced extrinsically from extended crystalline defects. The scientific
program includes: (1) New experiments which utilize the unique combination of
surface and bulk sensitivity of x-rays to address the origin of misfit
dislocation induced surface roughness, (2) Extensive in situ experiments on
metals to test theories of kinetic roughening, and (3) Novel experiments to
investigate transient growth dynamics. The information from these experiments
will provide insight on how atoms move and assemble on the surface, thereby
leading to a better understanding of the growth dynamics. The project is
fundamental in nature, but the results will be relevant to a range
technologically important disciplines. %%% The object of this research is the
investigation, at atomic scale, of fundamental physical processes that are
involved in the growth of thin films. This is important because thin films are
used in a myriad of technological applications; e. g. semiconductor devices,
adhesives, catalysts and surface coatings. All of these applications rely on the
ability to control the surface morphology of the films. The project will use
unique x-ray scattering facilities at the University of Missouri and at the
Brookhaven National Laboratory National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS). I n
particular, the extremely intense synchrotron x-ray radiation at the NSLS will
allow the study of the temporal evolution of a rough surface film. The
information from these experiments will provide insight on how atoms move and
assemble on the surface, thereby leading to a better understanding of the growth
dynamics. The project is fundamental in nature, but the results will be relevant
to a range technologically important disciplines. ***