* 9623044
* Mathematical Sciences:  Operads, Representation Theory and  Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Mikhail Kapranov, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 05/31/2000
* USD 73,500.00

Kapranov proposes to extend the prior study of moduli spaces of stable curves
by means of operads and their duality to more sophisticated moduli spaces of
stable maps and Fulton-McPherson compactified configuration spaces. He proposes
to relate two branches of representation theory which previously were not
connected: theory of automorphic representations and theory of affine quantum
groups, by looking at Eisenstein series and their functional equations from a
new point of view. He also proposes to study Hecke operators on vector bundles
on algebraic surfaces over finite fields, in order to establish an analog of the
geometric Langlands correspondence, a fundamental principle in the theory of
vector bundles on curves. Working with V. Ginzburg, Kapranov proposes to study
natural analogs of Hecke algebras for matrix groups over 2-dimensional local
fields like the field of power series in two variables over a finite field. In
addition, Kapranov proposes to generalize the theory of Drinfeld modules to
algebraic varieties of arbitrary dimension, again with the aim of finding the
correct analog of the Langlands correspondence. He also proposes to look for a
generalization of the theory of character sheaves to the case of $p$-adic
fields, which would involve stacks. This research is in the fields of algebraic
geometry and representation theory. Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest
branches of mathematics which initially studied plane geometric images defined
by simple equations but in last few decades has developed very extensively,
finding applications not only inside mathematics but in such diverse fields as
particle physics (geometry of microscopic degrees of freedom), car design (use
of algebraic surfaces to develop new aesthetically appealing shapes), robotics,
theoretical computer science and others. In particular, algebraic geometry over
finite fields (to which a large part of this proposal is devoted) has found
applications in constructing error-correcting codes, optimal net works and in
several other important problems related to communications and information
transmission.