* 9623649
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Invasion of Aquatic Habitats as an Evolutionary Process
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Bruce Frost, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 05/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

This project uses a powerful approach for studying species invasion by combining
methods of evolutionary genetics and physiological ecology. The focus is on the
invasion of freshwater habitats by a marine and estuarine planktonic copepod,
Eurytemora affinis. Two alternative hypotheses could account for its invasion of
freshwater habitats. Freshwater colonizations have been (A) multiple independent
events, or (B) rare events followed by dispersal among similar habitats. The
goals of this project are (1) to test these hypotheses by reconstructing the
history of colonization, (2) to determine changes in physiological traits during
habitat transitions, and (3) to determine whether habitat transitions occur
through genetic adaptation or acclimation. The history and geographic pathway of
colonization will be determined by constructing a phylogeny of 12 populations of
copepods from different salinities using DNA sequences from two genes. Breadth
of salinity tolerance will be determined for 6 populations, then mapped onto the
phylogeny to determine how physiological traits change during habitat
transitions. Response to changes in salinity will be measured to determine
whether habitat transitions involve genetic adaptation of populations or
individual acclimation. The introduction of exotic species into aquatic habitats
is an issue of major environmental concern. This research will reveal important
processes involved in habitat transitions, and contribute to our understanding
of habitat invasions, local adaptation, as well as intraspecific genetic and
physiological diversity.