* 9623477
* Tunneling and Transport in Ordered and Disordered           Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Allen Goldman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/1999
* USD 390,000.00

9623477 Goldman The study of two dimensional superconducting films allows access
to several important paradigms in contemporary Condensed Matter Physics
including the superconductor-insulator transition, the quantum tunneling of
vortices, and other quantum properties of Abrikosov vortices. The hallmark of
the work is the extension of the parameter space to very low temperatures and
very high magnetic fields. The focus of work on the superconductor-insulator
transition will be on resolving whether the transition is governed by a variant
of the Boson- Hubbard model or, is a consequence of decreased screening by
disorder of the repulsive electron-electron interaction. The work on quantum
tunneling of vortices should reveal new features of the dynamics of vortices, in
particular the extent to which their behavior can be fundamentally quantum
mechanical. The other investigations of quantum properties of vortices,
including studies of quantum vortex lattice melting, superconducting analogs of
the quantum Hall effect, and vortex shot noise will contribute to a coherent
picture of electron transport and superconductivity in two dimensions. %%% The
study of two dimensional superconductors impacts important paradigms in
contemporary Condensed Matter Physics including the superconductor-insulator
transition, and the quantum tunneling of vortices, an important dynamical
property of Abrikosov vortices. The investigation of model problems and model
systems in two dimensions, in addition to their intrinsic scientific interest,
will contribute to our knowledge of the mechanism of high-Tc superconductivity,
and to our understanding of vortex dynamics. The dynamics of vortices, which
exist in superconductors in magnetic fields, are of interest because vortex
motion causes dissipation. The promise of superconductivity to bring about
changes in electrical and electronic technology is connect ed with reduced
dissipation. The understanding of the mechanism of high temperature
superconductivity will aid in the search for new materials. The understanding of
the fundamental limits on performance resulting from vortex motion will
contribute to our understanding of factors which could limit the technological
usefulness of superconductors. ***