* 9623476
* Dissertation Research: Systematics of Calopogon and the     Arethuseae (Orchidaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Robert Jansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 05/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9623476 JANSEN This award will provide funds for materials and supplies as well
as travel funds for obtaining material from Malaysia and the western Pacific and
some DNA sequencing effort in the laboratory of Dr. Mark Chase at Kew Gardens,
UK. This support will enhance the dissertation of Douglas H. Goldman who is a
graduate student with Dr. Robert Jansen at University of Texas, Austin. The
student's dissertation project has two elements 1) revision of the North
American orchid genus Calopogon, utilizing molecular and morphological data sets
and including population level analyses across the geographic range of species,
especially to assess the status of the species C. oklahomensis, which is
believed to be of hybrid origin and 2) molecular phylogenetic analysis of the
tribe Arethuseae to which Calopogon belongs and which is a basal lineage
critical to understanding relationships in the family Orchidaceae. This award
will provide support for a graduate student pursuing studies of relationships in
the orchid plant family. These plants are world-wide in distribution but many
have restricted habitats and are threatened or endangered. Some are of major
economic importance as nursery cultivars but their very beauty and popularity
has threatened other rare species. Support for the training of graduate students
in modern systematic and population biology methodologies is important for
maintaining the workforce of scientists capable of addressing the questions and
issues of biodiversity which are of increasing global concern.