* 9623385
* CAREER:  Assessment and Control of Motor Vehicle Emissions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Robert Harley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 08/31/2001
* USD 315,000.00

9623385 Harley Because motor vehicles are the largest contributor to air
pollution in most U.S. cities, improved control equipment is required on all new
cars and trucks, and reformulated clean- burning fuels are required for older
vehicles in order to achieve immediate emission reductions. To address motor
vehicle emission problems, the research will: (1) develop new, accurate
inventories of motor vehicle emissions; (2) study the causes of excess vehicle
emissions; (3) develop and use mathematical models to study the formation of
photochemical air pollution; and (4) determine the effects of reformulated
gasoline on ambient concentrations of ozone and other air pollutants. An
alternate approach to calculating emissions will be developed using infrared
remote sensing measurements of emissions from thousands of in-use vehicles.
Measurements of vehicle emissions under various operating conditions will be
used to assess the robustness of emission control systems. In addition, the
frequency of emission control system failures will be studied as a function of
vehicle age. The air quality impacts of various technological approaches to
controlling vehicle emissions will then be compared. An Eulerian photochemical
air quality model will be developed to assess the impact of motor vehicle
emissions on ozone. The chemical mechanism in the air quality model will be
extended to include the reactions of relevant oxygenated compounds such as
methyl-butyl ether (NME) which are required in reformulated gasoline.
Performance of the air quality model will be verified using measurements from
historical air pollution episodes in the San Francisco air basin. The air
quality model will then be used to predict changes in ozone formation due to use
of reformulated gasoline. Novel approaches to control of vehicle emissions will
be assessed and compared. The proposed educational plan has the following
objectives: (1) to develop and teach new environmental engineering lecture
courses; (2) to develop and test new experiments to be included in a new
environmental engineering lab class; and (3) to encourage minority students in
local schools to apply to college-level science and engineering programs.