* 9623479
* Dissertation Research:  Does Selection on Mating Characters Facilitate Adaptation in a Laboratory Population of         Drosophila Melanogaster
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* William Rice, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 05/31/1999
* USD 8,688.00

9623479 Rice The Dissertation Research funded by this award will test basic
theory on adaptive evolution. Natural selection can be divided into two
components - sexual selection (competition by males to fertilize eggs) and non-
sexual selection (survival of both sexes and egg production by females). Theory
predicts that these two forms of selection can be either reinforcing or
antagonistic. If the latter case is common, sexual selection will slow a
population's adaptation to a changing environment. Research funded by this award
will establish how these two forms of natural selection interact in nature. To
do this, a laboratory population of Drosophila melanogaster will be challenged
with a new environmental factor, heat stress. The rate of adaptation by the
population to the new environment will then be determined with and without
sexual selection imposed, providing a direct measure of the regime under which
adaptation accrues most rapidly. The relationship between sexual selection and
non-sexual selection is of practical concern in all breeding enterprises
involving animals or plants (e.g. agriculture, zoological parks, and
conservation biology). This research will also shed light on how fast can
populations adapt to thermally changing environments. Findings will provide
practical information for predicting the ability of insect populations to
respond to a protracted and substantial increase in temperature, as anticipated
under global climate change.