* 9623970
* Dissertation Research:  Mendel's First Law of Segregation   Revisited:  Variation in Chromosome Transmission Through    Female Meiosis in Drosophila Melanogaster
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1999
* Charles Langley, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 04/30/1999
* USD 10,250.00

9623970 Langley Meiosis is the biological process in which a diploid organism
produces haploid gametes (i.e. eggs or sperm). It is traditionally assumed that
each chromosome of a given homologous pair has an equal probability of being
transmitted into a gamete. Violations of this assumption in which certain
chromosomes are transmitted more or less frequently are referred to as
segregation distortion. Examples of segregation distortion are found in a wide
variety of organisms and can profoundly influence the dynamics, levels and
patterns of genetic variation in natural populations. Genes whose function is to
ensure chromosome transmission through meiosis would seem to be ideal candidates
to exhibit segregation distortion. Yet, for a variety of reasons, the study of
this class of genetic loci has been neglected by population geneticists. The
research funded by this award takes advantage of recent advances in the
understanding of the genes and the mechanisms of meiosis in the model organism,
Drosophila melanogaster, to address this the gap in our fundamental
understanding of segregation distortion. In this project, variation in the
fidelity of chromosome transmission through female meiosis for will be assessed
for fifty African X chromosomes. This experiment is designed to detect
deviations from the assumption of equal probability of transmission into
gametes. A series of X-linked genes which act during meiosis will then be
surveyed. Specific polymorphisms detected during this survey will be correlated
with the observed variation in chromosome transmission. Finally, the effects of
telomeres, centromeres and polymorphic candidate loci on a chromosome's
"transmission phenotype" will be directly measured through a series of genetic
assays. The mechanisms of segregation distortion revealed in this work are
important to applied as well as theoretical genetics, impacting genetic
engineering, gene therapy, and breeding programs to improve plant and animal
resources.