* 9623359
* CPMSA: "Partnerships for Access and Student Success (PASS)"
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2002
* Annette Saturnelli, Newburgh City School District
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 09/30/2002
* USD 3,400,000.00

The goals and objectives of the Newburgh (NY) Enlarged City School District's
proposal are aligned with National Science Foundation's goals and objectives for
the Comprehensive Partnership for Minority Student Achievement (CPMSA). A
systemic approach K-12 has been designed by the school district and its partners
to improve the quality and quantity of science and mathematics education
received by minority students; to increase the number of minority students
enrolling in and successfully completing higher level precollege science,
engineering and math courses; and to increase the number of students who go on
to pursue undergraduate studies in science, math, engineering, and technology
(SMET), especially minority students who are significantly underrepresented in
these fields. The Board of Education has unanimously adopted a resolution that
embraces the CPMSA mission, promotes the philosophy for science and math as
defined in the Goals 2000 Educate America Act, and commits existing resources to
achieve these goals within the next five years and to sustain these efforts
thereafter. the framework for the school district's model for systemic reform
consists of four essential characteristics: core elements, supporting
mechanisms, connecting activities, and transitional experiences for students,
teachers, and parents. These will be delivered through three coordinated and
integrated systems which function year round: The SMET Student Academy; The
Teacher Institute; and The Parent Community Center. These entities will provide
multiple pathways to attain the goal orientation needed for success in school,
at work, and in life. To excite, encourage, enlist and meet the needs of
student, a series of core math and science Readiness and Preparedness Courses,
as well as a variety of enrichment opportunities will permeate the system.
Programs such as Dial-a- Teacher, Homework Hotline, Face-to-Face Tutoring,
project Adventure, Young Saturdays, Study Skills courses, SAT/ACT Pre p courses,
College Saturdays and Weekends will offer students continuous support.
Transitional experiences will be provided for student s at three levels: SMET
Summer Camps, modeled after our 1995 NSF-funded Summer Science Camp, will
provide transitional experiences at two levels, from elementary to middle and
from middle to high school; a College Bridge program will help extend the
pipeline from high school to college. A critical component of each transitional
experience is the connection it will make to the SMET industries through field
trips, shadowing, mentoring, and internship opportunities. The primary goal of
the Teacher Institute is to develop and strengthen the capacity of teachers for
teaching SMET courses in a multicultural setting an to alter the way that
teaching, learning, and assessment take place through staff development courses
based upon the latest educational research and taught under the leadership of
the faculty at New York University. A unique aspect of the Teacher Institute
will be the SMET Fellows Program, a 4-6 week summer internship. Parents will be
actively engaged in the Parent Community Center. Satellite locations,
strategically located throughout the city, will welcome parents. The programs
will empower parents to become more active partners in the education of their
children. By putting educational research and theory into practice, this
proposed CPMSA will reduce and ultimately resolve the problem of
underrepresentation in our district and has the potential to in other districts
that are also experiencing a high degree of underrepresentation of minority
students in higher level SMET courses. ***