* 9623137
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical and Numerical Problems  in Material Sciences and Fluid Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Weinan E, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 65,999.00

9623137 E The proposed work is the initial phase of PI'slong term project on
``Complex Materials and Complex Fluids''. The plan is to explore and develop
ideas from non-equilibrium thermodynamics, advanced numerical techniques,
asymptotics and rigorous mathematical analysis for prototypical problems, to
reach a solid, coherent and practical level of understanding for the dynamical
issues in polymeric liquids, high temperature superconductors, etc. PI's work
will be carried out in close collaboration with chemists and experimental
physicists. In this initial phase, PI proposes to study the following problems.
(1). Dynamics and morphology of phase separation involving polymers. The
emphasis is on understanding the interplay between isotropic molecular
interaction which drives the phase separation, and the anisotropic molecular
interaction which gives rise to orientational order, as well as phase separation
driven by polymerization. (2). Geometric defects of smectic liquid crystals.
(3). Efficient and accurate numerical methods for complex flows.This includes
direct simulation of high Reynolds number turbulent flows, turbulence models and
polymeric liquids such as liquid crystals. The emphasis will be on reliable,
practical and parallelizable methods which can be used immediately to enhance
progress on other fronts. %%% Many areas of technology calls for the
manufacturing of microcellular foams and composite materials out of polymer
solutions. The most promising candidate for the next generation of flat panel
display devices are made by chemically driven phase separation processes in a
liquid crystal-prepolymer solution. While a vast amount of experimental results
have been accumulated, both for flexible and rigid polymers, the dynamics of
these processes and the implication to morphology is very poorly understood.
Theoretical understanding is hindered by the extreme complexity of these
problems. The current proposal is a coordinat ed effort between applied
mathematicians, chemists and physists to tackle this problem. A key component of
this proposal is the numerical simulation of these processes using state-of-the-
art numerical methods and computers. The fact that polymers are often large and
non-uniform in their sizes makes this problem fundamentally different from the
phase separation of ordinary binary liquids. ***