* 9623971
* Career:  Adaptation and Learning in Distributed Systems     Using Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Snehasis Mukhopadhyay, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/2001
* USD 232,200.00

9623971 Mukhopadhyay Distributed information-sharing computer networks and
automotive systems are two examples of an increasing number of applications
areas in engineering and computing systems which require collaborative
interaction between physically distributed decision-makers and controllers. Such
distributed applications frequently give rise to nonlinear distributed decision
and control problems in the presence of uncertainties such as the effects of the
local decisions on the over-all objective and incomplete system state
information. Artificial neural networks in the past have proven effective in
adaptive realization of nonlinear decision-making and control rules. In order to
apply them to distributes applications, new interconnection models as well as
adaptation and learning methods are needed to cope with distributed sources of
uncertainty such as those mentioned above. Utilizing results form large-scale
systems theory and current research on multiple neural networks, the proposed
research will investigate several closely-related distributed interconnection
models of neural networks. Constructive methods will be found to determine local
approximations to an overall performance function under different conditions on
the completeness of local measurements. These local performance functions, in
turn, will yield adaptive methods for realization of nonlinear decision and
control rules using neural networks. The model and methods derived will be
applied to problems in the application areas of information sharing over
computer networks and automotive control.