* 9623468
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Diversification of Spider Venoms:   Patterns and Correlates of Variation within Individuals and Across Populations and Phylogenies
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Wayne Maddison, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 03/31/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9623468 Maddison The role of spider venoms in predation strategies or defense
varies widely among spiders. The chemical composition of venoms also varies
among spider species and there is even evidence of variation within species. In
this study, we will use a comparative approach to test for the influence of
ecological demands on venom diversification. We will determine phylogenetic
levels at which variation in venoms exists, and then determine whether venom
changes are more pronounced in systems with behavioral and ecological
variability. First, we will assay nongenetic variation by determining the effect
on adult venom expression that results from rearing broodmates on different
diets. Second, we will determine amounts of variation below the species level in
three spider systems: (1) Agelenopsis aperta, a species with known behavioral
differences among populations; (2) Tegenaria agrestis, a species with evidence
of interpopulational differences in venom pharmacology; and (3) populations of
Hawaiian Tetragnatha that are similar ecologically but isolated on different
islands. Finally, we will determine venom differences above the species level
and investigate ecological and behavioral correlates of these changes in
Hawaiian Tetragnatha, a clade which has undergone a radiation involving a shift
in foraging behavior. The ability to predict venom characteristics, based on
phylogenetic position or ecological circumstances, would help to streamline the
ongoing search for novel toxins with useful physiological applications.