* 9623663
* Nanocomposites in Microstructures:  Optical Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Robert Armstrong, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 242,570.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9623663 Armstrong Dipolar resonances in small-particle
fractal aggregates may be localized in sub-wavelength spatial regions, leading
to enhanced local fields. Local field enhancements, in turn, result in the
enhancement of both linear and nonlinear optical processes. Doping the
aggregates into microcavities (e.g., liquid microdroplets) further increases the
local fields because of trapping by mirocavity resonant modes. Nanoparticle-
microcavity composites are expected to possess unique characteristics including
extremely large linear and nonlinear optical susceptibilities and strong
dependence of the fractal eigenmodes on the frequency and polarization of the
exciting laser and on the structure of the microcavity resonances.
Investigations of nanocomposite materials will provide insight into the effect
of morphology on spectral properties. The composites themselves have potential
applications to photonics, information technology, signal processing, aerosol
science, and remote sensing. This project will carry out experimental and
theoretical studies of a variety of optical effects including linear and
nonlinear Raman scattering, fluorescence and lasing, and other third-order
processes including degenerate four-wave mixing; other, more fundamental,
studies will include Anderson localization and cavity quantum electrodynamics.
%%% Aggregates of small particles are widely found in nature and may also be
fabricated in the laboratory. In the process of formation many of these
aggregates form frothy structures that possess so called "scale invariance",
that is, they have the same appearance when viewed over a wide range of sizes.
Such aggregates are examples of "fractals" and include commonly occurring,
materials such as smokes, foams, polymers, and DNA. A second constituent of the
composite is exempli fied by the simple raindrop (that is, a small, spherical
liquid droplet). The composite material itself, consisting of liquid droplets
containing fractal aggregate inclusions, may form naturally or may be the result
of a specific laboratory procedure. A number of recent experimental and
theoretical studies suggests that these composite materials possess unusual
optical properties, resulting from the fact that each constituent (i.e., the
fractal aggregate and the microdroplet) possess so-called electromagnetic
resonances. Electromagnetic resonances are responsible for many unusual optical
phenomena and generally lead to an amplification of the light emitted by the
resonant system. General theoretical arguments suggest that the composite
materials should exhibit enhanced resonance behavior, they have many potential
applications to such diverse fields as information technology, signal
processing, and atmospheric monitoring. In this project, the PIs will carry out
both experimental and theoretical investigations of these novel composite
materials. ***