* 9623251
* Mathematical Sciences: Real Variable Techniques in the      Approximation of Functions and Boundary Value Problems in   Nonsmooth Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Rodolfo Torres, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Osborn
* 06/30/1999
* USD 78,841.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-962325 PI: Torres Torres will continue with his work in
harmonic analysis and partial differential equations. This work combines wavelet
decompositions, singular integrals, and related real variable techniques. He
plans to study functions that can be characterized by their values on a discrete
set of points. A scale of discrete function spaces introduced by Torres in his
previous work quantifies the oscillatory properties of these functions. He will
now use these spaces to measure the errors in various linear and nonlinear
approximations of band-limited signals. He intends to provide optimal estimates
that cannot be attained with more classical techniques which only take into
account the size of the functions. Other technical aspects of this part of the
research relate to problems about operator theory and Besov spaces. In the
second part of his program, Torres will continue his work on transmission
problems in nonsmooth domains. For example, he will consider problems arising in
electromagnetism. He will use singular integrals and layer potentials
techniques. He also wants to combine his work with recent numerical analysis
techniques for the study of large systems of linear equations. Band-limited
signals are functions obtained as superposition of periodic waves whose
frequencies remain bounded. Most signals in applications are band-limited and
they can be recovered from the knowledge of their values on a discrete set of
instants in time. This is very important for practical purposes because, often,
a set of measured samples of a signal is all that is available from an
experiment or a detection procedure. Fourier and Harmonic Analysis techniques
codify, transform, and interpret the information and properties of a function or
signal in a quantified way. In particular, the discrete character of wavelets
and the techniques to be used make them amenable to numerical applications.
Error estimates in approximations and the processes to minimize them trans late
into results about compression of information. Other related problems are found
in tomography and medical imaging. Transmission problems arise in physical
situations in which an object interacts with the surrounding ambient space or
when an object is composed of several different materials. These problems
require the simultaneous solution, inside and outside of a region in space, of a
systems of differential equations that are coupled by conditions on the boundary
of the region. Effective tools for studying such problems in smooth domains are
available, but it is very important to further develop the theory so it can
adapted to domains that have corners or edges since they model realistic
situation in the applied sciences.