* 9623842
* Study of Interaction Between High Tc and Conventional       Superconductors by Tunneling Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Kwok-Wai Ng, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/2000
* USD 240,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9623842 Ng High temperature superconductors (HTS) have
many properties that differ from conventional superconductors, the anisotropic
energy gap notable among them. Josephson tunneling provides a phase sensitive
technique to examine the energy gap and some measurements in HTS have suggested
a zero energy gap along particular directions indicating a different, d-wave,
electron- electron pairing mechanism compared to s-wave pairing in conventional
superconductors. This research will investigate the transport properties across
a HTS and conventional superconductor interface. Three experiments are planned:
to determine how electrons are reflected by the interface; to study how
electrons or electron pairs behave after tunneling through the interface; and to
investigate induced superconductivity in a normal metal film in close proximity
to the HTS. Student and post doctoral fellow education will be supported and
will provide trained professionals in the superconductor and related
semiconductor industries. %%% High temperature superconductors (HTS) have
important fundamental properties that differ from conventional low temperature
superconductors. Current transport that is uniform with direction in
conventional superconductors varies with direction in crystalline HTS in
response to a fundamental anisotropy. The goal of this research is to
investigate the origin of these anisotropic properties. In particular, this
research will improve our understanding of how conventional low temperature
superconductors and normal metals can be connected to the HTS and how current
will be transported across that interface. Such knowledge is important for the
introduction and improvement of superconducting devices in the electronics,
telecommunication, and medical diagnostic industries. Professional edu cation
and training will be provided for students and a post doctoral fellow. ***