* 9623084
* SBIR PHASE II:  Coulombic Pairing of Dopants as a Novel     Approach to Produce High Conductivity p-type GaN
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Honnavalli Vydyanath, Avyd Devices
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1999
* USD 221,956.00

DMI-9623084 Vydyanathan This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
is aimed at optimizing the approach of coulombic pairing of dopants-feasibility
of which was demonstrated in Phase I-to produce high conductivity p-type GaN for
blue LEDs and lasers. Avyd Devices' approach to create shallow acceptors entails
the coulombic pairing of a double acceptor with a single donor with the
resulting pair acting as a single acceptor in its unpaired style. Specifically,
GaN crystals will be simultaneously doped with an element from group I and an
element from group IV or group Vl and then the crystals will be annealed under
well controlled thermodynamic conditions which would promote the association of
the group I element occupying gallium lattice sites, acting as a double acceptor
with the group IV or group VI element occupying gallium or nitrogen lattice site
acting as a single donor. The resulting pair would act as a single acceptor with
an expected energy level much closer to the valence band edge than that of
either the first or second level of the group I acceptors in their unpaid state.
Phase II research will focus on optimizing the coulombic pairing approach to
create acceptor levels at 50 meV above to value band edge in GaN-much shallower
than that Mg in GaN-and demonstrate prototype blue LEDs with superior
brightness; by reducing the acceptor level from 150 meV for Mg to less than 50
meV with coulombic pairs, an increase in ionization by a factor of 200 is
expected at room temperature. Creation of shallow acceptor levels at 50 meV
above the valence band edge would also open the possibility of realizing the
ultimate goal of blue lasers in the nitride system. High power blue light
emitting diodes (LEDs) for displays, traffic lights High power blue laser diodes
for optics data storage.