* 9623681
* RUI: Comprehensive Property Measurements and Structure      Relationships in Various Glass Systems over Extreme         Compositional Ranges
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Steven Feller, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Clive H. Perry
* 06/30/2000
* USD 191,740.00

9623681 Feller This project will involve at least fifteen Coe College
undergraduates in a number of projects in glass science. The purpose of the
research is to find relationships between the atomic-level structure of
important glasses, some never described before and some of commercial interest,
and the physical properties exhibited by these glasses. The short-range atomic
structure will be determined using various techniques, including magnetic
resonance, optical spectroscopy, and neutron scattering. The physical properties
to be related to the atomic arrangements include density, optical transmission,
softening temperature, and glass-forming limits. An important aspect of this
research, which will benefit and provide additional research training for the
undergraduate students concerned, is the experience they will gain in working as
part of an ongoing and large international collaboration established to study
these glasses. %%% This research will involve the determination of quantitative
structureproperty relationships in a wide variety of basic, novel, and
commercially interesting glass systems. The glass families to be studied include
alkali borates, alkali silicates, alkali borosilicates, alkali germanates, heavy
metal oxide glasses based on lead and bismuth oxides, alkali vanadates,
phosphates, chlorinated glasses and others. A number of complementary
spectroscopic techniques including novel nuclear magnetic resonance, dynamic
angle spinning, nuclear quadrupole resonance, elastic and inelastic neutron
scattering at the Rutherford-Appleton lab, infra-red, and Raman scattering will
be used. The physical properties to be examined include: density, glass
transition temperature, optical characterization, and glassformation limits. The
work is part of well-established world-wide collaborations. Another crucial
aspect of the project is the heavy reliance on unde rgraduates; at least fifteen
students from Coe College will be active as full members of this research
effort. ***