* 9623964
* Career: Development of Design Models for Integration of     Advanced Transistors Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1996,12/31/2000
* Joy Laskar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 12/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

9623964 Laskar The objective of this research is to systematic characterization
and integration of GaAs and InP transistors, the focusing upon the noise
characteristics and high frequency properties of the devices studied. The
anticipated results of this investigation include: (1) Greater understanding of
the physical properties that lead to superior noise and high frequency
performance and (2) Development of practical design models for the optimization
and implementation of critical circuit components. This research will lead to an
improved fundamental understanding of the role of coherent transport and noise
mechanisms in advanced transistor structures. Based on this effort, significant
impact is expected upon the development of robust device design models for
wireless applications between 1 and 100 Ghz. This research will provide improved
device small-signal and large-signal models, enhanced frequency dependent noise
models, development of CAD models in an industry standard format and practical
demonstration of the impact of high performance, wide bandwidth electrical
components. This work also has the potential for commercialization of: the
experimental techniques, enhanced CAD models, and improved integration
techniques for InP based transistor and circuit processes. Most importantly, the
proposed research tasks represent collaborative efforts with leading industrial
and academic laboratories which provide a direct path for commercialization and
manufacturing. My teaching plan during the CAREER award period addresses the
education of students from grade school to graduate school. I have a strong
interest in developing talented students and giving opportunities to students
who traditionally may have been left out of graduate studies in electrical
engineering. I would like to continue to involve students in meaningful design
project both in the classroom and the laboratory. I believe it is critical that
the students receive a "real-world" educational experience which should prove
most rewarding in their future careers. ***