* 9623962
* Vibrational Spectroscopy of Adsorbed Molecules Using Self-Assembling Tunnel Junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2002
* Glenn Agnolet, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/2002
* USD 255,235.00

9623962 Agnolet The goal of this project is to investigate the potential of a
new technique for studying the vibrational modes of molecules adsorbed on metal
surfaces. The method uses inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy (E3TS)
adapted to a new geometry, the "self-assembling" tunnel junction (SATJ). In a
SATJ, the oxide layer of the metal-insulator-metal tunnel junctions normally
used in IETS is replaced by an atornically-thin rare-gas film. By replacing the
oxide layer with a more inert one, any chemical or structural changes in the
adsorbed molecules illduced by the oxide may be avoided. Moreover, this
technique m~kes it possible to dilectly study the adsorption and reaction of
molecules on bare metal surfaces. 'rhe systernatics of SATJ's will he explored
to deter~I~ine the SATJ's ultimate sensitivity and applicability to surface
science. The vibrational spectra of C2H2, CO and NH3 on platinum and tungsten
surfaces will be studied to evaluate the sensitivity and resolution of these
junctions. This technique will be applied to studies of surface reactions on
metals and its applicability to studies of surface chernistry on planar surfaces
of semiconductors will be investigated. %%% The study of molecules and their
interactions on surfaces is important for the continued success of numerous
fields such as catalysis, corrosion and semiconductor processing. Although
scanning probe microscopes (SPM's) can provide real-space irnages of molecules
at surfaces with atomic resolution, very o*en these images must be supplemented
by other measurements in order to identify the molecules. Vibrational
spectroscopy is particularly well suited for chemical identification since the
characteristic molecular vibrational modes are a unique fimgerpnnt of the
molecule. In inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy (II~TS), the vibrational
modes are detected by their influence on the tunneling curr ent between two
metal surfaces separated by an oxide layer. The goal of this project is to adapt
IETS to a new experimental geometry in which the oxide layer is replaced by an
inert rare-gas film. 13y eliminating the oxide layer, the chemical changes or
structural modifications of the adsorbed molecules induced by the presence of
the oxide can be avoided. The systematics of this tcchnique will be examined to
determine its ultimate sensitivity and applicability to surface science. ***