* 9623336
* Dissertation Research: Mechanisms of Food Recruitment
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Thomas Seeley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1998
* USD 9,855.00

Abstract Proposal #9623336 P.I. Seeley and Nieh NSF Doctoral Dissertation
Improvement Grant IBN-9623336: Mechanisms of food recruitment in a stingless
bee, Melipona panamica. Large Social insect colonies require a considerable food
intake, yet usually live in competitive environments in which food sources are
widely dispersed. Faced with these constraints, many highly social insects in
the family Hymenoptera have evolved mechanisms to bring additional nestmates
(recruits) to a newly discovered feed source. The mechanisms employed by
stingless bees to communicate food location are diverse and fascinating, yet
poorly understood. Like many ants, stingless bees in several genera directly
follow foragers to feed source (piloting) or lay scent trails followed by
recruits. Like honey bees, stingless bees in the genus Melipona may use sounds
to communicate the distance to the food source. Recent data indicate that
Melipona panamica foragers can recruit to a specific distance, direction and
canopy level without using scent trails. Our goal is to understand how these
bees recruit to a specific 3 dimensional set of coordinates. Recruiting foragers
perform an intriguing sequence of spinning movements and pulsed sounds inside
the nest. Foragers also appear to communicate the food source s direction
outside the nest and deposit an unidentified pheromone at the food site for
local orientation. The actual mechanisms may offer a novel solution to the
problem of communicating food source location and will increase our
understanding of complex mechanisms of communication in insect societies.