* 9623832
* SBIR Phase II:  Molecular Engineering of a Biocatalyst for  the Destruction of Chlorinated Solvents
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Robert Steffan, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/1999
* USD 299,983.00

*** 9623832 Steffan This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is
aimed at producing cost-effective biological catalysts for use in the
bioremediation of chlorinated solvent-contaminated environments.
Toluene-4-monooxygenase (T4MO) is a multicomponent enzyme from Pseudomonas
mendocina KRl capable of oxidizing chlorinated solvents, which directly leads to
their bioremediation. During Phase I, several regions of amino acid sequence
were identified that control the reactivity of T4MO. In vitro mutagenic
techniques (either site-directed or random primed polymerase chain reaction)
were then used to alter the amino acid sequence in these regions. This effort
resulted in the creation of new, catalytically-active mutant isoforms of T4MO.
One of the most promising of these new isoforms has an increased oxidation rate
for halogenated hydrocarbons such as trichloroethylene (TCE) and chloroform,
while several other isoforms exhibit changes in substrate specificity relative
to the wild-type enzyme. These results demonstrate the soundness of the
project's strategy to improve the catalytic versatility of the T4MO enzyme via
genetic engineering. Both of these mutant isoforms may prove valuable in
commercial applications. The proposed Phase II project will evaluate the
commercial potential of these promising mutants in detail, including further
characterization of oxidation rates, substrate specificity ranges, product
distributions, catalyst stability, bioreactor scale-up parameters, and other
relevant structural and functional properties of these novel, engineered
biocatalysts. The biocatalysts developed during this project will be
commercially applicable to remediate many of the Nation's contaminated aquifers
and soils at both government and private sites. Initial application will be in
contained vapor-phase bioreactors, and future applications will include in situ
treatment. ***