* 9623509
* Mathematical Sciences:  Statistical Mechanics of Classical  and Quantum Lattice Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Thomas Kennedy, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 95,922.00

Abstract Kennedy 9623509 Three types of lattice systems will be studied -
quantum spin systems, weakly self-avoiding walks and real space renormalization
group transformations for classical spin systems. The primary quantum spin
system that we will study is the Heisenberg antiferromagnet on a ladder (2 sites
wide, infinitely many sites long). This particular model contains several
interesting quantum spin models as limiting cases and should help us understand
the relationship between the variety of exotic phases that occur in these
models. Weakly self-avoiding walks are nearest neighbor walks on the lattice
with the probability of a walk reduced according to the number of self
intersections it contains. The goal here is to develop real space
renormalization group transformations for the usual model and for a model in
which the energy penalty for a self intersection decays as the length of the
loop formed by the intersection raised to a power. This latter model has
interesting behavior even in one dimension. For classical lattice spin systems
like the Ising model, we will continue our study of real space renormalization
group transformations like majority rule. When this transformation is applied to
the one dimensional Ising model with a power law interaction, there is a nice
simplication when the power is close to one. This simplification should be the
start of a rigorous definition of the transformation. We will also work on
establishing the existence of the transformation in various two dimensional
models. This project is devoted to the mathematical study of several systems
that originate in physics - quantum spin systems, self avoiding walks and
classical spin systems. Quantum and classical spin systems are models for the
interactions of the spins of electrons in crystals. These systems contain a huge
number of spins, but typically each spin only interacts with nearby spins.
Nonetheless these microscopic local interactions can produce macroscopic
effects, e.g., magnetism and super conductivity. Self avoiding walks are models
for very long polymers. Again, there are a large number of basic units, but the
interaction is local - different sections of the polymer cannot occupy the same
location. This local interaction affects how the size of the polymer grows as
the number of basic units making up the polymer increases. A common motivation
for studying all of these models is to understand how simple local interactions
in a mathematical model with a very large number of degrees of freedom produce
global effects. One of the most remarkable discoveries in physics is that
certain properties of these global effects do not depend on the details of the
microscopic interactions. There are several quantifiable properties of the
macroscopic behavior know as critical exponents which are believed to be exactly
the same for a wide variety of microscopic interactions. One of the goals of
this project is to further our mathematical understanding of this
"universality."