* 9623390
* Mathematical Sciences: Further Development and Applications of the Method of Moving Planes
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Congming Li, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 68,565.00

Abstract 9623390 Li The PI will develop further the method of moving planes and
study the following three problems: the a priori estimates, classification, and
asymptotic analysis of solutions to some nonlinear differential equations; the
prescribed Gaussian (or scalar) curvature problem; and the existence,
uniqueness, and stability of travelling fronts. One focusing point of this
project is to classify singular solutions or sequences of blow-up solutions in
terms of when, where, how, and in what form do they occur. The method of moving
planes is the main tool to be developed and used for this and other purposes.
The analysis is particularly useful in the study of the last two problems where
the PI has already obtained some interesting results. Many aspects of natural
phenomena are related to each other by the natural laws governing them and very
often these laws are described by differential equations. To understand these
differential equations, it is necessary to classify all possible singular
solutions or sequences of blow-up solutions. The PI proposes to study the
prescribing curvature problem which involves some very challenging nonlinear
partial differential equations. In fact, this type of equations also appear in
many different fields of sciences. Also, singular solutions or sequences of
blow-up solutions are the major barriers to the complete understanding of these
equations. The PI will also study the existence, uniqueness, and stability of
travelling fronts which describe the long term behavior of solutions to
evolution type equations. He is mainly interested in problems arising from
population dynamics and from flame propagation and ignition in combustion
theory.