* 9623250
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Self-Similarity
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Robert Strichartz, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 03/31/1999
* USD 82,710.00

Abstract Strichartz 9623250 R. Strichartz will investigate problems related to
self-similar measures, analysis on fractals, and an experimental approach to
basic harmonic analysis estimates. The goal is to develop the theory of fractals
using the tools of harmonic analysis, in the process enriching both areas. By
making the central object a self-similar measure (a mass distribution that has
similar structure at all scales) rather than a set, it becomes plausible to
consider analytic questions, involving Fourier transforms, convolution
operators, etc., as well as purely geometric questions. Analysis of functions
defined on fractals (with respect to a self-similar measure) is an area of great
interest in recent years. It is now possible to define the analogs of Fourier
series and wavelet expansions for such functions. This project will extend this
theory and answer some basic questions about these expansions. Self-similiarity
is an idea that plays an important role in three areas of applied mathematics
that have received a great deal of attention in recent years: wavelets,
fractals, and quasicrystals. But the idea of self-similarity -- an object that
can be broken up into pieces, each of which looks like a scaled down version of
the whole -- can be investigated in a purely mathematical way that brings out
its connections not only with these applications but also older areas of
mathematics such as harmonic analysis. R. Strichartz has been in the forefront
of the development of these ideas, and in this project will continue this line
of investigation. The goal is to strengthen and enrich the mathematical
infrastructure that makes possible the rapid development of important
applications of mathematics.