* 9623747
* Dissertation Research: Race, Class, and Human Ecological    Factors in the Spatial Distribution of Manufacturing        Emissions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Kevin Leicht, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1998
* USD 6,905.00

9623747 Leicht A growing number of social movements, government officials, and
the media have claimed that disadvantaged communities are disproportionately
exposed to environmental pollution, yet there has been little empirical research
examining this claim or its importance for social stratification. This research
combines data from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's 1990 Toxics
Release Inventory (TRI) with Census data to examine the relationship between the
racial and economic composition of places and toxic air releases from
manufacturing. This project will compare results from a nationwide, county-level
analysis with census tract level analysis of selected communities that have
unusually high levels of manufacturing pollution. The project will use
Geographic Information Systems technology and spatial analysis techniques to
model the dispersion of toxic releases in a more sophisticated manner than used
in most studies of environmental justice and stratification. This research will
contribute significantly to the sociological understanding of how pollution from
manufacturing is distributed across social groups by (1) shedding light on
debates about the appropriate geographic units of analysis for environmental
justice research; (2) improving estimates of levels of toxic air pollution by
using GIS technology, and; (3) exploiting the spatial nature of geographic data
by testing observed relationships for the presence of spatial autocorrelation.
****