* 9623439
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Stochastic Adaptive       Control
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Tyrone Duncan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 222,000.00

9623439 Duncan A variety of problems of stochastic adaptive control will be
investigated in this project. Stochastic adaptive control is the control of an
incompletely known stochastic system. Typically to solve an adaptive control
problem it is necessary to identify the unknown parameters of the system and
simultaneously to construct a control based on an ergodic cost functional. The
stochastic systems to be considered include finite dimensional, linear and
nonlinear systems and infinite dimensional systems that include both linear and
semilinear partial differential equations. The control for the partial
differential equations can occur only on the boundary or at discrete points.
Some specific systems include stochastic models in the mathematics of finance
and in stochastic manufacturing processes. Since self-optimal adaptive controls
often cannot be determined or may not exist, the construction of almost optimal
adaptive controls will be continued. An important component of this study is the
computational investigations in adaptive control which includes the performance
of estimation algorithms and adaptive controls. Many important physical systems
are controlled. Typically a system is not completely known and often there are
perturbations or errors that can be naturally modeled by noise. The control of
an unknown system with noise is called stochastic adaptive control. This project
will investigate some stochastic adaptive control problems that have
applications to some important physical systems. The investigation includes both
theoretical and computational aspects.