* 9623009
* Mathematical Sciences: Subfactor Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Adrian Ocneanu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/1999
* USD 56,822.00

DMS-9623009 Adrian Ocneanu Pennsylvania State University The project "Operator
Algebras and Applications" is concerned with the study and classification of
connections (commuting squares) and subfactors. The main problem to be studied
is the question of existence of irreducible hyperfinite subfactors of arbitrary
Jones index larger than 4. Our previously developed techniques give a
reformulation of problem in terms of representations of an explicitly described
algebra, resulting in an easy construction of nonhyperfinite irreducible
subfactors associated to arbitrary graphs, as well as the full classification of
all commuting squares with one of the indices less than or equal to 4, natural
constructions of all subfactors of index less than 4 and a classification of all
the intermediate subfactors in their Jones towers. Unlike previous methods, the
proofs are very conceptual, use topological quantum field theory methods
developed by us previously and involve little computation. The problems can be
reformulated in terms of statistical mechanics and topological quantum field
theory, and thus would impact on these areas as well. The project "Operator
Algebras and Applications" is concerned with the development of mathematical
techniques for operator algebras and quantum field theory. The quest for the
unification of quantum mechanics and gravity, which is fundamental to an
understanding of the physical world, appears to require a substantial amount of
new mathematics. Our previous work constructed among others the mathematics of a
dictionary between operator algebras (which are connected to quantum mechanics)
and topology (which studies the shape of space, and is important in the study of
gravity). The project involves further developments of these structures,
together with the study of their symmetries, which are important since physical
laws are naturally expressed as symmetries. The techniques proposed have
applications in statistical mechanical m odels, involved in the study of the
structure of materials as well as in the mathematics of knot theory, which has
found use in the study of complex molecules such as DNA. The Japanese Ministry
of Education has designated the research area operator algebras and quantum
field theory one of the top 3 strategic research domains.