* 9623033
* Mathematical Sciences: Equilibria Instabilities and Waves   in Fluids and Plasmas
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Alexander Lipton, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/1999
* USD 57,274.00

9623033 Lipton The Principal Investigator (PI) will continue to study
equilibria, instabilities and waves in fluids and plasmas with the emphasis on
the comparative aspect of the problem. The PI is particularly interested in the
following topics: (a) stationary states of magnetized plasmas with flow and
their group-theoretical properties; (b) the stability and evolution of
elliptical self-gravitating fluid masses (the Riemann ellipsoids) with
applications to astrophysics; (c) the linear and nonlinear dynamics of fixed-
boundary ellipsoids containing fluid. The PI is going to use various analytical
techniques including the constrained minimization, `exact' Galerkin, group-
theoretical, and geometrical optics methods in conjunction with numerical
techniques such as the three-dimensional vortex method, large scale symbolic
manipulations, and visualization, in order to achieve these goals. Further
directions of attack include self-similar, time-dependent vortex rings, short
wavelength instabilities of unmagnetized and magnetized accretion discs, global
instabilities of collisionless gravitating systems,and spectral problems of
hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics. This research will advance current
knowledge of the behavior of both laboratory and astrophysical fluids and
plasmas. In particular, this research will contribute towards a better
understanding of the properties of nonlinear PDEs of mixed elliptic/hyperbolic
type describing symmetric stationary states of plasmas with flow; the stability
of Riemann ellipsoids and fluid- and plasma-filled bodies; the evolution of
nonaxisymmetric stars, and the validity of the fission theory of binary stars.
%%% The dynamics of fluids and plasmas is of great interest to mathematicians
and physicists alike. There are at least two reasons for this interest. First,
fluid and plasma motions play a fundamental role in nature and technology with
applications stretching from astrophysics, to oceanography, to weather predicti
on, to controlled thermonuclear fusion. Second, a very rich and sophisticated
mathematical apparatus is required in order to give an adequate description of
these motions. The equilibrium theory studies the structure and properties of
steady solutions of the nonlinear equations of fluid and plasma dynamics. These
equilibrium solutions represent special states which do not change in time when
left undisturbed. Usually it is rather difficult to describe equilibrium
solutions, however, it is still much easier then to describe the general
solutions. In addition, equilibrium solutions are the most interesting ones from
a practical point of view. The stability theory studies the impact of initially
small perturbations on a given steady fluid or plasma equilibrium. An
equilibrium is called stable and can occur in nature if perturbations do not
have a profound effect on its properties. An equilibrium is called unstable if
under the influence of perturbations it either evolves into a different
equilibrium, or loses its steady character altogether. Over a period of years
many classical stability problems were solved, however, several important
stability problems are still open. The wave theory studies the behavior of small
perturbations in the vicinity of stable plasma equilibria. The main issues
include the analysis of the oscillation frequencies, the structure of the
corresponding eigenfunctions, and the asymptotic behavior of perturbations in
time. The present research is aimed at advancing current understanding of
equilibria, instabilities and waves. It blends theoretical and symbolic methods
with high-performance computing and graphics. The outcome of this research will
have both theoretical and practical value. Among other things, it will help to
understand the dynamics of plasmas in the so-called tokamaks (installations
which are used for controlled thermonuclear fusion), and the stability of stars.
***