* 9623864
* Study of Building Material Emissions and Indoor Air Quality and Innovative Courses Dealing With Building Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Qingyan Chen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John Scalzi
* 06/30/2000
* USD 310,000.00

96233864 Chen The objective of the research is to develop: A suitable turbulence
model for accurately predicting room airflows; A detailed numerical method for
calculating the emissions from building materials; A simplified method of
determining material emissions for industrial use; A procedure to investigate
the impact of material emission on indoor air quality and building energy
consumption. The method used will be the computational-fluid-dynamics (CFD)
technique with a two-layer turbulence mode. The CFD code will be validated by
detailed flow and thermal measurements in a full- scale test chamber and by
emission data obtained from a small- scale and a full-scale test chamber of
stainless steel. The research will investigate material emission, indoor air
quality, thermal comfort and energy consumption of buildings simultaneously for
the first time. The results of this project will provide the basis for the
development or improvement of industrial standards for material testing for
obtaining reliable emission data. This will help building designers and owners
to select various types of building materials for better indoor air quality.
This education will strengthen the Building Technology Program at MIT. This
provides a unique opportunity for engineering and architectural students to
obtain experienced work with colleagues in the complementary field in the design
of healthy buildings with energy efficiency. The curriculums to be developed can
also be used by other schools and organizations. ***