* 9623007
* Aspects of Subelliptic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Francis Christ, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 193,629.00

Abstract Christ Research will be conducted on a variety of questions concerning
subelliptic partial differential equations and related topics. Among these are
(i) Local and global analytic hypoellipticity of sums of squares of vector
fields satisfying the bracket condition, and in the d-bar Neumann problem. (ii)
Global regularity in the d-bar Neumann problem and for the Bergman projection in
the infinitely differentiable (but not finite type) category. (iii)
Characterization of optimal exponents of Gevrey regularity for sums of squares
of vector fields. (iv) Local solvability of partial differential operators with
double characteristics and smooth coefficients. All these topics are related to
certain eigenvalue problems that arise from limits and/or reductions of partial
differential operators; key issues are whether eigenvalues exist, and the extent
to which the limiting problems control the original operators. The emphasis will
be on low-dimensional problems, and on those connected to complex analysis in
several variables and to harmonic analysis on Lie groups. Since Isaac Newton's
insight that the fundamental laws of nature should relate the rates at which
observed quantities change, rather than describe those quantities directly, most
basic physical laws have been formulated as partial differential equations. To
understand such equations and their solutions has thus become one of the
fundamental goals of mathematical research. Partial differential equations are
rarely solvable by explicit formulas, except in very symmetric situations. On
the other hand, in physical applications it is often useful to understand
certain qualitative features of solutions: whether any solution exists (which in
practice may mean that some situation is or is not physically viable), and what
kinds of singularities, if any, solutions can exhibit (shock waves, vortices,
and wave fronts are typical physical manifestations of mathematical
singularities). These issues can often be understand in situations where
formulas for the solutions cannot be constructed. However, partial differential
operators vary greatly in character, and each type must be investigated on its
own terms.