* 9623148
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Effects of Productivity on the      Biomass of Different Trophic Levels:  An Experimental Study in Microbial Microcosms
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* Peter Morin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 04/30/1998
* USD 4,397.00

9623148 Morin Food chain theories linking trophic structure (number and
composition of trophic levels) to productivity are important to understanding
the regulatory roles of these factors in ecological systems. Tests of these
theories also provide insight into the mechanisms of nutrient effects in natural
and enriched ecosystems. In this study, productivity and number of trophic
levels in the food chain will be experimentally manipulated in microcosms
containing protists and bacteria. One set of experiments will test predictions
of a food chain model by assembling linear, homogeneous food chains of one, two,
and three trophic levels and monitoring biomass within each trophic level over a
range of productivity generated by different nutrient conditions. A second set
of experiments will test the impact of added heterogeneity (multiple species or
types of species per trophic level) on trophic levels one and two. These
experiments will also test predictions concerning conditions under which
increased productivity causes an increase in the abundance or biomass of species
in the top trophic level. Adequate tests of food chain theories are lacking,
largely due to the difficulty of manipulating productivity over a range
sufficient to alter number of trophic levels. The experimental microcosms that
will be used in this study provide a unique opportunity to test food chain
theory experimentally.