* 9623526
* Dissertation Research:  The Origins and Distribution of     Breeding in the Honeyeaters (Passeriformes, Meliphagidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Stephen Pruett-Jones, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 06/30/1999
* USD 9,975.00

9623526 Pruett-Jones While most birds breed and raise young in pairs, a few
species do so in groups, with several non-breeding adults assisting in the
feeding and rearing of young produced by a single breeding pair. In essence,
these helpers forgo breeding themselves in order to assist the breeding pair. In
some instances, it appears that the helping birds are not related to the young
that they are rearing, making cooperative breeding an apparently altruistic
behavior, a situation that is rare in nature. Research funded by this award will
address the environmental factors that have promoted the evolution of this
unique behavior. Studies will focus on Australian songbirds of the Honeyeater
group. Honeyeaters are ideal for such research because they vary widely in diet,
habitat preferences and in the level of cooperation in their breeding efforts.
Comparative analyses of the relationships between environmental variables and
the occurrence of cooperative breeding within the Honeyeaters will be conducted.
These analyses will utilize a framework of evolutionary relationships between
the species, so that behavioral characteristics that have arisen in response to
similar environmental pressures can be distinguished from those arising from
shared ancestry. This study will be the first to rigorously test ecological
hypotheses for the evolution of cooperative breeding. Understanding the
ecological factors promoting cooperative breeding in songbirds has implications
for the conservation of avian biodiversity and for the design of managed
breeding programs (e.g., in Zoological Gardens) to preserve species that show
such complex social behaviors.