* 9623617
* CPMSA: "Paths Toward Significant Achievement (PTSA)"
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2002
* Yuki Mio, Paramount Unified School District
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 09/30/2002
* USD 1,800,000.00

The Problem: The Paramount Unified School District is a microcosm of the
population of Los Angeles County, California, with a 90% non-Asian minority
population. Fewer than 60 students out of a graduating class of 400 go on to a
four-year college and even fewer major in mathematics or science. The Solution:
Objectives. By June 2001, at the end of the fifth year of implementation,
Paramount High School will have had 1,450 of its seniors complete a college
preparatory sequence (currently only 57 per year do so). All of these graduates
will have successfully progressed through this project, Paths Toward Significant
Achievement (PTSA) to successfully complete precollege courses. Subsequent years
will show even higher numbers of students who pass through the PTSA pipeline.
Project Staff: The Principal Investigator, the Superintendent, and Project Co-
Directors have a strong background in successful educational project
implementation and will be responsible for the achievement of PTSA goals.
Participants/Activities: The Advisory Committee will advise participants in the
design and implementation of the long-term, systemic plan for K-12 to change the
way science and math are taught and learned in the District. Five hundred
teachers (90% of District teachers) will participate in curriculum
reform/enrichment and teacher enhancement activities; they will learn how to
motivate students to enjoy and want to learn science and math through staff
development, peer coaching, and collaboration activities. Teachers will become
more sensitive to the special problems of minorities, Limited-English proficient
students, and disabled students. They will help students set higher expectations
using strategies adapted from the successful program, Advancement Via Individual
Determination, AVID. All 14,352 students will experience science and math across
the curriculum, participate in student enrichment activities such as tutoring,
summer school and intersession courses, distance l earning, and keeping
electronic portfolios. The quality and quantity of science and math instruction
at the elementary school (K-8) will "hook" children in the active pursuit of
mathematical and scientific knowledge. At the ninth grade school, students will
link concrete learning acquired in elementary school with the more abstract
concepts and critical thinking demands of high school science and math. In high
school (10-12), students will attend rigorous science and math courses taught by
their high school teachers or college teachers within the context of their
career path through distance learning technology. At all levels they will be
grouped into smaller groups called "Families" as a safety net. Community
resources such as businesses, museums, colleges, and other community partners
will provide many types of hands-on experiences and programs, including distance
learning, to stimulate and enhance science and math education. Parents will
support children's math and science learning by promoting science and math
activities at home and in the community, leading family discussions, monitoring
homework, setting aside time for reading and study, limiting television viewing,
and encouraging their children to take advanced science and math courses. Cost
the total costs of program implementation and dissemination will be $1,750,000
for five years. Most of the costs will relate to participant collaboration time
in program and staff development as well as the development and implementation
of a significant array of hands-on student enrichment activities entailing some
equipment and supply expenditures. ***