* 9623079
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Partial        Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Sagun Chanillo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract Chanillo 9623079 The project consists of ten problems, all proposed in
the field of Partial Differential Equations(PDE). Eight of the proposed problems
pertain to questions arising in non-linear PDE, and two problems are proposed to
study over-determined systems of linear partial differential equations. The non-
linear problems all arise from various situations that arise in Physics and
Geometry. There is a stronger focus in the proposal on systems of PDE than on
single equations. The problems are selected in part because solutions to them
and understanding them require some understanding of classical Harmonic
analysis. Very often the behaviour of a physical system is described by partial
differential equations. Thus it is important to know how to solve these
equations. Very often there are many, many solution families and thus one may
really not know all the possible solutions. However if by some technique we can
cut down the list of solutions and show that only solutions of a certain
category are the the only possibility then the task of determining all solutions
become easier. For example if an equation exhibits symmetry one could try to
show that all solutions of the equation will have this symmetry manifest. This
will automatically rule out large classes of objects and focus our study on a
small class which will then tell us everything about the equation. Recently
there has been a great surge of interest in solutions of a type of equation
called the Ginzburg-Landau equation (GL equations), named after the Russian
physicists, Ginzburg and Landau who first used them in theories of
superconductivity in the 1950's. The GL equations also appear in string
theories. A major part of our project is devoted to classiying all the solutions
of the Ginzburg-Landau equation.