* 9623537
* Dissertation Research:  Coevolution in the                  Legume-Rhizobiaceae Symbiosis:  A Phylogenetic Test of      Codivergence
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* Margaret Riley, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 04/30/1998
* USD 9,167.00

9623537 Riley Members of a bacterial family Rhizobiaceae are known for their
nitrogen-fixing, symbiotic relationship with a variety of legume host plants.
The soil bacteria forms nodules on legume roots, where it fixes atmospheric
nitrogen into a form which the plant can use. The goal of this study is to test
for coevolution between these two symbiotic partners. Similarity of branching
patterns in phylogenies (or, phylogenetic congruence) is strong evidence of a
shared evolutionary history between symbionts, and will be used to test for
coevolution between the Rhizobeaceae and their legume hosts. Research will
determine whether genetic information enabling the bacteria to become a symbiont
of the plant, the sym region, has coevolved with genes of the host plant during
the process of host plant diversification. Findings will also illustrate the
contribution of geographic separation among spatially isolated strains to
genetic divergence in rhizobia and show whether nodulation genes have been
transferred between different rhizobial chromosomal lineages over the
evolutionary history of rhizobia. Understanding the evolution of associations
between Rhizobiaceae and legumes is important agriculturally. Legumes include
the important crop plants, soybeans, peas, and chickpeas. The nitrogen-fixing
symbiosis with rhizobia has also been exploited as a way to replenish soil with
fixed nitrogen without using chemical fertilizers. Understanding how
rhizobia/host relationships arose, the stability of the association throughout
the diversification of legumes, and the types of evolutionary pressures which
maintain the symbiosis in nature is critical if crop production and soil
fertility are to be improved by manipulating the symbiosis.