* 9623125
* RUI:  Mathematical Sciences:  Spherical Characters on P-adic Coset Spaces and the Relative Trace Formula
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Cary Rader, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2000
* USD 48,030.00

Rader This award provides funding for a project in the Langlands program. The
Relative Trace Formula (as initiated by Jacquet) is a new tool for studying
automorphic L-functions and functoriality in the Langland's program. Rader and
S. Rallis have been collaborating to prove some of the local results they think
necessary to make the Relative Trace Formula a theorem instead of just a
collection of examples. They have shown that many of the results known for usual
character and central orbital integrals generalize to the case of spherical
characters and double coset integrals on certain p-adic symmetric spaces. They
plan to expand their research to include spherical subgroups such in the sense
of M. Brion. Although it will take many years to complete such a project, it
seems to be the natural domain for relative trace formulae, because (probably)
one dimensional representations of H occur in irreducible smooth infinite
dimensional representations of G with finite multiplicity. Rader also plans to
complete a collaborative effort with Marie-France Vigneras investigating the
geometric Zelevinskii involution for nilpotent orbits in certain Lie algebras.
This should have applications in constructing modular representations of Hecke
algebras, after Kazhdan-Lusztig. The Langlands program is part of number theory.
Number theory is the study of the properties of the whole numbers and is the
oldest branch of mathematics. From the beginning problems in number theory have
furnished a driving force in creating new mathematics in other diverse parts of
the discipline. The Langland's program is a general philosophy that connects
number theory with calculus; it embodies the modern approach to the study of
whole numbers. Modern number theory is very technical and deep, but it has had
astonishing applications in areas like theoretical computer science and coding
theory.