* 9623796
* Dissertation Research:  Reproductive Isolation              in the Prosobranch Snail Genus Nucella
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* Richard Grosberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 04/30/1998
* USD 9,365.00

9623796 Grosberg When a mechanism evolves that prevents the exchange of genes
between previously interbreeding populations, both populations gain the
potential for independent evolutionary divergence. This process, referred to as
reproductive isolation or biological speciation, ensures the evolutionary
independence of a population, providing an opportunity for further
morphological, physiological, and behavioral divergence. In the research funded
by this award a multidisciplinary research plan will be carried out to integrate
data from mating studies, the fossil record, and a highly resolved DNA-based
phylogeny of populations to analyze the evolution of reproductive isolation
between two diverging species of predatory marine snails, Nucella emarginata
'northern' and N. emarginata 'southern'. Findings will make possible an
understanding of the process of speciation within one of the most common taxa of
intertidal snails found on the rocky shores of western North America.
Ultimately, present patterns of biological diversity are directly influenced by
the rate at which speciation occurs in nature. Reconstructing the historical
patterns of variation before, during, and after the evolution of reproductive
isolation provides insight into the processes which drive the evolution of
isolating mechanisms and the radiation of species. Such knowledge can directly
enhance efforts to conserve biodiversity in marine systems.