* 9623406
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonsmooth Analysis and Control Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Peter Wolenski, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 38,876.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9623406 PI: Wolenski The main emphasis of this proposal
is aimed at studying a so-called differential inclusion by using ideas and
recent results from nonsmooth analysis. A differential inclusion is a
generalization of an ordinary differential equation, and can be viewed as a
multidirectional flow. The practical uses of the formulation are motivated by
issues in control theory, where it has been known for some time that a control
system can be reformulated as a differential inclusion without losing
information regarding its trajectories. But as with any reformulated model, one
must take care in analysing the precise transfer of assumptions from one to the
other. Part of the research in this proposal is aimed at bridging this gap
between what is known in differential inclusions and control systems under
different sets of assumptions. It is the contention of the Wolenski that many
issues in control theory will not be properly understood until the fundamental
traits implying the desired behavior are brought out in the associated
differential inclusion. Specific topics Wolenski plans to address include a
Hamilton-Jacobi type analysis in the minimal time problem, a detailed analysis
of the boundary to a reachable set, an extension of the Hopf representation
formula, a survey of the uses of semiconvexity in analysis and optimization, and
a broadening of the theory of hereditary control systems. Applications of
control theory are prevalent in applied science, and its influence on our
society will undoubtedly continue to expand. From manufacturing to medicine to
engineering to economics, control systems are increasingly being introduced as
models for describing complicated system behavior. The many recent mathematical
advances in control theory are finding their way into practice, and this exposes
the need for further mathematical understanding of control phenomena. Nonsmooth
analysis is a mathematical discipline that has developed rapidly in the last
twen ty years, mainly motivated by its many applications to optimization and
optimal control theory. It now contains a surprisingly complete body of results
that both in method and substance extend most of the classical differential
calculus. The present proposal is directed toward applying some of the more
recent advances to topics in control theory. Since the influence of control
theory in applied science can hardly be overestimated, and as more of the recent
mathematical advances are finding applications throughout society, a need has
arisen for a greater understanding of the properties of control systems. The
successful completion of this research will lead to a greater mathematical
understanding of the evolution of control systems, and could have significant
consequences in the modelling process by allowing the designer to focus on
crucial elements of the design that would lead to an improved performance.