* 9624388
* CAREER: Morphology Development in the Manufacturing of      Immiscible Polymer/Polymer Blends
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Chris Scott, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

9624388 Scott This project focuses on furthering the scope of morphology
development of immiscible polymer blends during extrusion (or mixing using twin
extruders). Identification and qualitative analysis of the critical mechanisms
of morphology development are particularly significant. A numerical model will
be developed for simulation of melting and morphology development. The model
will be used to predict the phase morphology during compounding which includes
the fraction of each melted component, determine which phase is continuous, the
phase domain size, and the evolution of material temperature along the screw.
The primary impact of this work will be establishment of a quantitative basis
for the design of more effective compounding processes and equipment. The
information will be useful for scale-up, design of processes for difficult to
mix formulations, maximization of throughput, and minimization of polymer
degradation. The success of this project will lead to improved design of twin
screw processes and equipment and allow commercialization of materials that are
difficult to produce economically because of mixing limitations. This project
also proposes and education plan as a follow-on to this research. This plan will
improve students' Team Project Skills at the undergraduate level and develop a
Polymer Processing course that provides a thorough fundamental understanding of
the technology in addition to computer simulation, design, and industrial
aspects.