* 9624924
* Study of Galactic Structure and Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Alexander Rudolph, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 07/31/2001
* USD 359,100.00

9624924 Rudolph The study of galactic structure and evolution is one of the
most fundamental in Astronomy. The research to be carried will focus on studying
the structure and evolution of our own Milky Way by comparing observations of
two distinct parts of our Galaxy, the local solar neighborhood, and the outer
Galaxy. The solar neighborhood is the best studied region of the Galaxy. The
outer Galaxy is less well understood, but its proximity and differences in
physical conditions (e.g., low gas density, low metallicity) make it an ideal
place to study contrasts with the local neighborhood. The areas of study be: 1)
searches for and studies of atomic hydrogen (HII) regions in the outer Galaxy;
2) a study of Galactic abundances and how they vary in the Galaxy; 3) studies of
molecular cloud structure; and 4) studies of the stellar content of regions of
active star-formation. A Very Large Array (VLA) and Australia Telescope Compact
Array (ATCA) radio continuum survey of HII regions in the outer Galaxy has
begun, and this work will be continued by analyzing the data to determine HII
region properties. These data can be compared with similar data taken in the
inner Galaxy. The survey will be carried out to observe lower luminosity radio
sources. A study of outer Galaxy abundances (N,O,S) in HII regions measured from
the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. The Infrared Satellite Observatory (ISO) will
be used to observe additional lines of Ar and Ne in some outer Galaxy HII
regions, and to measure abundances in the furthest known HII region at a
distance of 28 kpc from the center of the Galaxy. A third objective will involve
new molecular-line observations of two star-forming regions in the outer Galaxy
in order to determine the structure of the molecular clouds. In particular, it
is planned to measure the spectrum of clump masses (initial clump function, or
ICF) in t hese clouds in order to compare with the numerous measurements of the
ICF parameter in local clouds. The final objective is to obtain JHK photometry
of a number of nearby star-forming clouds using a near-IR camera mounted on the
Claremont Colleges l-m telescope. With this telescope and camera, entire clouds
could be mapped (such as rho-Oph), thereby obtaining a complete census of the
embedded cluster. Models of the observed cluster luminosity function will allow
us to determine the underlying IMF. Similar cluster membership data for the
outer Galaxy will be obtained, allowing one to compare the IMF in two regions of
very different metallicity. Also, comparison of the ICF and lMF in both the
local neighborhood and in the outer Galaxy will help one understand how star-
formation proceeds from molecular cloud clumps to stars of various masses. The
educational component of this project will focus on course development and
modernization. The Observational Astronomy course offered at Harvey Mudd College
has, in the past, neglected including recent advances in non-optical astronomy.
New lecture material and computer laboratories are being developed to introduce
non-optical data into the course. The Advanced Astronomy course will be
redesigned into a series of topical half-semester courses (e.g., Star-formation
and the Interstellar Medium, Cosmology, Extragalactic Astronomy, Galactic
Structure, etc.) to introduce modern astronomical topics into the curriculum and
to increase student interest in advanced Astronomy. The educational component of
this project will also continue K-12 outreach work begun in the last year,
through a partnership with two local Claremont School District teachers.