* 9624008
* CAREER:  Key Problems in Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Upamanyu Madhow, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 07/31/2000
* USD 210,000.00

This research can be classified into two major themes, motivated by the
following key bottlenecks for wireless systems: the scarcity of radio bandwidth,
and the problem of interfacing inherently lossy wireless links with high-speed
wireline networks where loss occurs mainlv due to congestion. The first research
theme is concerned with enhancing the capacity and performance of direct-
sequence CDMA, which holds great promise as a robust workhorse technology for
future wireless systems. Since multiple-access interference imposes a major
limitation on CDMA performance two broad methodologies are considered for
alleviating its effects: decentralized adaptive reception and centralized multi-
user reception. The goal is to further the theoretical development of both these
methodologies with a view to developing practical receiver structures. The
issues addressed include devising methods for making adaptive interference
suppression work over the severe time variations of a wireless multiple-access
channel, supporting multiple classes of traffic (and hence multiple rates) using
direct-sequence CDMA, inventing near optimal adaptive nonlinear receivers,
incorporating antenna diversity into interference suppression schemes with
reasonable complexity, and deriving receivers based on multi-user detection and
estimation principles for systems to which adaptive methods do not apply. The
second research theme is the development of a theory for designing interfaces
that ensure compatibility between wireless and wireline networks while
minimizing the use of precious wireless bandwidth. The problem formulations,
while of broader interest, are motivated by the fact that two wireline
technologies with which a wireless network must be compatible are the emerging
ATM networks and TCP/IP. The problems considered include the formulation of
service guarantees over a lossy wireless link and the design principles for
implementing them, optimization of wireless bandwidth for a broadcast or
multiple-access wireless channel by using transmission control based on the
channel state seen by each receiver, manipulation of the feedback mechanisms
used by TCP/IP flow control and ATM rate control by the wireless interface to
provide good end-to-end performance over a heterogeneous network with both
wireless and wireline links, and the design of a flow control mechanism that
does not suffer from the shortcomings of TCP/IP.