* 9624055
* X-Ray Scattering Studies of Thin Liquid Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Pulak Dutta, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 240,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9624055 Dutta The project employs synchrotron
radiation to study the intermolecular correlations within very thin liquid
films. These are a relatively easily controlled and geometrically well defined
class of `confined' liquids, whose properties can be significantly different
from those of bulk liquids. Systems to be studied include thin films of
concentrated metal salt solutions, spreading films of viscous liquids, and
wetting films on solid substrates. The structures within and normal to the film
plane are to be probed as functions of film thickness, temperature, solute
concentration, and applied potential. The investigations are of fundamental
interest and are relevant to applications involving not only lubrication,
wetting, and spreading, but also to other confined systems such as liquids in
droplets, porous minerals, capillaries, and biological cells. %%% This project
investigates the structural arrangement of molecules within very thin liquid
films. Synchrotron radiation is used to measure the structure as it can be quite
different from bulk liquids. The properties of liquids change when they are in
the form of very thin films or in other `confined' geometries. The investigation
is not only of basic interest but is related wetting and spreading processes
(such as occur in painting or oil spills), and related industrial processes. The
information obtained is likely to lead to a better understanding of the
properties of other confined systems such as droplets in a cloud, oil in porous
rocks, and fluids in biological cells and capillaries. ***