* 9624841
* CAREER: Hybrid Material Routes to Porous Amorphous Ceramics with Controlled Microstructure
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Gabriel Lopez, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2001
* USD 209,406.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9624841 The goal of this research is to develop methods of
generating silica-based ceramics in the form of porous bulk gels or as thin
membrane films that have well-defined porous morphologies and pore chemistries.
This work develops sol-gel routes to the synthesis of hybrid organic/inorganic
materials that can be converted to porous ceramics by the total or partial
removal of the organic component of the hybrid materials through pyrolysis or
solvent extraction. Hybrid materials incorporate organic constituents either as
molecularly well-dispersed solid solutes in the silica- ceramic network or as
phase-segregated mesoscopic or macroscopic domains are formed and used as
precursors to microporous ceramics or to mesoporous and macroporous ceramics,
respectively. Methods that selectively remove non-covalently bonded organic
polymers from hybrid the materials and leave covalently bonded organic ligands
on the porous silica networks are also developed. These molecular templating
approaches are used to generate well-defined porous films with several specific
goals: polymerizable organic ligands (e.g., through free radical, ionic, or
elimination mechanisms) are incorporated as molecular, templates for the
generation of porous thin films that exhibit high degrees of pore connectivity
and orientation; metal-chelating organic templates are incorporated, together
with particular metals or metal ions, in the synthesis of hybrid thin films that
are used to form porous ceramic membranes that exhibit high thermal stability,
selective transport characteristics, and/or catalytic activity; organic ligands
exhibiting specific molecular recognition properties are incorporated into
hybrid materials such that, after a porous thin film is formed from them, the
organic ligands are localized preferentially on the surface of the porous
network and hence can be used in the development of porous matrices for chemical
sensing applications. Education developments include the revision an d
improvement of specific aspects of the undergraduate and graduate chemical
engineering curricula, including the establishment of an individualized
instruction program for at-risk undergraduate students in chemical engineering
the establishment of undergraduate research programs, especially for students
from underrepresented ethnic groups, and the development of cross-disciplinary,
industrial and federal (National Laboratory) collaborations that will expose
students to aspects of the fields of chemistry, materials science, and
microfabrication. A major component of this educational plan is the
implementation of an undergraduate research program whose main goal is the
preparation of students from underrepresented groups for entry into graduate
school. This is done in cooperation with several minority educational programs
already in place at the University of New Mexico to enhance the access of
minority students, especially members of New Mexico's relatively large Hispanic
and Native American communities, to research careers.