* 9624656
* Dissertation Research:  Interactions Between Above Ground   and Below Ground Competition in Old Field Vegetation
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Brenda Casper, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 04/30/1997
* USD 6,659.00

9624656 Casper This study will examine the combined effect of aboveground and
belowground competition on plant performance in an oldfield plant community.
Current literature assumes that their combined effect is simply the sum of each
effect by itself. However, belowground competition is likely to affect plant
response to aboveground competition and vice versa. Whether their combined
effect is greater than, equal to, or less than the sum of each separate effect
may depend on the relative strength of the aboveground versus belowground
interactions. These ideas will be tested in a field experiment in which
gradients in the intensity of aboveground and belowground competition will be
crossed in a full factorial design at two levels of soil fertility. The growth
response of target individuals of the annual plant, Abutilon theophrasti, will
be used as the dependent variable. The belowground competition gradient will be
created through the use of soil partitions with different degrees of
accessibility by neighboring roots. Aboveground competition will be varied by
pulling back portions of neighboring shoots. This research will be the first to
test directly the additivity of competitive forms in a field experiment. It will
also be able to test whether belowground competition decreases in importance
with increased soil resources.