* 9624048
* The Electronic Structure of the High Temperature            Superconductors Studied by Angle Resolved Photoemission
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Juan Carlos Campuzano, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/2000
* USD 271,847.00

9624048 Campuzano Angle-Resolved Photoemission will be used to study many- body
effects in high temperature superconductors. The technique will provide clues on
(1) the nature of the spectral function of the quasiparticles in the normal and
superconducting states, (2) the momentum distribution of the normal and
superconducting states, (3) the dependence of the quasiparticle lifetime on
temperature, momentum and energy, (4) the relationship between the van Hove
singularity and the normal and superconducting properties, (5) the nature of the
superconducting gap function in the clean limit. Limited preliminary results
indicate that these properties exhibit unusual behavior, and that the high
temperature superconductors still have many interesting Physics surprises in
store for us. %%% Angle-Resolved Photoemission will be used to study many- body
effects in high temperature superconductors. In this technique, the sample is
irradiated with ultra-violet light. This causes the electrons in that sample to
be ejected. By analyzing the energies of those ejected electrons, the state of
the electrons in the sample can be obtained. This information can, in
conventional materials, lead to understand how the material carries current, and
how it becomes superconducting upon cooling. However, high temperature
superconductors do not behave like conventional materials. The electrols in
these materials interact with each other and the motion of one electron is
strongly correlated with the motion of other electrons. Materials in which this
occurs are called "Strongly Correlated Materials". The proposal seeks to provide
a direct measurement of the "spectral distribution". The latter measures the
probability of adding or removing an electron from the sample. This will lead to
the understa nding of the novel electronic properties of high temperature
superconductors. ***