* 9624687
* CAREER:  Adaptive Higher-Order Error Correction of NonlinearDiffusion Generalized Perturbation Theory Via a Neural      Network
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Guillermo Maldonado, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 07/31/2001
* USD 310,000.00

9624687 Maldonado The general objective of the proposed research is to initiate
a research program that would promote, extend, and improve recent advances in
Generalized Pertarbatium Theory Techniques. The long-term goal of this project
targets to exploit more general and multidisciplinary applications, while the
near-term goal will target the development of an adaptive -and computationally
economic- error reduction technique applicable to an nth order perturbation
theory methodology. The preliminary results herein presented strongly suggest
that a relatively rudimentary two-hidden-layer artificial neural network (ANN)
can be suitably trained for this type of application. In fact, the GPT
methodology previously developed by the PI provides a unique framework for the
systematic training and adaptive implementation of an ANN designed to predict,
and thus correct, the error associated with an nth order GPT solution. Moreover,
identifying all portions of these calculations which can take advantage of
massively parallel or scalable computers will also be addressed. The main
objective of the PI's education plan revolves around nurturing four major
ongoing career activities which he has identified as key contributing factors to
the future success of his education plan. Furthermore, these activities have
been selected exclusively by the PI based upon several moths of hands-on
assessments and observations, and re in full agreement with his personality,
background, and known talents. The PI enjoys these activities and seeks no
personal gain from them other than selfulfillment as a person and as an
educator. These activities, listed in no particular order of preference or
implied importance, are: Active Learning Techniques. Encouraging
Underrepresented Groups into Science and Engineering. Involving Undergraduate
Students in Research. International Extensions of Research Efforts. The
education plan of this proposal elaborates further on each of the above topics.