* 9624468
* Investigations of Unconventional Superconducting and        Magnetic Order-Parameters in Heavy Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Bellave Shivaram, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/2000
* USD 255,000.00

9624468 Shivaram The superconducting and magnetic properties of a new class of
intermetallic compounds formed from rare earth and actinide elements will be
investigated. In these materials, the low temperature behavior is dominated by
the interactions between the electrons. A number of advanced instrumentation and
techniques such as ultrasonics, superconducting quantum interference devices as
well as scanning magnetometry, and transport measurements will be used. The
measurements will be performed on high quality single crystals as well as on
thin film samples. Extreme physical conditions such as high uniaxial pressures,
high magnetic fields and very low temperatures will be chosen as appropriate to
elucidate the unique nature of superconductivity and magnetism in these
materials. For this purpose a special low temperature apparatus where uniaxial
pressure up to 8,000 atmosphere and magnetic fields close to a million times
stronger than the earth's magnetic filed, will be utilized. The results obtained
will be relevant to many areas in materials science including high temperature
superconductivity, magnetic storage, high field magnetic materials etc. %%% The
superconducting and magnetic phases of rare earth and actinide based
intermetallic heavy fermion compounds will be investigated with ultrasonics,
force as well as SQUID magnetometry (both macroscopic and microscopic) and
transport measurements. These measurements will be performed on high quality
single crystals as well as on thin film samples. A combination of experiments
involving high uniaxial pressures, high magnetic fields and ultra-low
temperatures will be chosen as appropriate to elucidate the novel
superconducting and magnetic phenomena in these materials. These phenomena
include (i) coexistence of superconductivity and magnetism, (ii) multiple order
parameters in the superconducting state, (i ii) magnetic filed vortices with
half a quantum of circulation, (iv) magnetism with non-Neel types of order, and
(v) novel magnetic and transport effects due to the presence of interfaces. The
measurements will utilize a special ultra low temperature apparatus where the
magnitude and the mutual orientations of externally applied perturbations,
uniaxial pressures upto 8 kbar and magnetic fields upto 16 tesla, can be
controlled in situ. ***