* 9624884
* Controlled Fluorescent Derivatization of Peptides and       Proteins for Characterization by Capillary Electrophoresis  Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Larry Krannich, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 03/31/1999
* USD 186,500.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the development of novel,
useful, fluorescent labeling strategies that will permit biomacromolecule
analysis, especially for proteins and peptides, using capillary electrophoresis
(CE). During the tenure of this four-year continuing grant, Professor Beale and
his students at the University of Alabama at Birmingham will develop a highly
sensitive peptide mapping protocol using CE with laser-induced fluorescence
(LIF) detection, investigate partial specific peptide cleavage schemes and
pursue strategies for putting a single fluorescent label at the n-terminus of a
protein without modifying the entire protein. During this grant period Professor
Beale will expose undergraduates to research opportunities and implement
project-based laboratory experiences in the senior level analytical course. This
course will be tailored to students in forensic science, public health, pre-med
and chemistry. The ability to characterize proteins by mapping peptide sequences
and to develop sensitive protein separation methods are important objectives for
a host of applications in biotechnology. The separations based on CE with LIF to
be developed will be sensitive and practical outcomes of this CAREER research
project. The enrichment of the undergraduate analytical curriculum and the
enhanced opportunities for undergraduates to participate in frontier research
projects are educational aspects of this CAREER research project that will
positively impact students at the University of Alabama at Birmingham.