* 9624995
* CAREER:  Native Oxides on the III-V Nitrides and Chemical   Cleaning of the Semiconductor Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2002
* Suzanne Mohney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2002
* USD 448,318.00

9624995 Mohney This CAREER research project addresses the formation and the
chemical etching of native oxides on III-V nitride surfaces. The chemical and
structural nature of intentionally and unintentionally formed oxides on the
semiconductor surfaces will be studied, and chemical processing steps for the
preparation of semiconductor surfaces for further devic e processing will be
developed. Complementary techniques including spectroscopic ellipsometry, Auger
electron spectroscopy, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and conventional and
high resolution transmission electron microscopy will be employed. The nature of
the oxide, which is currently unknown, will strongly influence which chemical
etchants w ill be most effective for removing it. Appropriate chemical
treatments for removing the oxide and producing surfaces with the least residual
oxygen and carbon contamination will be developed, given that many processing
steps, such as the formation of ohmic contacts and Schottky barriers, are most
conveniently accomplished when a brief exposure to air is allowed between
chemical preparation and further processing. Comparison of the effectiveness of
the chemical surface preparation procedures will be accomplished through the
fabrication and characterization of non-reactive ohmic contacts and/or Schottky
barriers to GaN. %%% Along with the basic research activity, this project
incorporates material on surface preparation of semiconductors into an
undergraduate laboratory course on electronic and photonic materials. Other
educational initiatives to be undertaken include updating a senior-level
laboratory course on metals science and engineering, increasing the use of c
omputer modeling and visualization in the undergraduate curriculum, and
increasing participation of undergraduates in research. The proposed basic
investigations are expected to contribute fundamental materials science
knowledge of technological relevance to advanced microelectronic devices and
circuits. The knowledge and understanding gained fro m this research project is
expected to contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced
devices and circuits used in computing, information processing, and
telecommunications by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
designing and producing improved materials and processes. *** _