* 9624458
* CAREER:  Efficient Implementation of Object Oriented        Languages on Superscalar Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2002
* Urs Hoelzle, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Yuan-Chieh Chow
* 03/31/2002
* USD 200,000.00

9624458 Hoelzle Programmers have long been faced with the dilemma of choosing
between abstraction and efficiency: if they use abstraction pervasively, their
programs become more maintainable but may execute too slowly. Ideally, hiding a
design decision behind an abstract interface should have no impact on
performance, so that programmers can reap the full benefits of encapsulation
without fear of performance problems. Thus, abstraction-oriented languages must
employ aggressive compiler optimizations to reduce the run-time overhead of
abstraction. Since the ultimate goal is to increase programmer productivity,
these optimizations must be compatible with interactive, exploratory programming
environments. The focus of this work is on reducing the cost of abstraction in
object-oriented languages, as well as, complementary educational goals. The
objective of this project is to develop adaptive customization, a compiler
technique that aims to make aggressive optimization practical by improving
performance without unduly increasing code size. Being suitable for interactive
programming environments, adaptive customization could dramatically improve the
performance of real-world applications written in dynamic languages like
Smalltalk, Self, Java, Dylan, or CLOS. Not all dispatches can be optimized away,
and the remaining dispatches may become more expensive on superscalar
processors. Thus, the goal is to develop new dispatch techniques specifically
optimized for such processors. A comprehensive study of dispatch performance on
superscalar processors will be undertaken in this project. Benchmark suites and
tools will be developed to support this research. ***