* 9624324
* CAREER:  Requirements Specification for Embedded            Systems:  An Integrated Framework
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2001
* Mats Heimdahl, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 06/30/2001
* USD 250,309.00

The vast majority of serious software design flaws are due to incomplete,
inconsistent, or obscure requirements documents. It is in the very first stages
of software development, the requirements specification phase, that the fewest
formal procedures exist to aid the analyst. Techniques to capture, verify, and
validate requirements specifications for embedded systems are of demonstrable
importance. This project focuses on validation of requirements specifications,
specifically on executable specifications. An integrated framework is being
constructed for the development, analysis, and execution of high-level
requirements specifications for embedded systems. The framework is intended to
support (1) execution and simulation of embedded system requirements (hardware-
in- the loop simulation), and (2) requirements reuse and requirements synthesis
based on the structure and design of the physical system. This environment will
enable an executable high-level requirements specification to interact with: (1)
models of the assumed behavior of the environment, (2) software simulations of
the environment, or (3) the actual physical components in the environment. The
approach taken is to extend an existing formal specification language, RSML,
with the capability to define system-level inter-component communication in an
embedded system. The educational component of this CAREER project seeks to
increase industrial involvement in undergraduate and graduate education through
case studies and industrial projects. A remotely-accessible embedded systems
laboratory is being established, where students can gain realistic hands-on
experience with software development for real-time systems. ***