* 9624739
* CAREER:  Intelligent Systems and Advanced Computation in    Molecular Biology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Richard Lathrop, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

The aim of this project is to integrate research and education in advanced
computation and artificial intelligence as applied to problems in molecular
biology. The underlying research theme is the relation of structure to function
in complex systems. The specific application focus is on enhanced protein
structure prediction capability and its subsequent relation to function.
Structural models and empirical objective functions are extracted from the
existing scientific databases, thereby capitalizing on an enormous scientific
investment compiled over decades. Structural predictions for novel protein
sequences are made by aligning the sequence to the models so as to optimize the
objective function. A novel branch and bound algorithm permits the true global
optimum alignment to be found even though the underlying search problem is NP-
hard. The education program creates a collaborative setting wherein computer
scientists and biologists both can interact within an interdisciplinary research
program. Students from both disciplines can get hands-on experience ``learning
by doing'' research on real and important problems. The research will lead to
improvements in our ability to predict protein structure and function from
sequence, a crucial step toward design of novel pharmaceutical compounds,
realizing the full potential of the human genome project, and understanding
fundamental life processes.