* 9624084
* CPMSA: "Partnerships To Enhance Student Achievement (PESA)"
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2003
* Shirley Turnage, Roanoke River Valley Consortium-Bertie County
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 09/30/2003
* USD 2,958,407.00

The Roanoke River Valley Consortium (R2VC), consists of five predominately
African American disadvantaged school systems (Bertie, 78%; Hertford, 73%;
Northampton, 79%; Warren, 77%; Weldon City, 98%) located in rural poverty-
stricken Northern North Carolina. Poverty has a reverberating effect on these
children and their families, and also on these school systems where the students
are in attendance. To decrease the gap between these disadvantages school
systems and advantaged systems, the R2VC proposes to implement a comprehensive
regional science and mathematics K-12 project entitled Partnerships to Enhance
Student Achievement (PESA). The goal of PESA is to implement systemic approaches
to increase the number of minority students enrolling in a successfully
completing precollege courses essential to preparation for collegiate science
and mathematics. To achieve this goal, an overview of the objectives are as
follows: to deliver quality instruction and to sustain interventions in school
science and mathematics education for minority students that will result in a
significant increase in those who graduate and who are academically prepared to
enter college and major in the sciences, mathematics, or engineering; to
substantially decrease tracking and improve academic counseling to facilitate
the successful transition of minority students from elementary to middle and
from middle to high school into undergraduate programs in SMET; to stimulate
efforts among secondary schools and colleges and universities, as well as
relevant informal science organizations (e.g., museums, aquaria, etc.); to
develop summer enrichment activities; to stimulate efforts to establish
mentorship programs among professional organizations, business, and industry and
network with programs supported by the federal and private sector to avoid
duplication, to share resources, and to maximize available funding; to stimulate
the involvement of parents and guardians and the business community throu gh
partnerships in all aspects of the students' education; and to function in a
complementary and collaborative manner with other funded educational activities
(i.e., NSF,EPA, NIH, UDOE, etc.) through continuous dialogue. PESA has four
major components: (1) staff development for educators (i.e., teachers,
counselors, administrators); (2) student enrichment opportunities including
field-trips, Saturday Seminars, Leadership Conference, career counseling,
mentorships, Summer Enrichment Institute, and a challenging high school course
of study (Ronald McNair Academy); (3) parental partnerships; and (4)
business/industry partnerships. With support from the N.C. State Department of
Public Instruction, Elizabeth City State University, North Carolina Central
University, University of N.C. at Chapel Hill and business/industry, through
memorandums of partnerships, this project will influence each entire school
system in the areas of curriculum reform, curriculum enhancement, teacher
enhancement, strategic use of resources, student enrichment activities, and
summer enrichment activities. The curriculum shall be enhanced through such
activities as Family Math, Family Science, Science and Technology for Children
(K-5), Science and Technology Program (6-8), the Bob Moses Algebra Project,
EQUALS, and the Ronald McNair Academy (9-12). Teachers shall upgrade their
skills through training in the aforementioned areas as well as Gender/Equity
Expectations for Student Achievement. In addition, teachers will be encouraged
to accept summer internships in business/industry, higher education and federal
agencies such as NASA and EPA. The students will be provided expanded
opportunities in science and math. These activities consist of the following:
Super Stars (K-5); Math Counts (6-8); Bob Moses Algebra Project (6-8); Student
Challenge (9); Summer Enrichment Institute (9); Math Science Education Network
Seminars (10); Math/Science Leadership conference (11); Mentorships (12); and
Ronald McNair Academy course of study (9-12). Parents will be encouraged and
supported in the establishment of a parent Partnership Program to function as a
resource to the school systems and to enhance their involvement in their
children's education. The evidence of program effectiveness in schools and
classrooms used for validation by the National Diffusion Program Effectiveness
panel shall be used for evaluation. The program effectiveness areas are
specified in claim types. They are as follows: Claim Type 1, Academic
Achievement; Claim Type 2, Teacher Learning Process; Claim Type 3, Positive
Change Student; and Claim Type 4, Instructional Delivery. The evaluation results
will show institutionalization os systemic changes which will result in an
increase in minority students enrollment in and successful completion of
precollege courses in science and mathematics; minority student academic
performance; minority students choosing careers in science and mathematics;
teachers using innovative instructional and motivational strategies; parental
involvement; business/industry partnerships; and, utilization of available
resources to enhance instruction. The results of implementing PESA will depict a
project that can be implemented in whole or in part to meet the needs of
students in rural and/or urban areas. ***