* 9624050
* Simple Molecular Solids at Ultrahigh Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/2000
* USD 428,044.00

9624050 Hemley The behavior of solid hydrogen and related molecular systems will
be investigated with newly developed experimental techniques to pressures in
excess of 300 GPa and temperatures down to 2 K. Both recently discovered and
theoretically predicted novel transitions in these materials will be examined,
including metallization at the highest pressures. The experiments will be
conducted with diamond- anvil cells used in conjunction with synchrotron x-ray
diffraction and synchrotron infrared, Raman, Brillouin, and optical
spectroscopic methods. The diamond anvils will include high-strength, high-
purity synthetic crystals. The experiments will probe the crystal structures,
orientational states, phase diagrams, and vibrational electronic properties of
the high-pressure molecular and non-molecular states. The high-pressure behavior
of newly discovered stoichiometric hydrogen compounds will also be investigated,
and new techniques for exploring matter at still higher pressures will be
developed. The results of this project will provide critical tests of
fundamental theories of condensed matter physics, will aid in the design of new
materials, and will provide important information on the interiors of the large
planets. %%% Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the cosmos and the key to
a wide range of fundamental problems in the physical sciences. At low
temperatures and under moderate pressures, the material crystallizes as a
diatomic molecular solid. At sufficiently high pressures, however, the molecules
are predicted to break down to form an atomic metal with novel and potentially
important properties such as high- temperature superconductivity. At high
temperatures, this material in the fluid state is the major constituent of the
large gaseous planets, and at still higher temperatures, of stars. Information
on the behavior of hydroge n as it evolves towards these novel states requires
detailed study with high-pressure techniques. Resent advances in diamond- anvil
cell techniques have permitted materials to be compressed and studied to
pressures in excess of 300 GPa (3 Mbar or three million atmospheres pressure).
These techniques will be used together with x-ray and infrared radiation from
high-energy electron storage rings, synchrotrons, laser techniques, and other
optical methods to probe the nature of hydrogen and related substances in the
newly accessible range of pressures. The results of the work will provide
critical tests of fundamental theories of condensed matter physics, will aid in
the design of new materials, and will provide important information on the
interiors of the large planets. ***