* 9624243
* Enhanced Sensitivity NMR Studies of Nanostructured          Electronic Materials and Education in Physical Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Clifford Bowers, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 04/30/2001
* USD 362,500.00

In this Faculty Early Career Development Program award funded by the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Bowers will
study nanostructured III-V semiconductor systems using enhanced sensitivity
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR). Ultrahigh sensitivity NMR
techniques will be developed, including solid-state optical pumping, spin inject
dynamic nuclear polarization, and magnetoresistance detection. Some of the
examples that will be examined include structural studies of dopant complex
bonding geometries, the detection of skyrmions in the fractional quantum Hall
effect (FQHE), and the determination of quasi-Landau level structure and
magnetic moments of composite Fermions in the characterization of ordering and
phase domains in semiconductor alloys including the III-V nitrides. Some of
these experiments will be conducted at the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory (NHMFL). The education plan will include sponsorship of undergraduate
research at NHMFL, the development of computer-assisted chemical education and
the virtual classroom, and expansion of a highly successful NMR seminar series.
One goal of this project is to demonstrate the potential of NMR to provide new
information about nanostructured electronic materials which may not be available
by any other analytical measurement. All of the systems of interest have novel
device applications, such as in various types of field effect transistors and in
blue- or ultraviolet-light diode lasers. The educational part of this CAREER
grant will promote an understanding of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
for both undergraduate and graduate students through classroom work, seminars,
and hands-on research in one of the world's best a settings for research with
high magnetic fields.