* 9624614
* CAREER:  Assessment, Maintenance, Repair, and Rehabilitation of Historic Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1996,12/31/2001
* Thomas Boothby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/2001
* USD 336,000.00

9624614 Boothy This is a CAREER Award. The project will develop new repair
techniques for historic structures and will develop educational activities that
will cultivate a respect for historic buildings, structures, and civil works,
and an interest in their maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation. The teaching
and research activities will adopt a multidisciplinary perspective, including
architectural history, architectural history, architecture, civil/structural
engineering, and landscape architectural input. The repair techniques to be
studies involve the application of new composite Fiber Reinforced Plastic (FRP)
materials, and their application to historic structures is considered a
demanding test bed for the more general use of FRP materials in the repair of
concrete, steel, and masonry structures. The specific types of structures to be
included in the study are masonry and concrete arch bridges, metal truss
bridges, mid-20th century slab girder and slab bridges, unreinforced load
bearing masonry buildings, and thin-shell reinforced concrete structures. The
specific issue to be addressed for these building types include transverse
effects in filled arch bridges, load distribution and floor system issues in
truss bridges, the hazard of parapets and cornices of URM buildings in Eastern
locations in moderate earthquakes, environmental damage to thin-shell concrete
structures. The repair techniques to be studied include replacement of critical
elements with FRP materials, externally bonded FRP sheet reinforcement, external
unbonded FRP reinforcement (banding), and chemical and mechanical prestressing
using FRP repair materials. ***