* 9624152
* Career:  A Career Development Plan in Optimal and Robust    Control Theory and Application
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Bassam Bamieh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2000
* USD 180,000.00

9624152 Bamieh The research efforts outlined in this proposal are unified by the
idea of developing the existing paradigms in robust and optimal control in a
variety of novel problems, some of which make contact with other areas such as
nonlinear systems sensitivity and identification. The starting point of our
investigations is the problem of robust digital control. We take the view that a
digital control system is a mixture of continuous-time and discrete-time
systems, with the resulting periodic behaviour, and the related nonlinear
quantization effects due to finite wordlength computations. For this problem the
issue is to develop a systematic theory where one can analyze performance
tradeoffs between sampling rates, periodic behaviour, and quantization effects.
Such a theory does not at present exist. This leads us to develop compatible
techniques in two different directions with a wide range of applicability.
First, we develop a framework for the analysis and synthesis of mixed
continuous-time discrete-time systems which extends the principal investigators
previous work on sampled-data robust control. The second direction involves the
analysis of systems with switching nonlinearities such as relays, hysterisis,
and quantization. We show via a multirate sampling technique (akin to Sigma-
Delta modulators in signal processing) that many problems with switching
nonlinearities are equivalent to analyzing a LTI system in feedback with a
relay. We address the problems of computing limit cycles and their sensitivities
in terms of the input-output loo nonlinear for such systems. This effort seems
to provide a connection between robust control and certain types of so-called
"intelligent systems." In a parallel and related effort, the L1 model reduction
problem is addressed and its significance as a "good" norm for model reduction
is outlined. This problem is also motivated from the perspective of reduced
order robust controller design for la rge scale systems. In the area of control
oriented identification, we address the novel problem of the identification of
parameter varying systems, whose models would be more useful for process control
problems such as in the real-time control of semiconductor manufacturing, and
situations where the underlying processes undergo rapid changes in operating
conditions, for which a single LTI model is inappropriate. Preliminary results
are outlined as well as their connection and implication for identification and
modeling in the bahavioural framework. The educational part of this career plan
is guided by the principle that control and systems theory are fundamentally
interdisciplinary subjects. This idea is apparent in research problems that
cross departmental boundaries. In education, this can be carried out with
interdepartmental courses and laboratories. The current involvement of the
principal investigator in the establishment of an interdepartmental controls
laboratory, will be a guide to the establishment of common courses in controls
and systems. Another component in this plan is the incorporation of recent
research results to update graduate and undergraduate courses. Specifically, we
outline ongoing efforts at incorporating recent results on sampled-data control
from the hybrid systems point of view in digital control courses. ***