* 9624542
* Galactic History- Old Stellar Populations in Edge-on Disk   Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2003
* Heather Morrison, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen D. Eastwood
* 07/31/2003
* USD 532,369.00

9624542 Morrison The ability to study old stellar populations in galaxies, the
results of which may be used to trace the formation and evolution of galaxies,
has benefited in several ways from the advent of large-format Charge-Coupled-
Devices (CCDs) and increased computing power. A major advance has been the
development of techniques of using deep CCD imaging of galaxies, which allows
one to study the old stellar populations of nearby galaxies in unprecedented
detail. The observations to be carried out will reach more than 2 magnitudes
fainter than previous observations. The results of the research will serve to
delineate the older stellar populations of a representative sample of nearby
disk galaxies, using recently developed techniques. A systematic investigation
of the properties of 10 nearby edge-on disk galaxies with Hubble types ranging
from Sc though Sa to S0 will be carried out. Of particular interest in this work
are the properties of thick disks and stellar halos of these galaxies, when they
exist. The study of the thick disks observed in the sample will able one to test
the currently popular models of thick disk galaxy formation by satellite
accretion. If the models predict successfully the thick disk properties of this
sample, there is the possibility of using thick disks as tracers of the
accretion history of galaxies. The characterization of thick disks and halos in
this sample will allow us to test for the first time whether the Milky Way's old
stellar populations are typical of nearby disk galaxies. Most of the
observations will be taken on Case Western Reserve University's (CWRU) Burrell
Schmidt telescope at Kitt Peak Natal Observatory (KPNO), to which CWRU has
special access. An improved CCD system for the Schmidt, with a factor of 5
improvement in quantum efficiency, will be purchased. This upgrade of the CCD
system will enable surface photometry observations in the blue region of the
spectrum, and thus provide color (and hence a ge and metallicity) information on
the thick disk and halo stellar populations. Teaching development activities
will include involvement of undergraduate students in research and in course
development of the "Introduction to Astronomy for Majors" course. This will
closely tie what is taught to current research, using a thematic approach. Two
major areas of current astronomical research, how the solar system was formed
and the determination of the value of cosmic distance scale problem, will be
used as recurring themes in the two-semester course. Other teaching-related
activities will include several innovative ways of improving teaching, organized
through CWRU's new teaching center (including active learning techniques and a
strong use of the World Wide Web). A program to allow undergraduates to
accompany the PI on observing trips to KPNO will be carried out. ***