* 9624498
* Decoupling and Reforming Tag and Data Arrays for            High-Performance Memory Hierarchy Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2001
* Jih-Kwon Peir, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yavuz A. Oruc
* 05/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

The project investigates issues in memory hierarchy design and proposes
solutions to bridge the increasing performance gap between the processor and
memory. By observing the unequal time needed to perform cache tag
access/comparison and to access cache data, this path imbalance can be exploited
to achieve a more performance optimal cache design. The basic idea is to use an
additional tag array record the status and location of the recently used lines
in the cache data array. By recording the cache line locations in this subset of
the tag array, the data access is decoupled from the tag access/comparison path
for a shorter overall cache access time. In a multiprocessor system, cache
coherence activities incur extra traffic to the heavily-loaded snooping bus and
impose additional latency in accessing the data. By observing that references to
the same memory location are often ordered at the software level, frequently
rendering cache coherence activities are unnecessary and can be deferred until
at the proper synchronization point. The infrastructure required, including a
multiprocessor tracing facility, multiple-issue out-of-order execution processor
models, and various memory hierarchy models, will be developed in this project.
These tools will be enhanced with graphical user interfaces and used for
instructional purposes to provide students with hands-on experience in
evaluating difference architectural design tradeoffs.