* 9624102
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Light        Scattering in Fullerenes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Jose Menendez, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 90,000.00

9624102 Menendez: This project comprises an experimental/theoretical light
scattering study of the dynamical and electronic properties of fullerenes.
Experiments on systems ranging from molecular solids to isolated molecules in
the vapor phase, using both resonance and off-resonance incident radiation, will
elucidate the interplay between molecular vibrations and rotations, the effects
of solid-state packing and disorder, and the electron/vibrational coupling. The
experiments will be analyzed theoretically by means of first-principles
calculations and powerful time-correlator techniques for light scattering.
Results from this project will contribute to the understanding of
technologically important problems, e.g. details of the dynamical Jahn-Teller
interaction thought to be responsible for superconductivity in doped fullerenes,
and will shed light on fundamental problems, such as vibrational localization
induced by defects or anharmonicity. ***This project comprises an
experimental/theoretical study of the properties of fullerenes, a new class of
carbon-based materials. Fullerenes are of great scientific and technological
interest due to their unusual properties and the possibility of important
applications, ranging from superconductivity to the fabrication of diamond
films. Experiments involving scattering of laser light will be performed on
systems ranging from molecular to isolated molecules in the vapor phase, in
order to elucidate the interplay between molecular vibrations and rotations, the
effects of solid- state packing and disorder, and the interactions between the
electrons and vibrations. The experiments will be interpreted theoretically by
means of powerful computer techniques. The results will contribute to
understanding of technologically important problems such as the quantum
mechanical mechanisms responsible for superconductivity in fullerenes, and will
also shed light on fundamental problems such as vibrational localization.***