* 9624532
* CAREER: Asymmetric Synthesis and Novel Transformations      of 2-Oxetanones; Minority Outreach/Multimedia Approaches to Understanding Organic Chemistry and Its Societal Relevance
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Daniel Romo, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 03/31/2001
* USD 325,125.00

This research focuses on the preparation of beta-lactones by the development of
Lewis acid mediated (2+2) cycloaddition chemistry and tandem aldol/lactonization
methodology. New transformations of beta-lactones including intramolecular
allylsilane additions and ferric chloride mediated tandem
debenzylation/transacylation will be probed. The educational plan focuses on the
development of a `transition` course for first year graduate students, including
minorities, minority outreach to local high schools and development of
multimedia presentations for use in the teaching of organic chemistry. With this
CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research and
educational activities of Dr. Daniel Romo of the Department of Chemistry at
Texas A&amp;M University. Professor Romo will focus his research effort on the
asymmetric synthesis of a class of compounds known as beta-lactones. These
compounds serve as useful intermediates in organic synthesis, are utilized as
polymerization substrates and the basic structural unit appears in a variety of
physiologically active natural products. The educational plan will focus on the
development of a `transition` course for educationally disadvantaged first year
graduate students and the development of multimedia presentations related to
organic chemistry