* 9624562
* US-Indo Cooperative Research: Design of Mineral Processing  Reagents- Iron Oxide-Titania Separation, Award in Indian    Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* N Chaudhuri, Tata Reserch Development & Design Center
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/1999
* USD 16,129.00

9624562 Chaudhuri Description: This award supports a US-Indo cooperative project
between US scientists, Drs. Brij Moudgil, postdoctoral fellow Michael L. Free,
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Florida, and Drs.
N.C. Chaudhuri, Pradip of the Tata Research Development & Design Centre (TRDDC),
Pune, India. The objective of this research is to understand the basic mechanism
involved in selective adsorption of hydroxamate and fatty acid reagents in the
iron oxide-titania systems. Physical and surface chemical characterization would
involve x-rays, SEM, pore size distribution and electrokinetic measurements.
Adsorption, FT-IR and microflotation tests would be conducted to identify the
conditions for achieving the desired separation. Selectivity observed would be
explained on the basis of conditional stability constants, crystal structure
specificity and molecular orbital considerations. It is expected that the
fundamental knowledge base generated in this study would be useful in scientific
design of reagent schemes for processing of low grade complex ores. Scope: This
project allows cooperation between two well known scientists whose capabilities
complement each other and who work in institutions with complementary facilities
for the proposed research. Dr. Moudgil is the director of the newly established
Engineering Research Center for Particle Science and Technology, University of
Florida. He has published extensively, including several co-publications with
Pradip. The collaboration with Dr. Chaudhuri is new and likely to benefit both
institutions. This project meets a number of important objectives of the
Division of International Programs, especially the inclusion of a postdoctoral
fellow and a new Indian participant in the collaboration.