* 9624216
* The Gaseous Extent of Galaxies and the Origin of Quasi-     Stellar Object Lyman-Alpha Absorption Line Systems
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2002
* Kenneth Lanzetta, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 07/31/2002
* USD 324,150.00

Lanzetta 9624216 The research to be carried out focuses on the gaseous extent of
galaxies and the origin of Quasi-Stellar Object (QSO) absorption systems. The
foundation for carrying out the research is an existing imaging and
spectroscopic survey of faint galaxies in the fields of the Hubble Space
Telescope spectroscopic target QSOs. The goal of the survey is to probe the
gaseous extent of galaxies and the origin of Lyman alpha spectral line
absorption systems by directly comparing redshifts of galaxies and absorbers
along common lines of sight. Nearly 2000 faint objects in 25 fields have already
been targeted with low-resolution optical spectroscopy. A wide variety of
follow-up observations of galaxies identified in the survey have already been
obtained, including broad-band optical and infrared imaging, broad-band, high-
resolution optical imaging, and high-resolution optical spectroscopy. Additional
follow-up observations of galaxies identified in the survey are planned,
including 21 cm radio spectroscopy observations and wide-field, low-resolution
optical spectroscopy. The existing and planned observations will constitute an
enormously rich data set that was designed for the purpose of providing new
insights into many different aspects of the relationship between galaxies and
absorption systems. The observations and measurements characterize, in more or
less as much detail as is possible, the properties of an unbiased sample of
galaxies that by chance occur near lines of sight to bright background QSOs.
This allows one to obtain unique measurements of the presence or absence of
corresponding Lyman alpha absorption lines. The potential application of these
observations and measurements is enormous, not only from the perspective of the
relationship between galaxies and absorbers, but also from the perspective of
faint galaxies generally. Specifically, the observations and measurements will
be used to determine how the incidence and extent of tenuous gas around galaxies
depends on the luminosity, mass, morphological type, stellar population and star
formation history, and large-scale environment of the galaxies. The luminosity
function of Lyman alpha absorbing galaxies will be derived. This is a crucial
quantity that links the number density of Lyman alpha absorbers with the number
counts and redshift distribution of faint galaxies. Galaxy and absorber pairs
are also of interest because they provide a new and utterly unique dynamical
probe of galaxies that extends far beyond conventional rotation curves and can
be applied to determine the dark matter content of galaxies to unprecedented
spatial scales and redshifts. The education plan focuses on the development of a
new course and textbook to teach quantitative reasoning skills to non-science
majors and the development of a new program to involve undergraduate students
and high school students in astronomical research. The goal is to exploit the
natural tendency of students in all areas of study to take an interest in
astronomical topics to teach concrete, tangible skills drawn from the areas of
applied physics, applied mathematics, and applied statistics. The new course is
entitled "Impacts in the Solar System" and is specifically aimed at non-science
majors who have had minimal but some background in physics, mathematics, or
statistics. The objective of the course is to apply simple yet rigorous
quantitative reasoning to a variety of problems related to impacts in the solar
system, concentrating especially on terrestrial impacts and their consequences
for evolution of life on Earth, but also covering impacts on other solar system
objects. The objective of the program of undergraduate research is to allow
students from all areas of study particularly those who will not become
professional researchers to benefit from the experience of conducting research.