* 9624475
* CAREER:  Molecular Modeling Studies of Poly(ethylene oxide) and Poly(propylene oxide) in Aqueous Solution
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Grant Smith, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1998
* USD 110,000.00

9624475 Smith This is a new CAREER award for an integrated research and
education program. Due to dramatic improvements in computer hardware and
computational algorithms, molecular modeling of polymers has seen significant
advances in the last few years. As these techniques become increasingly utilized
tools in materials research, the need for force fields which accurately describe
intermolecular and intramolecular interactions will correspondingly increase, as
will the need to expose both graduate and undergraduate students to the power
and utility, and limitations, of these methods. In this grant, the properties of
poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly(propylene oxide) (PPO) in aqueous solution
will be investigated via ab initio quantum chemistry calculations and molecular
dynamics simulations. The main questions to be answered relate to the
interactions of these polymers, one of which is water soluble (PEO) and the
other which is not (PPO), with the water solvent. These issues are of great
interest because PEO and PEO/PPO copolymers are used in a wide variety of
applications where the desired properties are determined by the behavior of the
polymers in aqueous solution. Among these is the modification of surfaces to
provide protein and cell resistance for many important applications, including
controlled release agents, encapsulated enzymes and injectable therapeutic and
diagnostic agents. The excellent protein resistant properties of PEO polymers
are believed to be a result of the unique solution properties of PEO and its
molecular conformation in aqueous solution. In order to expose undergraduate
students to these modeling techniques, a Computational Materials Science Program
will be instituted. The program will consist of a new materials
science/molecular physics course for upper-division undergraduate and graduate
students. The course will emphasize the relationships between molecular
properties and materials behavior. Both semi-empirical and ato mistic methods
for predicting materials properties will be introduced, and the strengths and
limitations of the methods will be examined at length. In the Computational
Materials Research Laboratory (CMSL), the students will gain hands-on experience
using these techniques in well-defined molecular modeling laboratory projects.
The CMSL will be equipped with powerful workstations and modeling software which
is well suited for undergraduate education and research. Undergraduate students
interested in research in computational materials science will have the
opportunity to design and perform projects using CMSL facilities. %%% This is a
new CAREER award for an integrated research and education program. Due to
dramatic improvements in computer hardware and computational algorithms,
molecular modeling of polymers has seen significant advances in the last few
years. As these techniques become increasingly utilized tools in materials
research, the need for force fields which accurately describe intermolecular and
intramolecular interactions will correspondingly increase, as will the need to
expose both graduate and undergraduate students to the power and utility, and
limitations, of these methods. In this grant, the properties of poly(ethylene
oxide) (PEO) and poly(propylene oxide) (PPO) in aqueous solution will be
investigated via ab initio quantum chemistry calculations and molecular dynamics
simulations. The main questions to be answered relate to the interactions of
these polymers, one of which is water soluble (PEO) and the other which is not
(PPO), with the water solvent. These issues are of great interest because PEO
and PEO/PPO copolymers are used in a wide variety of applications where the
desired properties are determined by the behavior of the polymers in aqueous
solution. Among these is the modification of surfaces to provide protein and
cell resistance for many important applications, including controlled release
agents, encapsulated enzymes and inje ctable therapeutic and diagnostic agents.
The excellent protein resistant properties of PEO polymers are believed to be a
result of the unique solution properties of PEO and its molecular conformation
in aqueous solution. In order to expose undergraduate students to these modeling
techniques, a Computational Materials Science Program will be instituted. The
program will consist of a new materials science/molecular physics course for
upper-division undergraduate and graduate students. The course will emphasize
the relationships between molecular properties and materials behavior. Both
semi-empirical and atomistic methods for predicting materials properties will be
introduced, and the strengths and limitations of the methods will be examined at
length. In the Computational Materials Research Laboratory (CMSL), the students
will gain hands-on experience using these techniques in well-defined molecular
modeling laboratory projects. The CMSL will be equiped with powerful
workstations and modeling software which is well suited for undergraduate
education and research. Undergraduate students interested in research in
computational materials science will have the opportunity to design and perform
projects using CMSL facilities. ***