* 9624921
* CAREER:  Nonlinear Propagation of Optical Vortex Solitons
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Chiu-Tai Law, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 06/30/2001
* USD 220,000.00

9624921 Law The soaring increase in network traffic has overwhelmed the
transmission capacity of current communications systems that use electronic
switches and copper wires. The use of optical fibers, switches and modulators,
components of all-optical networks, could equalize not only this disparity but
also provide a gigantic increase in the speed of the information superhighway.
This proposal describes novel approaches to build these optical components. All-
optical switching and modulation enable one light beam to control the
orientation as well as intensity of another light beam, and are hundreds of
times faster than electronic processes. What is more, a light beam can guide
another light beam, which follows the guiding beam's "footprints"-a process
called light-induced waveguiding. These waveguides are produced by special
nonlinear waves called optical vortex solitons. These solitons are peculiar
vortex-like pulses that retain their shape and height after traveling long
distances. Vortex solitons form in selfdefocusing Kerr nonlinear media when
their tendency to spread (diffraction) is counterbalanced by their ability to
change the refractive index of the media (Kerr nonlinearity). Recent experiment
has demonstrated the light guiding capability of vortex soliton in this kind of
medium. Optical transistor effect is another recent experimental result that
reveals the potential application of vortex solitons in optical switching and
modulation. Manipulating the size of a vortex soliton, another light beam (gate
signal) can control the guiding efficiency and sensitivity of light-induced
waveguide. As a result, a guided beam is modulated as well as amplified by the
gate and guiding beams. The proposed study will establish the theoretical basis
for light-induced waveguides, modulators and switches as well as simulate their
actions computationally. Particularly, the propagation dynamics of vortex
solitons in a CW laser beam as well as in a laser pulse will be investiga ted.
This study will concentrate on the interactions among vortex solitons themselves
as well as vortex solitons with other light pulses. These interactions are
crucial to practical applications, such as optical interconnections. Vortex
solitons not only have tremendous application potential, but also constitute a
new frontier for the exploration of vortex physics. This may lead to discovery
of novel phenomena that will find applications in other areas. The outcomes of
this project will result in a general simulation package for designing nonlinear
devices. Simulation results will be verified by various numerical methods as
well as experimental data provided by co-works at Worcester Polytechnic
Institute, Naval Research Laboratory and Wright Laboratory. A well-balanced
education for engineering students should consist of computational and
experimental training. One of the proposed educational activities involves the
use of computer as a tool for learning and communication in the undergraduate
Electromagnetics class. Computer can enlighten students on those abstract
theories by presenting results on visual display. As a communication tool,
computer becomes another channel for a two-way discussion between an instructor
and students. This will be achieved by setting up an electronic bulletin board
and a home page for the class. The role of computer in graduate research is even
more sign)ficant. Graduate training will include extensive exposure to different
numerical techniques and development of analytic sense. Graduate student, as a
researcher, should be capable of searching for information and disseminating
research results timely. Again graduate students will receive in-depth training
on using computers for communication. For experimental training, a graduate
student exchange program will be set up with Worcester Polytechnic Institute
which has a nonlinear optics laboratory with state-of-the-art equipment. At UWM,
an optics laboratory will be set up for three opti cs courses-optical
communication, laser and nonlinear optics-with the help of graduate students who
participate in the exchange program. This laboratory will also be used to verify
numerical results for the research project. Experiments for the three courses
will focus on practical issues and design techniques as well as current research
topics. The list of experiments will be updated to keep abreast with technology.
The proposed optics laboratory will be a magnet for attracting students to
involve in optical research. The intent of the experiments in the three optics
courses is to introduce research activities to undergraduate students.
Computational training is another component in the proposed research and
education plans. Computer will be used heavily as communication tool and
learning aid for both education and research. ***