* 9624628
* CAREER: Full Wave Analysis of Electronic Packaging on High  Performance Computers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Stephen Gedney, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vijay Jain
* 07/31/2001
* USD 284,419.00

9624628 Gedney In recent years, the speeds and densities of semiconductor
devices have increased dramatically, resulting in single chip devices with
millions of transistors, digital devices operating with clock speeds approaching
500 MHz, and microwave devices with operating frequencies upwards to 250. In
order to support such high speed devices, the electronic packaging, namely, the
electrical interconnect networks supporting the semiconductor devices, must be
miniaturized and their design optimized to maintain signal integrity. Therefore,
it is vital to develop rigorous methods to accurately analyze and design
electrical interconnect networks of electronic packages. This research effort
will develop full wave analysis tools that this is capable of analyzing
practical large scale electronic packages for digital circuit and microwave
circuit applications. To this end, the principal objectives are: 1) To provide
the capability of full-wave electromagnetic field analyses of dense electronic
packages. 2) Develop explicit and implicit time-domain solutions of Maxwell's
equations specifically using higher-order basis functions, and also utilizing
Wavelet expansions. 3) Develop a hybrid explicit/implicit solution of Maxwell's
equations using the finite-difference time domain and finite-element time-domain
methods. 4) Extend the perfectly matched layer (PML) boundary condition to
explicit and implicit time-domain schemes based on unstructured meshes. 5)
Develop innovative parallel algorithms for implicit and explicit schemes for
heterogeneous distributed multiprocessor computing environments, and for hybrid
explicit/implicit methods. 6) Establish industrial affiliates to mentor the
practical applications of the full-wave simulation tools and to provide test
beds for these tools to be applied in a design environment. The teaching effort
will initially focus on the modification existing courses in electromagnetics.
The objective of this effort is to provide an applied knowledge to students
through the use of interactive software toolboxes and the development of a case
study library that can be presented for instructional purposes at the
undergraduate and graduate level. This will enable students to have a better
physical understanding of electromagnetic field and wave interactions by being
able to visualize understanding of electromagnetic field and wave interactions
by being able to visualize the physical phenomena in real world applications.
Furthermore, through case studies, students will be provided with a better
applied knowledge of electromagnetics. Finally, multiprocessor computers are
reaching the point where they are becoming economical for industry and will be
used more and more in engineering design. However, only a select few engineers
and computer scientists are trained on development of software on these
platforms. On of the goals will be to provide a course in the fundamentals on
parallel computing, with hands on experience of parallel algorithm development
using a number of platforms and paradigms. This course will be cross-
disciplinary and will provide a foundation and practical understanding of
parallel algorithm development and parallel paradigms to engineering students at
a number of Universities as well engineers in Industry in the Commonwealth of
Kentucky. ***