* 9624932
* CAREER:  A Semantic Framework for Static and Dynamic        Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Rebecca Parsons, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 12/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Acceptance of an object-oriented approach to scientific computing is being
hindered by the performance differential between programs written in traditional
languages and those written in object-oriented languages. These performance
issues stem from the limitations on static dependence analysis and compiler
optimization posed by the presence of objects. An approach to increasing the
degree of optimization in object-oriented environments is incorporating
information about the object semantics and performing runtime optimizations. As
proved true for compiler optimization using static dependence
information,informal semantics and intuition are inadequate. A semantic
foundation for optimization which includes support for dynamic dependence and
for the richer data types exploited in object-oriented languages provides an
important foundation for advancing compiler research. The semantic model studied
in this research is intended to unify reasoning both in the compiler (static)
environment and the runtime (dynamic)environment. Support for dynamic object
creation and even dynamic class definition can be considered in a setting
exploiting both static and dynamic dependence information. The resulting model,
utilizing tools such as denotational semantics and equational calculi, will
allow the creation of automated tools to assist in the development of advanced
compiler optimizations with the additional formal assurances that these
optimizations do not alter the meaning of the program. The computational demands
posed by computational biology provide another realistic setting within which to
study the complexities of object-oriented parallel and distributed program
development and the concomitant optimization needs for language systems. The
educational goals of this research are to both alter the programming languages
and compiler curricula to address, at all levels, issues of semantics,
optimization, and the degree to which each affect the other. The computational
biology work provides a promising framework within which to study these issues.
Thus, the computational biology curricula is being developed in parallel with
the languages work. This research is expected to contribute to an understanding
of the nature of program dependences; how different language constructs and
program usage contribute to different patterns of dependence; and how these
patterns can be exploited in language design or in language translation. Work in
this area has already uncovered unsuspected connections between lazy evaluation
and imperative languages. Further study should provide insight into
relationships among languages in the context of their interactions at runtime. A
goal of this research is to support the mixing of languages without sacrificing
the performance of the program, allowing the programmer to select the most
appropriate language for the individual parts of a problem. The fundamental
notion of program dependence is a natural basis on which to construct a system
supporting this style of programming. ***