* 9624090
* Theoretical Studies of Near-Critical Fluids in Dilute       Porous Media
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Andrea Liu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 03/31/2000
* USD 329,500.00

Andrea Liu is supported by a Faculty Early Career Development Award from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to study equilibrium phase
behavior and diffusive transport in near-critical fluids, such as vapor-liquid
systems or binary liquid mixtures, confined in dilute porous media such as
silica gels. In general, the behavior of a near-critical fluid in a porous
medium is an extremely difficult theoretical problem, because the surface of the
medium strongly prefers one phase of the fluid and because the structure of the
medium is highly disordered. The approach used by Liu focuses on the strong
interaction between the fluid and the surface; previous theoretical work has
assumed that the interaction is weak and that disorder is the dominant factor.
The keystone of the proposal is a model of the confining medium as a simple
periodic network of cylindrical strands, which Liu has solved within the mean-
field approximation. The proposed work builds on this basic model by using a
coordinated combination of analytic and numerical techniques to investigate the
effects of critical fluctuations and long-wavelength disorder in the gel
structure, as well as the nonequilibrium behavior. This approach represents the
best hope of isolating the effects of surface interactions and of disorder in
the geometry of the medium in order to determine their relative importance for
equilibrium and nonequilibrium behavior. The proposed education plan is centered
around effective scientific communication. The objectives are to demystify
science for non-majors and to convince them that chemistry is an important and
interesting part of daily life, and to teach majors and graduate students how to
communicate their work more effectively. Nearly critical fluids in dilute porous
media, such as those studied by Liu, are models for more general multiphase
fluids in more realistic porous media. Applications that are of industrial
importance range from catalysis in porous beds, to storage of liquid wastes and
liquid fuels in porous glasses, to the extraction of liquids such as oil from
porous media like sandstone. An improved theoretical understanding of transport
in porous media could have a significant impact in several of these strategic
areas.