* 9624776
* Career Program:  A Theoretical and Experimental             Investigation of Novel Interfacial Instabilities in Thin    Spreading Films
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1996,12/31/2001
* Sandra Troian, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2001
* USD 265,000.00

9624776 Troian In parallel with the technological push toward miniaturization of
processing and instrumentation, there has developed renewed interest in the
behavior of thin fluid films in confined geometries. Particular attention is
being drawn to the question of how transport in ultrasmall geometries can cause
a system to behave in ways significantly different than its behavior in bulk. In
chemical engineering this focus has translated directly into investigations of
the structure and dynamics of liquids at interfaces. Even for the case of simple
Newtonian liquids, novel transport behavior has been recently uncovered related
to the interplay between surface tension, surface tension gradients,
evaporation, and Van derWaals forces - forces which have been studied for over a
century but whose coupling can lead to interesting and unexpected instabilities
in very thin films. The general objective of this research is to develop a
complete and fundamental understanding of the spreading kinetics of one liquid
on the surface of a supporting liquid higher surface tension with particular
focus on issues of stability. The first project involves the characterization of
a hydrodynamic fingering instability which occurs during the advance of
spreading surfactant solutions along a moist support. Given the implications of
this simple laboratory marker to differentiate surfactant solutions providing
stable homogeneous coverage from those yielding unstable, dendritic, and
inhomogeneous coverage. The second instability involves Marangoni stresses
coupled to evaporative effects. A novel fingering instability develops spanwise
along the thickened receding edge of a volatile hydrocarbon liquid film receding
from a bulk water support after spontaneous hole nucleation and growth.
Understanding how to prevent such an instability can lead to a new technique for
hydrocarbon separation involving Marangoni stresses. The four year experimental
and theoretical program will characterize these instabilities wh ich can
significantly affect transport behavior in system ranging from surfactant
transport in pulmonary flow, to the fabrication of organic films used in optical
microdevices, to the separation of hydrocarbon mixtures in the films. These two
types of instabilities and their characteristics pattern formations develop at
the advancing or receding front of a thin liquid film coating the surface of a
liquid support. The challenge is to fully characterize the flows from a liquid
mechanical point of view and more importantly to use this knowledge to develop
practical schemes with which to enhance transport properties and reduce
inhomogeneous surface coverage in thin spreading films. Suggestions for such
schemes are described. ***