* 9624833
* Optical, Structural, and Dynamic Properties of Viscous      Liquids, Glasses, and Crystalline Materials Under Extremes  of Pressure and Temperature
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1996,02/28/2002
* William Oliver, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/2002
* USD 300,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\career\0formca.doc 9624833 Oliver An academic research
program aimed at exploring fundamental properties of important condensed matter
systems in new and interesting thermodynamic regimes will be developed and
integrated into the educational experiences of both graduate and undergraduate
students at the University. Fundamental studies of the equations of state,
optical properties, fragilities, and both fast and slow relaxation processes of
viscous liquid glass- forming systems; and the optical, mechanical, and dynamic
properties of glassy, crystalline, and polymeric materials will be conducted
using both high-pressure and powerful optical and light scattering techniques.
Students in this program will have an opportunity to conduct high-pressure
viscosity experiments by visiting the Exxon Research and Engineering Laboratory
under an existing collaboration. Integrally related to this research program
will be the development of a unique upper level undergraduate laboratory for the
Growth and Characterization of Optical Materials (which is being developed in
part under NSF-ILI award number: DUE 9452409). %%% This program will have two
integrally related components: (i) the development of an academic research
program aimed at exploring fundamental properties of liquids and solids under
extremely high pressure, and (ii) the development of a unique upper level
undergraduate laboratory for the Growth and Characterization of Optical
Materials. A common theme to both components is the use of modern laser and
optical techniques. The first component focuses on fundamental studies of
viscous liquids and melted polymers and the ways in which they solidify at low
temperature or high pressure into either a crystalline material with an ordered
arrangement of molecules or a glassy material where the arrangement is random.
The s econd component will give undergraduate science and engineering students
"hands-on" experiences, using modern equipment, with several aspects of
materials research. This laboratory course will focus on important
semiconducting and optical materials as educational vehicles for developing
skills in growing materials and determining their physical, electrical, and
optical properties. Undergraduates will be involved in both components and
graduate students will have opportunities to conduct high-pressure viscosity
measurements at the Exxon Research and Engineering Laboratory under an existing
collaboration. ***