* 9624154
* Career Development Plan
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* C. Daniel Frisbie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

Abstract 9624154 Frisbie This proposal addresses two separate projects which are
part of general investigations of nanoscale materials chemistry. The first
project, is concerned with the construction of nanoscale molecular transistors
(NMTs) to determine electrical conductivity mechanisms in individual molecules
and molecular aggregates. These molecular devices will operate analogously to
recently developed single electron transistors based on quantum dots. To make
these devices, new methods for nanofabrication with the atomic force microscope
will be utilized as well as conventional electron beam writing techniques.
Molecules can be placed between closely-spaced source and drain electrodes by
vapor deposition, or by molecular self-assembly. The aim is to observe the
Coulomb Blockade for the first time in organic materials, to achieve room
temperature operation, and to demonstrate transport spectroscopy in which the
energy levels available for charge transport in the molecules are revealed.
Completion of these studies will result in significantly new knowledge of
conductivity mechanisms in organic materials and will define an important
prospective device technology for molecular electronics. For the second project,
a new scanning probe technique, near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM),
will be used to probe the optical properties of electrochemical interfaces and
nanostructures with high (&lt;50 nm) spatial resolution. In particular, the aim
is to show that NSOM can be used to map current density at electrochemical
interfaces by imaging luminescence from certain electrochemical reactions.
Investigation of luminescence from porous silicon will be conducted to verify
that the light emission occurs from silicon nanostructures and to track the
development of these nanostructures during growth of the porous oxide. Finally,
experiments are described to use NSOM as a nanolithography tool and as a means
for direct measurement of intermolecular forces with simultaneo us tip-sample
contact area measurement. %%% Tremendous opportunities are arising for gaining
new knowledge and developing new technology by building and studying nanoscale
structures. Recent developments in molecular self-assembly technology and
scanning probe microscopies in particular enable unprecedented manipulation and
investigation of materials on the nanoscopic scale. This research is aimed at
utilizing these new methods for probing nanoscale properties of materials and
interfaces. In the first project, nanoscale molecular transistors are
constructed to determine electrical conductivity mechanisms in individual
molecules and molecular aggregates. These molecular devices will operate
analogously to recently developed single electron transistors and offer an
important prospective device technology for molecular electronics. In the second
project, a new scanning probe technique is to probe the optical properties of
organic materials and electrochemical interfaces with high (~50 nm) spatial
resolution.