* 9624251
* CAREER:  Optically-Interconnected Fully-Adaptive Network    Router
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Timothy Pinkston, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 06/30/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9624251 Pinkston The precursor to building general-purpose teraflop computer
systems is the advancement of network technology to reach much higher levels of
performance. In parallel processor systems, where multiple high performance
processors work cooperatively as one connected unit, performance is determined
by the effective utilization of processor nodes which, predominately, depends
upon communication efficiency. The backbone for communication in parallel
processing environments is the interconnection network. We propose to design and
implement in a hybrid GaAs/silicon chip a flexible fully-adaptive deadlock-free
optical network router featuring a new packet routing algorithm universally
applicable to any network topology. This proposed research serves to further
advance the state-of-the-art in interconnection network technology by exploring
hardware-based solutions for increasing parallel processor communication
efficiency. This work leverages ofd of current trends in interconnection network
router architecture and continuing advancements in optical/photonic technology.
Our proposed optical router provides a flexible framework for exploring many
design alternatives never before imagined due to its high degree of resource
decoupling and topological independence. Interesting issues to be investigated
in the building of the router include how to accurately detect deadlock, how to
efficiently implement the deadlockfree recovery lane, how to implement low
overhead internal and external flow control for optical interconnects, and how
to integrate optical transmitters, optical receivers. and complex electronic
router logic circuitry onto a single optoelectronic VLSI router chip.
Interesting issues that can be further understood once the router is built
include the performance and/or fault tolerance advantages of fully adaptive
wormhole routing, misrouting capability, the use of the DB resource for not only
recovering from potential deadlocks but also for relieving n ormal network
congestion, and the use of dense high bandwidth optical I/O for fully adaptive
network routers. We will systematically address these and other important issues
as we go about designing, building, and experimenting with this novel network
router. This research adds significantly to optical interconnect/photonic
switching infrastructure. This work is pioneering in that, to our knowledge, we
are the first to propose research that encompasses advanced switching, flow
control, and routing functionality in optical interconnection network design.
The principal investigator will lead a dedicated research team ranging in
research experience consisting of undergraduate, graduate. and post-graduate
collaborative researchers. Moreover, important research achievements will find
use in the classroom to serve as excellent illustrations in teaching. Hence, we
will demonstrate that current and next-generation interconnection network
techniques such as wormhole switching, virtual channel flow, and adaptive
routing are feasibly incorporated in optically-based interconnection networks.
This will provide a platform on which to build optically interconnected parallel
processing systems, impacting the applicability of this technology to future
systems. ***