* 9624057
* Stark Units
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* David Dummit, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/2000
* USD 31,850.00

Algebraic number theory concern the study of the fields obtained by adjoining an
algebraic number to the field of rational numbers. The Stark Conjectures
postulate a deep connection between special values of the analytically defined
L-series of such a number field and algebraic properties of the field. In
particular, these Conjectures predict that certain specific elements of the
complex numbers obtained from the L-series are actually algebraic elements, the
Stark units. In the case of a relative abelian extension of number fields, the
Conjectures further predict that these elements, which would be uniquely defined
by the analytic data up to a choice of a root of unity, generate abelian
extensions of the number field. The Stark Conjectures are among the central
questions in algebraic number theory. This investigation is concerned with
examining a number of questions regarding these conjectures, continuing and
extending prior work of the investigators. This research falls into the general
mathematical field of Number Theory. Number theory has its historical roots in
the study of the whole numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with
the divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches
of mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons.
However, within the last half century it has become an indispensable tool in
diverse applications in areas such as data transmission and processing, and
communication systems.