* 9624544
* Career:  Uncertainty Management in Geoenvironmental         Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Robert Gilbert, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2002
* USD 366,561.00

Abstract 9624544 The goal of this career-development project is to facilitate
uncertainty management in geoenvironmental engineering through both research and
educational activities. Uncertainty is significant in geoenvironmental
engineering, and its effective management is necessary to maximize benefits and
minimize costs. The specific research objectives are: 1. Develop and teach
fundamental principles and practical tools for managing uncertainty in
geoenvironmental design. 2. Gain and disseminate knowledge about the performance
(both technical and economic) of remedial actions at contaminated sites. 3.
Create innovative educational units based on experiential learning for teaching
uncertainty management principles. 4. Provide unique educational and research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, such as interactions with
private industry in internship programs and through research collaboration. A
key element of the project is interaction between academia and industry; it is
essential in meeting each one of the stated objectives. The project consists of
integrated research and educational activities, including the compilation of a
data base of performance information for remedial actions at contaminated sites.
Focus is placed on obtaining high quality, detailed information for ten to
fifteen sites, with selected sites being used for case studies, both in research
and in teaching. Following the incorporation of an existing groundwater flow and
transport model into a simulation tool to create hypothetical sites with
complex, heterogeneous, and transient subsurface conditions, this simulation
tool is used to study site investigation strategies, and as part of an
interactive software package for students to learn about designing site
investigation programs. Theoretical analyses are conducted to develop practical
guidelines and tools for evaluating the extent of contamination and for
predicting design performance. The education componen t includes, (1) the
development of a new graduate-level course and a continuing education course to
teach about uncertainty management in geoenvironmental engineering, and (2) the
incorporation into an undergraduate course of a laboratory program that allows
students to experiment with the fundamentals of probability and statistics
through numerical simulation. Opportunities will be created for student
interaction with private industry and other disciplines through internship
programs, guest lectures and research collaboration. This career development
project addresses an important problem in geoenvironmental engineering, namely
uncertainty management. In addition, it will advance uncertainty management in
other engineering disciplines. The ultimate product will be engineering students
and practitioners who have the capability to manage uncertainty effectively. ***