* 9624386
* Career: Nonlinear Control: New Problems for Robust and      Adaptive Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Miroslav Krstic, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2000
* USD 210,000.00

9624386 Krstic The research objective of the proposal is to develop new control
designs which exploit, rather than counteract, nonlinear features of engineering
systems. The Principal Investigator's previous research includes solutions to
several long-standing design problems in adaptive nonlinear control and a new
monograph on control of uncertain nonlinear systems. These designs are gaining
popularity in a number of application areas, and are included in commercially
available control design software. This proposal addresses new problems of
robust and adaptive control for systems with severe nonlinearities and highly
uncertain models. (A) New designs will be developed which avoid cancellation of
useful nonlinearities. This is a major theoretical and practical problem which
the PI was recently able to solve for application to jet engine stabilization. A
general solution to this problem is likely to have a technological impact in
application areas such as automotive systems, flight control, electric motors,
power systems, manufacturing, and many others. Designs without cancellation will
contribute to solving robust nonlinear control problems of practical importance:
limited control power, sensitivity to noise and unmodeled dynamics, and
stabilization of bifurcated equilibria. (B) Design methods will be developed to
solve the problem of "peak seeking"-regulation to peaks of uncertain nonlinear
functions. Such problems occur in many inherently nonlinear applications where
maximum efficiency is achieved at the peak but the uncertainty prevents the
designer from choosing the set point a priori. (C) Existing methods of adaptive
nonlinear control will be redesigned to allow nonparametric uncertainties and
improve performances under unmodeled dynamics. The PI's recent finding that
adaptive controllers can converge to destabilizing controllers (while
guaranteeing global regulation) advances the fundamental geometric understanding
of adaptive systems and will guide his future robust redesigns. The objectives
of the proposal are motivated by application problems, and will provide a
theoretical base for future collaborative projects with United Technologies,
Ford Motor Company, and Rockwell International. The focus of the education plan
is on developing a new graduate course Nonlinear Control Design based on the
PI's recent book. An effort will be made to introduce nonlinear control results
of engineering relevance into the graduate control curriculum. A particular
emphasis will be put on making nonlinear control attractive to a broader
spectrum of control students, especially those with interest in applications, so
as to enhance appreciation of control among future industrial leaders. The
undergraduate teaching plan is a part of a major innovative reform of the
undergraduate curriculum at UMCP. The dynamics of the industrial environment are
much faster than those of the academic environment, consequently, the plan calls
for undergraduate control education which teaches a lasting set of skills with
enduring value. Computer animation is proposed as an important tool for teaching
undergraduate control. ***