* 9624787
* CAREER:  Integrated Product and De- and Remanufacture Process Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Bert Bras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2001
* USD 320,000.00

9624787 Bras This NSF Career Award provides support for research on how to
enhance the integrated design of products and de- and remanufacture processes.
Demanufacture is defined as the entire process opposite to manufacture involved
in recycling, reuse, incineration and/or disposal of products after they have
been taken back by one or more companies. The specific objectives of the work
are to establish (1) the operational parameters and models for an extended set
of commercial and prototypical plastic-metal chemical and mechanical product de-
and remanufacturing processes, (2) computer-based tools for integrated product
and process design of plastic-metal products with associated appropriate high
performance and robust de- and remanufacture processes, and (3) the efficient
and effective integration of such new technologies in engineering education.
These objectives will be achieved by (1) classifying the technical, economical
and ecological performance of appropriate de- and remanfacture processes, (2)
developing models for de- and remanufacturability performance and robustness
assessments, (3) developing tools for de- and remanufacturability process
selection and synthesis, (4) integrating this process selection and synthesis
with product design and synthesis models, and (5) enhancing the education and
learning about new technologies in general and de- and remanufacture in
particular through the development and assessment of new courseware and
educational facilities. Educational focal points are to (a) increase learning
through doing by creating a facility where students can demanufacture real
systems, (b) increase the outreach to practicing engineers (and others) by
creating self-study (multi-media) courseware on product and process design for
de- and remanufacture, and (c) increase the diversity of students and encourage
holistic thinking by creating an international course on Environmentally
Conscious Design. A primary issue is assessing the effectiveness of the learning
that takes place by the students. A secondary issue is the efficiency of the
delivery of the educational material. This award will provide advances in the
field of recycling durable goods, like automobiles. It will help to increase the
US competitiveness with respect to designing products and cost-effective
recycling processes that will meet current and pending product take-back
legislation in Europe. The research will contribute to new technologies for
pursing recyclability, reusability, and other means of environmentally benign
product disposal. Other tangible outcomes will be computer-based tools that will
provide decision support and enable designers to explore different recycling
process scenarios in conjunction with the product design.