* 9625892
* Acquisition of a Custom Molecular Beam Epitaxy System for   Metals and Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Thomas Myers, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1999
* USD 189,120.00

9625892 Lederman The considerable recent interest in magnetic thin films and
superlattices has been fueled in large part by the potential technological
applications of giant magnetoresistance (GMR), exchange anisotropy (EA), and
perpendicular anisotropies in metallic ferromagnets. However, numerous topics of
interest in this field have not been fully explored, including the magnetic
interactions in superlattices composed of alternating metallic and insulating
layers, and purely insulating magnetic superlattices. These types of
superlattices could further our basic understanding of magnetic interactions and
lead to unexpected technologies. The molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system
sponsored by this award is designed to grow and characterize a wide variety of
magnetic superlattices, including those composed only of insulators, only of
metals, or combinations of insulators and metals. %%% Characterizing the
structure of these materials is important because the surface and interface
structure in magnetic thin films and superlattices can significantly affect
their physical properties. In order to understand these properties, it is
crucial to study the surface of these materials as a function of growth
parameters, such as film thickness, growth temperature, and growth rate.
Structural studies can also aid in distinguishing the structural effects from
the intrinsic superlattice and interface effects. This can be done in-situ using
surface-sensitive techniques such as reflection high energy electron diffraction
(RHEED), low energy electron diffraction (LEED), scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM), and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) without contamination from the
air. This information will be complemented with ex-situ x-ray diffraction
measurements. ***