* 9625762
* WORKSHOP: ORGANIZATION OF THE 1996 INTEGRATED PHOTONICS     RESEARCH TOPICAL MEETING, APRIL 28-MAY 3, 1996, BOSTON MA
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* David Hennage, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 04/30/1997
* USD 5,000.00

9625762 Hennage This is a request for a grant towards defraying the cost of
attendance at the OSA/IEEE Integrated Photonics Research Conference (IPR) for
selected American students who would otherwise be unable to come to the meeting.
It is expected that participation will significantly advance the educational and
research impact of the conference. A very important aspect of IPR is its unique
role in education and training in the field of guided-wave optoelectronics. The
conference presents students and researchers with the latest ideas and results,
and provides a forum for discussion and sharing contributions with colleagues as
well as leading scientists. The purpose of the grant we propose here is
therefore to help sustain the participation of graduate students in the meeting.
At present large conferences such as the LEOS Annual, OFC, OSA Annual, CLEO and
SPIE meetings are increasingly soliciting integrated optics papers.
Unfortunately, relatively few researchers are able to attend all these forums,
while yearly attendance at IPR has remained relatively constant at 200-250
attendees with 15-20 % being students. This has led to some dissatisfaction
among many members of the integrated optics community. To reverse this trend by
strengthening the educational and research content of IPR, the conference this
year has undergone several major changes. First, the technical program committee
has been expanded from 44 to 59 members. Many of the new members were added to
help organize eight semi-autonomous symposia on key emerging areas in guided-
wave optics ranging from Silicon Photonics and Parallel Optical Interconnects to
Optical System Modeling and Integrated Optics and Micromachining. In future
years, the more successful symposia will hopefully develop into permanent sub-
units of the conference and additional symposia will be established as
warranted. Since symposia papers undergo the same careful review process as
normal contributed papers, we hope in this mann er to combine the flexibility of
a small topical meeting format with the high scientific standards normally
associated with large professional meetings. At the same time, IPR will continue
to offer a full program of regular submitted papers in its core areas -
numerical simulation and design, active semiconductor devices, dielectric
waveguides and waveguide devices and photonic component manufacturing and
packaging technology. These sessions traditionally have attracted many of the
top international scientists in the guided-wave optics field from a wide cross-
section of organizational backgrounds. Indeed, the geographic distribution of
registrants for IPR'95 was - North/South America: 54%, Europe: 25%, and Pacific
Rim: 60%. ***