* 9625692
* Acquisition of a Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope  for Nanotexture and Microcharacterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Hamid Garmestani, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2000
* USD 301,871.00

9625692 Kalu This award supports the acquisition of a Scanning Transmission
Electron Microscope (STEM) as the next step in the growth and development of the
materials research community at two major academic institutions, Florida
Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU) - a minority/HBCU institution, and
Florida State University (FSU), together with the Center for Materials Research
and Technology and the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. The research
projects address the need for microcharacterization of technologically important
materials in a number of fields such as advanced aluminum-based aerospace
alloys, composites, high strength conductors, high temperature alloys and
electronic thin films. The primary objective in acquiring an STEM with a
nanotexture analytical capability is to enable the faculty and researchers at
FAMU and FSU to perform research in the area of materials characterization. This
includes, but is not limited to nanotexture analysis, nanophase identification
and in-situ deformation and annealing studies. The equipment will compliment our
existing texture facility and therefore provide a unique microanalytical
capability for advanced research on an international scale. %%% The primary
objective in acquiring an STEM with a nanotexture analytical capability is to
enable the faculty and researchers at FAMU and FSU to perform research in the
area of materials characterization. This includes, but is not limited to
nanotexture analysis, nanophase identification and in-situ deformation and
annealing studies. The equipment will compliment our existing texture facility
and therefore provide a unique microanalytical capability for advanced research
on an international scale. ***