* 9625287
* GEM:  Three Dimensional Kinetic Instabilities in the Near-Earth Thin Current Sheet
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Philip Pritchett, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 05/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

A fundamental problem of magnetospheric physics is to understand the failure of
the magnetosphere to make a smooth transition from a state of slow convection
and low dissipation to one of fast convection and high dissipation in response
to enhanced coupling of solar wind energy into the magnetosphere. A
magnetospheric substorm initiates the transition. The precise physical
mechanisms that occur at auroral breakup and trigger the substorm have yet to be
determined. There is a long established theoretical belief that the triggering
mechanism involves the growth of a localized plasma instability in the near-
Earth plasma sheet. Plasma simulations in 2-D, however, have not been able to
produce such an instability. This proposed effort will initiate a series of 3-D
particle and hybrid simulations with the goal to determine if the localised-
instability hypothesis is correct. Various instabilities including (drift kink,
collisionless tearing, interchange/ballooning, lower- hybrid drift, cross-field
streaming, ion Weibel, etc.) will be considered and examined. The large-scale
30D simulations will be implemented on massively-parallel computers using a very
efficient General Concurrent Particle-in-Cell algorithm. Only large scale 3- D
kinetic simulations of this type can determine the role of various localized
plasma instabilities in destabilizing the near- Earth plasma sheet.