* 9625907
* Mathematical Sciences:  High-Order Mixed Elements on        Tetrahedral Meshes for the Stokes Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Shangyou Zhang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 54,000.00

Zhang 9625907 The investigator studies high order mixed finite element methods
on tetrahedral meshes for the 3D stationary Stokes problems, and the iterative
solvers for the resulting discrete linear systems of equations. Preliminary work
done by the investigator finds a family of stable mixed elements on some macro-
element type grids. This result indicates the possibility of finding the minimal
polynomial degree of continuous piecewise polynomials for the velocity where one
degree less piecewise polynomials are employed to approximate the pressure and
the mixed elements are stable; this has been an open problem for more than a
decade. The investigator studies various augmented Lagrangian methods (including
the well-known Uzawa method and the iterative penalty method) where the
effective multigrid method or/and domain decomposition method are combined to
achieve the optimal order of computation. The difficulty in the design of both
the mixed elements and the iterative methods is to treat the incompressible
condition. The investigator develops computer algorithms for some well-known
equations in incompressible fluid dynamics. Problems of incompressible
computational fluid dynamics arise throughout industry and science. There are
difficult challenges in developing these methods involving limits of computer
memory and speed, as well as accuracy and robustness of the method itself. The
algorithm is expected to have applications to areas such as airfoil design and
to manufacturing processes involving fluid flow in complex shapes, for example,
the chemical industry.