* 9625291
* CAREER:  Rare Event Simulation Techniques and Their Applications to Models of Computer and Telecommunication    Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2002
* Perwez Shahabuddin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 08/31/2002
* USD 310,000.00

9625291 Shahabuddin The research plan for this project focuses on new strategies
for efficient simulation of computer and telecommunication systems. For many
large-scale systems, simulation is one of the few means available to analyze
system performance, but because these systems must often meet critical
standards, estimating the probabilities of certain "rare events", e.g. overflows
from a finite buffer queue or system failures, via simulation may be time-
consuming and difficult. The research has two main thrusts: first, to
investigate the extension of importance sampling techniques to non-Markovian
processes, and second, to investigate a relatively new technique called
importance splitting. These techniques will be studied in the context of
queueing and reliability problems. Collaboration with researcher(s) at a major
computer systems manufacturer is proposed on performance analysis of high speed
telecommunications networks." The educational plan has two specific goals (1) to
develop an advanced simulation course at the M.S./Ph.D. level that would expose
students to more modeling and analysis tools; and (2) to expand the involvement
of talented undergraduate students in research activities. The investigator will
enhance the exposure of students to industrial problems from the experiences
gained in working directly with a large industrial firm and incorporting
interactions with industry into the curriculum. Moreover, to use his 5-year
industry experience to enhance the exposure of students to industrial problems.
The development of efficient techniques for simulating large-scale systems holds
the potential for significant contributions to the design, control, and analysis
of these systems. The principal investigator has previously developed an
impressive body of work in the area of importance sampling for queueing and
reliability problems. The research builds on this work, and there is strong
potential for incremental gains. Moreover, the educational plan promise s to
bring many of the results of the research back to the classroom.