* 9625910
* CISE Postdoctoral Program: Research in Computer Aided Design of VLSI Circuits with Emphasis on Deep Submicron Technology
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Ernest Kuh, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 02/28/1998
* USD 20,910.00

9625910 Kuh, Ernest S. University of California, Berkeley CISE Postdoctoral
Program: Research in Computer Aided Design of VLSI Circuits with Emphasis on
Deep Submicron Technology This award supports associate John P. Lillis. With the
advent of deep submicron technology, the VLSI community is now faced with many
new technical challenges which are currently inadequately addressed by the state
of the art in Computer Aided Design for VLSI circuits. Because of the scaling of
feature size in the submicron domain, performance of VLSI systems is now largely
dominated by interconnect delay. Some powerful techniques for addressing this
interconnect dominance are timing optimization by buffer insertion, wire sizing
and performance driven routing. We propose that the time during the award period
be used to further develop these techniques into a mature, cohesive set of
tools. Among the research objectives of the proposals are (1) development of
algorithms for routing and buffer insertion to address the problems of
electromigration and crosstalk noise, (2) experimental evaluation of gate
replication techniques for timing optimization and (3) integration of the
optimization techniques at a higher level in the physical layout process which
included circuit placement. All of these topics are of great practical
importance in deep submicron systems of today and the future.