* 9625662
* Identification of Round Rotor Generator Stability Constants from Operating Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Ali Keyhani, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Marija Ilic
* 09/30/2000
* USD 158,696.00

9625662 Keyhani In the next few decades, the power systems of the United States
will face bottlenecks in transferring bulk power due to the virtual absence of
new transmission line construction. The increased utilization of existing
facilities to cope with the growing magnitude of bulk power transfers and third-
party access will require a closer look at system stability requirements. In
addition, as more thyristor-based controllers, including phase shifters,
advanced static VAR compensators, and modulator series capacitors, are used to
control bulk power networks, accurate dynamic models of generators, will be
required for precise control of bulk power transmission systems. Rapid
development in computer technology has facilitated computerized instrumentation
of power systems. In the next few years, power systems will be monitored and
operated by many computers in a decentralized control structure. Computers will
be installed in power plants to monitor the input and output responses of the
generators. The operating responses can be used for the development of generator
models and tracking of key parameters for incipient failure detection. The
objectives of this project are to develop a new technology for identification of
round rotor generator models based on operating data resulting from disturbances
occurring in power systems. The operating data for this project will be provided
by Arizona Public Service Company (APS) for Cholla and Four Corners units (see
Section H for APS letter of support). Signal processing and system
identification methods will be used to develop the technology for estimation of
stability parameter of the round rotor generators from the operating data. The
significance of the proposed research is that engineers at utility companies can
use the proposed technology to develop generator models for use in power system
control and stability studies. Furthermore, by tracking the machine parameters
and turns ratio of stator and f ield windings, the incipient faults of
synchronous machines can be detected in real time. Finally, the results of this
research can be used by the power systems control engineers to accurately
predict and control the dynamic performance of electronically-controlled future
power systems. ***