* 9625421
* Symbolic Software for the Investigation of Nonlinear        Partial Differential Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Willy Hereman, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1999
* USD 92,000.00

This project continues the development and implementation of new powerful
symbolic algorithms for testing the integrability and the calculation of
conservation laws. The construction of closed- form solutions for systems of
nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) will also be investigated. In
particular, for systems of nonlinear evolution equations, a first symbolic
software package will automatically generate polynomial-type conservation laws.
Based on scaling properties (symmetries) of the equations, the proposed
algorithm provides an elegant way to construct conserved densities and their
associated fluxes. Based on homogenization techniques, a second software package
will allow the user to compute the analytic form of particular solutions for
large classes of PDEs. For integrable equations, the technique leads to soliton
solutions. For non-integrable equations, closed-form expressions of homoclinic
and heteroclinic orbits can be computed efficiently with the method. The
symbolic software to be developed will complement and build on earlier
algorithms for the computation of Lie-point and non- classical symmetries, to
find soliton solutions via Hirota's direct method, and to test the integrability
of differential equations via the Painleve test. The programs will be written in
Macsyma and Mathematica syntax. They will be entirely symbolic and produce
analytical output. The development of novel mathematical techniques, in addition
to the refinement and generalization of existing methods and algorithms, is also
a part of this research project. The aim is to provide high-quality symbolic
packages to researchers working on soliton theory, dynamical systems,
mathematical physics; specifically nonlinear wave phenomena in networks, elastic
media, chemical kinetics, bio-sciences, fluid dynamics, plasma physics, and
nonlinear optics. ***