* 9625831
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Wave Interactions in One   and Two Space Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Suncica Canic, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 63,572.00

Author: Suncica Canic &lt;canic@gauss.Stanford.EDU&gt; at NOTE Date: 5/11/96
9:39 PM Priority: Normal TO: jjenkins at nsf11 Subject:
------------------------------- Message Contents -------------------------------
Dear Joe, Please find attached the abstract of my project in the format you
requested. Let me know if you have any comments and would like me to revise the
second paragraph. The revised budget of $20.5K for each of three years has been
signed on Friday by Richard Hasbrook, Iowa State University representative. I
will fax you the forms this coming Monday. Have a nice weekend. Regards, Suncica
ABSTRACT OF THE PROJECT "Nonlinear Wave Interactions in One and Two Space
Dimensions" Suncica Canic, Iowa State University, Ames This project deals with
nonlinear wave interactions in one and two space dimensions. The main focus is
on wave interactions that arise in transonic flow, reflections of a shock by a
wedge, multiphase flow through the porous media and chemically reactive fluids.
A benchmark problem for understanding the interaction of nonlinear waves in two-
space dimensions is the shock reflection problem. Depending on the shock
strength and the wedge angle different reflection patterns can occur. Open
problems regard the transition criteria between different types of reflection,
bifurcation diagram describing two-dimensional elementary waves, and the
existence theory that would provide a solution space describing possible
singularities. This research project proposes a study of self-similar wave
interactions in two space dimensions as a first step towards understanding these
issues. The study is based on the nonlinear analysis of free-boundary problems
for transonic shock waves, on the wave curve analysis of quasi-one-dimensional
Riemann problems that arise in hyperbolic wave interactions, and on numerical
simulations of the corresponding wave structures. The results from t his project
would provide a fundamental contribution towards understanding the nonlinear
stability of transonic shock waves and the development of a general theory of
two-dimensional wave interactions. In one-dimensional systems of conservation
laws, global existence and uniqueness of weak solutions is still an open
question. A delicate dependence of weak solutions on the precise form of
diffusion plays a crucial role in distinguishing physically relevant solutions
(in oil reservoir modeling, chemically reactive fluids, elastic plastic
deformation, and in numerical simulations). In this project an organized
approach to the study of the influence of the precise form of viscosity on the
existence and uniqueness of weak solutions has been proposed. Preliminary
results surprisingly indicate symmetry breaking solutions for some parabolic
conservation laws. Mathematical issues studied in this project derive from
applications such as high-performance computing simulations in oil recovery, and
the stability of transonic flow. In both applications (nonlinear) waves arise
naturally (e.g., propagation of an interface between water and oil in oil
reservoir simulations, formation and propagation of shock waves around a wing in
a supersonic flight, formation and interaction of waves in a converging-
diverging nozzle). Numerical methods used in computer simulations of these
phenomena are sensitive to certain parameters. For example, numerical schemes
that produce artificial (non-physical) diffusion may produce misleading answers
that may result in high production costs. Therefore, understanding the
dependence of solutions on the parameters in a problem (called the stability of
solutions) is crucial in devising efficient numerical methods that would produce
physically meaningful solutions. This project focuses of the stability of
nonlinear waves that arise in a large class of models used in many areas of
Federal strategic interests. Two such appl ications are described above. Because
of the complexity of the problem, various state-of-the-art theoretical
techniques (e.g., nonlinear analysis of free-boundary problems, dynamical
systems approach to the influence of diffusion on weak Riemann solutions)
coupled with computer simulations, need to be used to tackle the problem.
Preliminary results indicate new phenomena that have not been studied before
(e.g., the occurrence of singularities in transonic flow and symmetry breaking
solutions in oil recovery). These results are crucial in tailoring computer
codes to capture the ("correct") physical behavior.