* 9625433
* Highly Ordered Polymeric Materials via a Monomer            Self-Assembly Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2001
* Douglas Gin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2001
* USD 327,153.00

9625433 Gin This CAREER grant details the research and educational plans of the
Principal Investigator: A research program dedicated to the synthesis of new
polymeric materials is described, as well as several new approaches to graduate
and undergraduate education. Aside from chemical structure, one of the most
important factors in realizing the intrinsic properties of materials is extended
order on the small scale. Order on the molecular level such as crystallinity
permits cooperative interactions between molecules in the material for improved
properties on the macroscopic level. However, in materials science, varying
degrees of order are obtained in synthetic polymers and composites typically via
post- synthesis processing (i.e., stretch-aligning). As materials chemists, one
of the issues that we would like to address is whether we can control or induce
bulk order in materials through the structural design of the constituent
molecules, instead of through post-synthesis processing. Specifically, we are
interested in exploring the use of self-organizing monomers based on liquid
crystals as highly organized media for the construction of a variety of
sophisticated polymeric materials. We applying this approach to two areas of
materials research: (1) The synthesis of new piezoelectric polymers in which
order and bulk symmetry can be controlled on the molecular scale. (2) The
synthesis of highly organized polymeric composites in which nanometer-scale
geometry can be predetermined through liquid-crystalline matrix monomers. %%%
Several ideas for the improvement of chemical education at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels are also proposed. Among these ideas is a
modular approach to undergraduate chemical education, where students will be
able to pick the topics they are interested in learning about, in any order they
desire. This would be modeled after special- topics lectures in the Modular Chem
Consortium (MC2), and NSF sponsored modular teac hing program aimed toward
developing and evaluating a modular approach to teaching chemistry in the first
two years of the undergraduate curriculum. ***