* 9625726
* Visualizing Learned Models and Data for Exploratory Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1996,11/03/1998
* Armand Prieditis, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/03/1998
* USD 159,000.00

Visualizing Machine Learning Models and Data Choosing an appropriate model for
the data or changing an existing model are both essential, but difficult steps
in machine learning. Surprisingly, the trend in machine learning research has
been to ignore that wonderful visual information processor--the human--and to
build learning systems that are stand-alone and fully automated. This research
is attempting to show that machine learning is a task best shared by humans and
machine because of their unique capabilities. Human vision gives us built-in
features such as motion detection and direction, stereoscopic depth, edge and
shape detection, grouping by color, light, and shade. Because of these features,
humans are good at quickly recognizing complex patterns in visual data, quickly
detecting outliers in visual data, and visually manipulating a model to reflect
the data. In contrast, machines are good at fast, accurate, and repetitive
calculations necessary for machine learning. Not only is an appropriate division
of labor between human and machine important, but a visualization of a learned
model can serve as a visual explanation of why the learned model fits the data.
Finally, visualization together with direct manipulation of the model can make
it easier for the user to change the model to reflect the data, immediately see
the results, and focus on interesting data regions. The impact of this research
is that is may become easier to find good learning models and to visually
understand why they are good.