* 9625934
* U.S.-Chile Program:  A Study of the Marine Ecosystem of the Chilean Inland Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Larry Atkinson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 03/31/1999
* USD 57,569.00

9625934 Atkinson This Americas Program award will support Drs. Larry Atkinson,
Arnoldo Valle-Levinson, John Klinck, Eileen Hofman, and a graduate student of
the Old Dominion University, Center for Coastal Physical Oceanography, on a
study to initiate systematic studies of the coastal ocean ecosystem of the
Chilean Inland Sea (CIS). Collaborating with the group will be Drs. Victor Marin
and Vivian Montecino, Universidad de Chile, and oceanographers from other
Chilean universities. This collaborative research will be accomplished through
extensive use of computer information servers and collaborative software over
the INTERNET network. Oceanographic processes in the CIS region will be
identified using remote sensing data. The data will be analyzed and made
available to all users. The CIS ecosystem includes the coastal ocean, interior
sea, fjords and inlets. Despite its ecological importance and its high
biological productivity, it has received limited attention, and few studies have
been conducted in the region. Red tide outbreaks have been reported which have
caused massive mortalities in the salmon farming in the area. The study proposed
here will constitute one of the steps toward increasing our understanding of the
mechanisms that trigger red tide events. The U.S. researchers will contribute
their expertise in physical processes and ecosystem modeling in coastal and
estuarine regions and scientists from Chile will bring theirs in productivity
and ecological issues. ***