* 9625964
* Development of a Photorefractive Glass Processing and       Characterization Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* M. Moharam, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Robert J. Reynik
* 08/31/1998
* USD 149,280.00

9625964 Richardson This award provides support for the acquisition of equipment
to develop a processing and characterization facility for photo- thermo-
refractive glass (PTRG) materials. This facility is critical to the continued
progress in the fabrication of new optical recording media for high efficiency
volume holographic optical element applications based on glass-ceramic
materials. Experimental results obtained at CREOL (Center for Research and
Education in Optics and Lasers) during the past 18 months have confirmed for the
first time in this country, the potential of an important new technology for
recording and storing information through the selective nucleation and
crystallization of photo- induced phases in a robust glass matrix. This glass
material, however has to date been obtainable only in Russia. As a result of our
experiments, the limitations of the Russian material and the importance of
processing these materials within our laboratory, has been firmly realized.
Establishment of this facility at CREOL will utilize our institute's strengths
in both the design and characterization of photorefractive materials and our
unique capabilities in the melting and characterization of new glasses for
optical applications. CREOL contains one of the few academic research groups in
the country specifically engineering and melting new glass compositions for
optical applications. This award will enable the establishment of bulk glass
processing capabilities and construction of an improved, reliable and accurate
holographic element formation and characterization facility. The equipment
includes furnace and optical finishing facilities to allow in-house melting and
fabrication of glass starting materials, and an ultraviolet (UV) laser system
which can efficiently irradiate the glass, forming the hologram, and
subsequently characterize the quality of the resulting element. Once
operational, irradiation/crystallization studies on in-house produced glass
compo sitions, with accompanying analysis of material physical properties
thermal, mechanical and optical will continue to be carried out. %%%
Establishment of this Processing and Characterization facility will assist in
the educational goals of our program at CREOL/UCF. CREOL has been instrumental
in establishing Master's and Doctoral degree programs in Optical Sciences and
Engineering at UCF. Over twenty courses in optics are taught by twenty five
nationally- recognized CREOL faculty. The co-PI's oversee research programs
containing a total of 5 students working on various, interdisciplinary topics
related to optics. Currently, 2 undergraduate and 2 graduate students utilize
limited (nonoxide) glass melting facilities. Acquisition of melting and
fabrication equipment identified in this program will allow expansion of lab-
based training in traditional glass processing at both graduate and
undergraduate levels. A CREOL-funded Ph.D. student will be associated with the
glass processing and optical characterization of the PTRG materials. ***