* 9625728
* CONFERENCE:  QEM Facilities Modernization Workshops for     Proposal Writing; December 7-10, 1995 (Atlanta, Georgia) and January 18-21, 1996 (Washington, D. C.)
* O/D,OIA
* 12/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1997
* USD 206,764.00

Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network, a non-profit organization, has
been instrumental in improving the education of minority groups that have been
historically undeserved by the nation's educational system. A successor to the
Quality Education for Minorities Project, based at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, QEM develops effective strategies in the education of minority
students, focusing on mathematics, science and engineering education, and the
issues and barriers that prevent minorities from receiving a quality education.
However, in order for institutions to be able to offer competitive research and
research training programs in the sciences, facilities in which these activities
are performed must be modernized. This award to QEM will make it possible to
provide technical assistance to institutions by conducting workshops on research
facilities. The goals are to equip institutional teams to prepare competitive
proposals to the NSF, and to support the process of facilities modernization
needed to strengthen science, mathematics, and engineering programs. Assistance
provided by QEM will furnish institutions with the tools required to submit a
successful facilities modernization proposal. Therefore all US institutions will
have opportunity to secure funds needed to provide state of the art facilities
for faculty and students in their quest to unravel the challenges presented by
the universe.