* 9625463
* Mathematical Sciences:  Menodromy Kernels, Discriminant     Loci, and Fundamental Groups of Algebraic Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* James Carlson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/2000
* USD 129,000.00

The investigators study fundamental groups of algebraic varieties. Particular
attention is given to the fundamental groups of complements of discriminant
loci. These complements parametrize smooth hypersurfaces in projective space.
They are studied by means of the period mappings associated to the variation of
Hodge structure of the hypersurfaces and of varieties naturally associated to
the hypersurfaces. The corresponding monodromy representations are also
important in this study. Zariski studied the case of zero-dimensional
hypersurfaces (points on the projective line), where the fundamental group is
the braid group of the sphere and the corresponding representations include the
permutation and Burau representations. The investigators are making progress on
corresponding questions for higher-dimensional hypersurfaces. Particularly
precise results are being obtained for curves and surfaces of low degree. As one
application, the investigators use this knowledge to construct examples of
projective and quasi-projective varieties with interesting fundamental groups.
This research is in the field of algebraic geometry, which is one of the oldest
fields in mathematics as well as one of the most active at present. Originally
it treated the geometry of curves in the plane defined by polynomial equations.
Now it treats similar questions in many dimensions, uses techniques from many
branches of mathematics and theoretical physics, and it turn it influences these
branches, and other subjects. This research is concerned with specific
interactions between algebraic geometry and topology that have been developed
not only by mathematicians but also by physicists studying Feynman integrals.
The present research also concerns the study of braids. Braids have been central
to several branches of mathematics since their mathematical introduction by Emil
Artin in 1925, and their influence continues to expand in mathematics and
physics.