* 9625550
* Acquisition of a High Frequency Measurement System for      Mesoscopic Samples
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Christopher Lobb, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1997
* USD 232,330.00

9625550 Webb The goal of this project is to elucidate the high frequency
properties of mesoscopic structures using a state-of-the-art high frequency low
noise measurement system. During the last decade it was discovered that a wave
mechanics approach must be adopted when describing the propagation of an
electron through any small conductor, including insulators and dirty metals as
well as nearly perfect crystals. Electron interference effects, which are
responsible for many of the large fluctuations observed in transport
experiments, can be traced to the existence of large phase coherence times for
the wave function of the electron. These large times in turn have lead to the
discovery of persistent currents in normal metals, Universal Conductance
Fluctuations (UCF), h/e &amp; h2e Aharonov-Bohm effects, non-local quantum
effects, length-independent conductance fluctuations, and an understanding of
how these new quantum effects ensemble average to their classical values. Very
little is known about the properties of the wavefunction which describes systems
on time scales comparable to the coherence time (t~10-9 sec). The recent
discovery that it is possible to make two terminal mesoscopic devices through
which we can control the passage of electrons, one at a time, by using a third
capacitively coupled gate electrode to the sample has generated much hope that
these devices might be the transistors of the future. The frequency at which
these single electrons pass through the device is f=IDc/e and is on the order of
lx109 Hz for most samples studied to date. The applications of such a technology
are quite extensive. They range from transistors to ultra-sensitive
electrometers and current standards. In this project we will systematically
explore the high frequency properties of these types of mesoscopic systems by
using a new instrument that will allow us to directly measure the high frequency
transport and magnetic properties of our samples. We believe that attemp ts to
probe mesoscopic systems on a time scale comparable to the coherence time of the
wavefunction will almost certainly produce a better understanding of the true
nature of the quantum physics of these systems. %%% Since the physics of small
structures provides the foundation upon which future electronic industry
technologies may be based, it is extremely important that we identify and
understand all the potentially relevant physical properties that these systems
exhibit. Only after these properties are reasonably well understood can we
attempt to propose to use any one of them in a new or improved technology. The
work described here is a relatively new direction for the studies of mesoscopic
structures: we believe experiments in the area of magnetic and transport
properties of mesoscopic structures are likely to discover new phenomena which
have yet to be anticipated and expand our fundamental knowledge of condensed
matter science. ***