* 9625341
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Applied Asymptotic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Jet Wimp, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2000
* USD 60,000.00

9625341 Wimp This proposed program consists of several topics in applied
asymptotic analysis. These topics by and large have not been systematically
covered in the general books dealing with asymptotics, yet are of great
significance in applied science and engineering. For instance, the central limit
theorem is one of the keystones of probability theory, yet no readily available
source on asymptotics has discussed its applications and ramifications. Certain
problems in combinatorics, in particular, the theory of random walks, can be
elucidated by asymptotic methods; yet these have received no unified treatment.
Most books have an extensive treatment of differential equations, but difference
equations, which are just as important, require their own methods of attack.
Renewal equations, which arise in investigations in computer science and
engineering, have been occasionally treated but have not yet received the
attention they deserve. The topics to be investigated are motivated by these
deficiencies: the drunkard's walk and convolution sequences; the stability and
convergence of the solutions of non-linear difference equations; the application
of probabilistic methods to problems in applied asymptotic analysis; error
distribution in the numerical inversion of matrices; and renewal equations
arising in the recovery of information in communications systems employing
multiaccess channels. %%% Scientists are often interested in what happens "in
the large." Examples of this abound in everyday life. For instance, if the
number of users of the internet continues to grow in some well-defined fashion,
what precisely will happen to the time required to log onto the system? What is
the likelihood that a medication ingested into the human system will reach its
target after an extended period of time? How are the populations of a given
agricultural pest and the plants on which it feeds related over an extended
period of time? Is the future growth in major criminal offenses in a city
strongly dependent on the current rate of minor criminal offenses? Will the
population of a country, given sufficient food supply, continue to grow at a
disastrous rate, or are there self-limiting features of population growth that
will prevent this from happening? The scientific mathematical language often
used to model such situations is called the theory of difference equations. In
this research program, we intend to develop new methods for attacking such
equations, and hence to help resolve some practical issues which these equations
describe. ***