* 9625478
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Origins of the Alachua:  A View from Perishables
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* R. Taylor, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1998
* USD 9,868.00

Under the direction of Dr. R.E. Taylor, MS Jill Minar will collect data for her
doctoral dissertation. She will visit museums in the Southeastern United States
and examine the cloth impressions on prehistoric pot sherds from a number of
archaeological cultures. The project has both methodological and substantive
goals. With the data she collects, MS Minar wishes to determine the origins of
the Alachua culture which was widespread in prehistoric Florida. On a
methodological level the project will assist in the development of new methods
of ceramic analysis and provide insight into the relationship between ethnic
identity and material culture. In many parts of the world prehistoric peoples
decorated the exterior of ceramic pots by pressing cloth or other forms of
cordage against the unfired wet surface. When the fabric is removed, a pattern
remains imprinted in the clay. Although archaeologists have noted this and in
fact have designated pottery types based on this feature, the cloth imprints
themselves have never been subjected to detailed analysis. Ethnographic evidence
indicates that cloth patterns and methods of manufacture are often very
conservative and closely tied to ethnic identity. Therefore, in principle, they
should provide an excellent trait to delimit prehistoric cultural groups and
determine continuity and replacement over time. Cordmarked pottery is relatively
common in the Southeast USA and many sites have been carefully excavated and
radiocarbon dated. Therefore this region provides an excellent test situation.
On the basis of preliminary research MS Minar has selected a number of
collections which are attributable to the Alachua, to a range of possible
Alachua predecessors and to groups which are culturally unrelated. In this well
defined context she will develop and apply her analytic techniques. She will
make molds of sherd surfaces, examine these under a microscope and employ a
recently developed image analysis program to describe and compare the fabric
impressions based on a wide range of attributes. This research is important for
several reasons. It addresses a significant regional archaeological question. It
will help to develop an analytic tool with a wide range of potential
applications and will also assist in training a promising young scientist.