* 9625096
* Mathematical Sciences: Viscous Incompressible               Magnetohydrodynamics:  Analysis and Numerical Approximation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Amnon Meir, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 120,964.00

9625096 Schmidt Magnetohydrodynamics (or MHD) is the theory of the macroscopic
interaction of electrically conducting fluids with a magnetic field. In the
viscous incompressible case, MHD flow is governed by the Navier-Stokes equations
and the pre-Maxwell equations of the magnetic field. The latter will in general
transcend the region of conducting fluid and, ideally, extend to all of space.
It is mostly this feature, the electromagnetic interaction of the fluid with the
outside world, which gives rise to challenging problems of mathematical analysis
and numerical approximation. In earlier work, the authors have developed a novel
approach to viscous incompressible MHD that avoids some intrinsic difficulties
of traditional approaches by employing fluid velocity and current density
(rather than velocity and magnetic field) as the primary variables. The
velocity-current method has been successfully applied to prove the well-
posedness of certain stationary MHD flow problems and to develop an efficient
finite-element algorithm for the numerical approximation of solutions. One
objective of the proposed research is to extend the velocity-current method,
both analytically and numerically, to more complex stationary problems, as they
arise in liquid-metal technology and other applications. Major tools will be
integral-equation methods, mixed variational formulations, and the coupling of
finite-element and boundary-element methods. In another direction, a suitable
generalization of the velocity-current method will be employed to analyze time-
dependent MHD flow problems. Initially, the focus will be on qualitative
properties of the ensuing systems of integro-differential equations, via Faedo-
Galerkin and semigroup methods; ultimately, the goal is again the design of
efficient algorithms for the numerical approximation of solutions in physically
realistic situations. Magnetohydrodynamics (or MHD) is the theory of the
macroscopic interaction of el ectrically conducting fluids with a magnetic
field. It is of importance in connection with many engineering problems, such as
sustained plasma confinement for controlled thermonuclear fusion, liquid- metal
cooling of nuclear reactors, and electromagnetic casting of metals. It also
finds applications in geophysics and astronomy, where one prominent example is
the so-called dynamo problem, that is, the question of the origin of the Earth's
magnetic field in its liquid metal core. Due to their practical relevance, MHD
flow problems have long been the subject of intense cross- disciplinary
research, but except for relatively simple special cases, the rigorous
mathematical and numerical analysis of such problems is largely terra incognita.
The authors have recently developed a novel approach to an important class of
MHD flow problems that circumvents some intrinsic difficulties of traditional
analyses. The objective of the proposed research is to further pursue this
approach in order to design qualitative and quantitative methods for the
mathematically rigorous and computationally efficient solution of MHD flow
problems in physically realistic situations.