* 9625178
* Thermodynamic and Spectroscopic Studies of Levitated Microdroplets of Highly Supersaturated Solutions
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Allan Myerson, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2000
* USD 259,647.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9625178 Allan Myerson The project examines the behavior of
supersaturated solutions which must be formed prior to crystallization.
Crystallization from solution is an important separation process which is used
in a wide variety of industries. In this project, the solvent activity of
supersaturated aqueous solutions of electrolytes (such as potassium chloride,
potassium aluminum sulfate and ammonium sulfate) and aqueous and non aqueous
solutions of non-electrolytes (such as glycine, adipic acid and succine acid)
will be measured employing electrodynamically levitated solution microdroplets.
The use of this technique removes the container walls and most dust and dirt
from the solution so that very high supersaturation can be achieved. This will
allow determination of the thermodynamic properties of supersaturated solutions
over a wide range approaching the spinodal. In addition, Raman spectroscopy will
be used to examine the formation and time evolution of subcritical molecular
clusters. Appropriate theoretical treatments of the thermodynamic and
spectroscopic date will be developed and used to calculate the nucleation
induction time, size distribution of clusters and metastable limit boundaries.
The study of the thermodynamics properties and cluster evolution in
supersaturated solutions is quite difficult because these solutions are hard to
prepare and keep stable. The technique of levitated microdroplets provides a
unique method to prepare highly supersaturated solutions which can be examined
employing Raman spectroscopy. Raman spectra of highly supersaturated solutions
should yield important information on the time evolution of molecular clusters
in supersaturated solutions prior to nucleation. In addition, these will be the
first studies of thermodynamic and spectroscopic properties of supersaturated
solutions of non-aqueous solutions. This project will supply additional data on
the thermodynamic properties of supersaturated solutions of industrially
important systems thus allowing modeling of the nucleation and crystal growth of
these systems making use of the thermodynamic supersaturation (supersaturation
based on activity instead of concentration). For cases in which the
supersaturation is above 10%, it has been shown that the error in using
supersaturated based on concentration is significant and increases rapidly with
increasing supersaturation. In addition the work will supply fundamental data on
the formation of subcritical clusters prior to nucleation through spectroscopic
measurements. Using appropriate theory, this data will allow calculation of
properties which are important to the industrial practice of crystallization and
will aid in the design and development of crystallization processes. ***