* 9625813
* Mathematical Sciences:  Some Approximation Problems in      Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Luca Dieci, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 115,872.00

9625813 Dieci The investigator and his collaborators analyze and implement
techniques to resolve outstanding computational issues in differential
equations. The following topics are studied: (1) computation and bifurcations of
invariant tori, (2) computation of Lyapunov exponents and applications, (3)
orthogonal factorizations for time-dependent matrices and applications, (4)
Riccati equations, (5) logarithms of matrices and matrix interpolation. In each
case the project combines theoretical analysis and extensive computational
testing, and develops working codes. Several aspects of this research are being
carried out in collaboration with Timo Eirola, Jens Lorenz, Erik Van Vleck,
Alessandra Papini, Aldo Pasquali, and Ph.D. students Michael Keeve and Benedetta
Morini. The investigator analyzes and implements algorithms to compute invariant
tori of parameter-dependent dynamical systems and to study their bifurcations.
He studies ways to monitor Lyapunov type numbers on the tori in order to detect
their smoothness and understand and classify their bifurcations and breakdown
mechanisms. The whole issue of computation of Lyapunov type numbers (or Lyapunov
exponents) is also considered. Quantitative information on these numbers is
needed in order to obtain a reliable stability picture for time-dependent linear
systems and nonlinear systems. He examines applications of this tool to error
control. Efficient and reliable techniques for computation of Lyapunov exponents
require study of orthogonal factorizations of time-dependent matrices. The
investigator works on numerical solution of Riccati equations, and develops an
integration code based on Gauss Runge-Kutta schemes. He studies techniques for
computation of logarithms of matrices, emphasisizing the case of a sequence of
slowly varying matrices and its application to interpolants of matrices.
Finally, he is writing a book on numerical dynamical systems with emphasis on
direct approximation techniques . Differential equations are one of the most
powerful models to describe physical phenomena. They provide a compact
description of a system by giving a continuous description of how a given
position in (phase) space of a system at a particular time influences
neighboring positions in the immediate future. The price for such a compact
description is that we then need to solve the differential equation in order to
obtain information about the system. Solving the differential equation, except
in trivial cases, cannot be done exactly, and we must resort to numerical
techniques. The investigator devises numerical techniques for differential
equations, motivated by the following question: What should we approximate, what
should we monitor? Existing techniques are typically very reliable at tracking a
specific solution (a trajectory) of the equation over a short time interval, but
they are inadequate to provide a complete description of the system, which would
need knowledge about many solutions over long time intervals. This need is
particularly true for models of complicated phenomena, which may take the form
of systems of coupled oscillators and coupled nonlinear differential equations,
or high-dimensional time-varying matrix equations. These cases are of interest
in this project and find applications in almost all applied sciences: from the
study of complicated biological and chemical interactions, to the optimal
control of time-dependent manufacturing processes, to stability assessment for
time-dependent phenomena in general. In concrete, the following issues are
studied. (1) For many systems, all solutions eventually approach a finite region
of phase space, and then stay there afterwards. The investigator devises
techniques that target directly such eventual finite regions, to avoid transient
behavior. (2) A differential equation, because it mimics a given physical
system, usually has built in some key properties. For example, in modeling a
rigid rotat ion, the solutions of the differential equation should be rigid
rotations. Unfortunately, most numerical techniques will fail at preserving even
such a seemingly simple characteristic. The failure of a numerical method to
preserve essential characteristics might have very unpleasant effects. The
investigator works on techniques that maintain the relevant geometrical
properties of the solutions. (3) For a given model, the fundamental question is
the one of stability. How robust is the model? How sensitive are solutions to
small changes in the model? Or, in a deceivingly different but mathematically
equivalent way, how fast is a system approaching its eventual state? The
investigator studies ways to monitor indicators in order to answer these
questions, and also applies this study to assess error propagation during
discretization.