* 9625151
* Synthesis and Optical Properties of Complex Metal           Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2001
* Colby Foss, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/2001
* USD 302,314.00

Abstract 9625151 Foss The general research goal of this Career proposal is to
synthesize metal particles of sufficient uniformity and complexity such that
they engender optical behaviors heretofore unseen in metal particle composite
materials. This project deliberately targets particles whose dimensions lie
between ca. 5 nanometers (nm) and 50 nm. Metal particles within these limits
contain a sufficient number of atoms so as to possess bulk optical properties,
but are small enough that they do not scatter appreciably light at visible and
longer wavelengths. The synthetic work will focus specifically on three basic
structural types: 1) cylindrical particles composed of two or more different
elemental subunits; 2) branched metal nanostructures; and 3) chiral
nanostructures. Type 1 particles will be prepared via template synthesis, which
involves the electrodeposition of metals into the pores of anodic aluminum oxide
films. The template synthesis method will allow for electrochemical control of
both cylinder radius and length, as well as the sequence of the different metal
layers of which the cylinder is composed. Type 2 particles will be prepared in
similar fashion to type 1, except that the anodic alumina films will be grown
using a voltage reduction regime that produces branched pore structures. The
preparation of chiral structures (Type 3) will involve the vacuum deposition (at
grazing incidence) of gold and other metals onto nanoscopic silver post
substrates prepared via template synthesis. Oxidation of the silver foundation
will facilitate release of the chiral particles into solution. Structural
characterization of all particles will involve transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) and/or atomic force microscopy (AFM). UV/Visible and near-infrared (NIR)
spectroscopic studies of particles in all three types will be done to assess the
relationship between particle structure and plasmon resonance absorption.
Composite materials containing oriented particles of types 1 and 2 which have
been prepared so as to lack inversion symmetry will also be evaluated for bulk
second harmonic generation (SHG). Solutions containing type 3 particles are
expected to exhibit optical activity, and will thus be examined using circular
dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. %%% This project is concerned with the application
of template synthesis methods to prepare nanoscopic metal particles of
unprecedented geometric and compositional complexity. By virtue of their
complexity, these particles are expected to exhibit optical behaviors that are
normally considered the sole province of molecular entities. The project will
lead to a more detailed understanding of the relationship between metal particle
structure and composite optical properties. Furthermore, as some of the
anticipated properties have not been observed previously to arise from gross
particle asymmetry, this project may also lead to new applications of nanoscopic
metal particles. Relatedly, since the proposed synthetic strategies are based
primarily on chemical and electrochemical methods (as opposed to photo- and
electron beam lithographies), they will be easily available to many research
groups.