* 9625680
* Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of Patterns and Dynamics of Nonlinear Dissipative Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Jack Xin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1999
* USD 57,000.00

Abstract Xin The first part of the proposed research concerns the global
existence and asymptotics of front solutions to the two-dimensional Boussinesq
combustion system on finite and infinite vertical strips with unbounded chemical
nonlinearities, and arbitrary Lewis, Prandtl and Rayleigh numbers. Numerical
methods will be implemented for calculating front speeds and controling chaotic
flame fronts. The second part concerns the stability, instability of vortex
solutions to Ginzburg-Landau equations and related asymptotic analysis. The
third part concerns the dimensional bounds of the universal attractors,
qualitative properties of solutions, approximation using reduced equations (such
as Swift-Hohenberg like equations), and numerical simulation of the Maxwell-
Bloch two level laser systems. The above proposed works are based on problems
arising in dynamics of reacting flows, and lasers. Understanding reacting flows
is of tremendous practical importance, and is related to industrial chemical
processing, energy consumption, as well as biotechnological remediation of
environment. In designing internal combustion engines or conducting industrial
chemical processes, one of the immediate concerns is to increase the efficiency
of fuel burning, and so minimize the waste gas output and reduce air pollution.
It is known that well-mixed and strongly stirred reacting fluids have more
effective contact area and their reaction efficiency is much higher. On the
other hand, stirred fluids behave in an irregular and chaotic manner, and are
not easy to control. This motivates us to study the properties of the irregular
reacting flows in order to utilize them for our needs. Mathematical models
proposed here serve as a starting point for pursuing such an investigation where
both analytical and numerical methods can be applied to advance our
understanding. Moreover, the techniques we develop can be very useful to other
problems, such as bioremediation of polluted aquifer. T here similar irregular
or chaotic phenomena exist due to the interaction of chemical species with
bacteria growth. Chaotic phenomena also appear in optical systems where people
try to produce high power laser output for massively parallel optical computing
and processing, image storage, and high power energy sources. It is essential to
be able to achieve coherence and control of the laser output. Mathematically,
this amounts to studying stability and instability of the special solutions of
the laser system, analyzing the structures and finding good approximations of
attractors. The two level laser model we propose here is the first step towards
this goal. The progress made and the methodology developed in the systematic
study of the two level model will greatly help us approach more complicated yet
more appealing semiconductor laser systems in the future.