* 9625577
* CISE Postdoctoral Research Associate in Experimental        Computer Science: Leveraging Networks for Collaborative     Education in the Blacksburg Electronic Village
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1996,05/31/1998
* John Carroll, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 05/31/1998
* USD 46,200.00

9625577 Carroll, John M. Virginia Polytechnic Institute &amp; State University
CISE Postdoctoral Research Associate in Experimental Computer Science:
Leveraging Networks for Collaborative Education in the Blacksburg Electronic
Village This award supports associate Jurgen Koenemann. This project is part of
an effort to create and study a virtual physics laboratory for middle and high
school students in a rural area of Southwestern Virginia. The virtual laboratory
is implemented as a real-time, multi-user domain, integrated with World-Wide Web
resources. The postdoctoral work focuses on two technical challenges within this
paradigm of network-based collaborative education: (1) supporting the design of
virtual laboratory activities and materials by teachers, and (2) evaluating
usability and learning outcomes for teachers and students. Regarding (1), a set
of software tools will be developed to help teachers locate and incorporate
World-Wide Web resources into activities they design for the virtual laboratory.
For example, the tool will automatically generate appropriate hyperlinks and
manage simulation software. Regarding (2), an evaluation tool will be developed
to facilitate the collection and analysis of "critical incident" reports,
episodes in which something went very well or very badly for the user. The
reports will be linked to portions of the virtual laboratory software that may
have been implicated in causing the critical incident to facilitate diagnosis
and redesign. ***