* 9625709
* Hurricane Impact and Recovery on Coastal Island             Geomorphology: Hurricane Opal, October 1995
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1997
* Gregory Stone, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 03/31/1997
* USD 49,399.00

SBR-9625709 Gregory Stone Louisiana State University This Small Grant for
Exploratory Research (SGER) supports a one-year program to measure the post-
storm recovery of a particular barrier island on the north Florida (panhandle)
coast, after Hurricane Opal (a Category 3 storm on the Saffir Simpson Scale,
with sustained winds of 130 mph). The measurements include: beachfront core
samples taken at 500-meter intervals monthly; monthly sediment samples at a grid
that includes a cross-section of five zones from step and mid-tide levels to
upper-beach, new foredunes, and backbarrier areas; daily meteorological data;
and daily wind direction and speed. The most important of the process questions
to be asked are the roles and the interactions of wind, wave, and current
transport processes in the sediment erosion and deposition processes in post-
storm recovery. The National Parks Service will close the area to human activity
for at least one year, so the investigator will be able to observe the natural
process of regeneration Our understanding of the initial phases of island
recovery after severe storms is based primarily on supposition, largely governed
by our interpretation of the day-to-day dynamics of barrier islands. This
research will generate high-quality field data, culminating in the development
of a heuristic model designed to identify and elucidate the importance of
separate yet interrelated post-storm recovery processes and the morphological
features of the site.