* 9625958
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometry, Topology and Arithmetic    of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Alan Reid, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/2000
* USD 59,400.00

9625958 Reid One of the fundamental problems in low-dimensional topology is to
understand the geometry and topology of 3-dimensional manifolds admitting a
complete hyperbolic structure of finite volume. Of particular interest are
properties of incompressible surfaces in hyperbolic 3-manifolds, and
interactions between number theory and algebra on the one hand and hyperbolic
3-manifolds on the other. The former involves the study of the existence and
construction of incompressible surfaces in hyperbolic 3-manifolds, and the
latter concentrates on how certain invariants arising from algebraic data
associated to a hyperbolic 3-manifold are related to the geometry and topology
of the the 3-manifold. The study of surfaces in 3-manifolds plays an important
role in 3-dimensional topology. Indeed, many of the deepest results in
3-manifold topology have arisen from the study of how surfaces map into
3-manifolds. Apart from their application in 3-manifold topology, the study of
surfaces in 3-manifolds has had many interesting applications in physics. The
number theoretic connections alluded to above have proved important in recent
years in proving theorems about hyperbolic 3-manifolds. One of the simplest
number theoretic connections is through the volume of a hyperbolic 3-manifold.
This is closely connected to the Dilogarithm function, which appears in many
guises in other branches of mathematics and physics. ***