* 9625601
* CAREER:  Virtual Reality Techniques to Improve Product Design and Engineering Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2002
* Judy Vance, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 07/31/2002
* USD 350,000.00

9625601 Vance This NSF Career Award will fund research into (1) the use of
virtual reality techniques to improve product design and (2) the implementation
of active learning techniques in the engineering classroom. Areas of design
where virtual reality can contribute to the design of better products will be
identified and appropriate virtual tools will be developed. In particulars,
focus of the research will be on the design of spatial mechanisms and
visualization techniques to advance cross-attribute design of large, complex
systems. Results of this research in cross-attribute design will be incorporated
into a new course in finite element-based optimization. The educational
activities focus on searching out and implementing effective teaching methods
that will improve student learning. Study groups of interested engineering
faculty will be formed to learn about active teaching strategies. Several
faculty learning groups will be facilitated. The research funded under this
award will provide a template for both the development of virtual reality
applications to improve product design and a process to integrate active
learning techniques in the engineering classroom. Virtual reality techniques
applied to product design will result in the ability to design in a fully three-
dimensional design space, and result in reducing the number of physical
prototypes needed before production runs are scheduled. Personnel involved in
the design process who are not accustomed to viewing three-dimensional models on
a computer screen will be able to bring their expertise to bear early in the
design process because of the advanced visualization and interaction
capabilities available through the use of virtual reality.