* 9625872
* A Professional Development Course in the Chemical Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Anthony Czarnik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 01/31/1999
* USD 61,626.00

With this GOALI award the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the
Synthetic Organic Program are supporting the educational efforts of Dr. Brian P.
Coppola and Christine E. Evans of the Department of Chemistry at the University
of Michigan and Dr. Anthony W. Czarnik, Director of Biochemistry for the Parke-
Davis Pharmaceutical Research headquarters of the Warner-Lambert Company. This
team of academic and industrial chemists will formally extend the integrated
architecture that is being created for the professional development stream in
the undergraduate program at the University of Michigan chemistry department.
This novel conceptual design will have two parallel outcomes. The first result
is a new undergraduate course, Professional Development in the Chemical
Sciences, taken during the Junior year. The subject matter of the course will
include critical analysis of written and oral presentations, written and oral
technical communication proficiency, and an introduction to the multi-faceted
features of professional life including professional ethics. The creation of
this course is a unique educational bridge between the traditional content of
undergraduate programs and the needs of beginning a professional life in
chemistry. Second, it is proposed to strengthen this bridge further by creating
a parallel set of course materials and objectives, through an academic-
industrial partnership, that also address the needs of post-baccalaureate
chemists who are already in practice. In addition to the traditional
undergraduate course structure, the team will explore alternative modes of
delivery that might better address the needs of the post-baccalaureate
population.