* 9625843
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Asymptotic & Singular Perturbation Methods for Bifurcation Problems with Applications"
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 55,200.00

Erneux 9625843 The investigator studies a series of mathematical problems
connected with singular perturbation and bifurcation problems. The project is
divided in three distinct parts. A. Slow passage problems: He analyzes the slow
passage through resonance in a solid state laser and the slow passage through
locking in a semiconductor laser. Both problems are motivated by current
experimental work. B. Laser instabilities: Many practical lasers are known to
exhibit damped or sustained pulsating oscillations. He investigates a series of
specific problems and develop asymptotic methods for their description. C.
Biological and medical problems: He works on three different problems, one
involving coupled chemical reactions, a model for bursting oscillations, and a
class of moving boundary problems modeling the controlled release of
pharmaceutical drugs. The common difficulty is the failure of a standard quasi-
steady state approximation. The investigator studies a series of practical
problems that are difficult, long, or expensive to investigate by using
traditional experimental methods. This is the case for many commercially used
lasers that exhibit undesired instabilities and for new pharmaceutical devices
that allow long releases but are poorly understood physically. Many of these
problems are described by mathematical models that are studied numerically.
These numerical simulations can be long because the models depend on several
parameters or because of numerical difficulties. The main goal of the project is
to determine analytical solutions of these problems that may then reduce or
guide the numerical simulations. Each specific problem described in this project
(lasers - biology) is motivated by current collaborations with experimental
groups or with biophysicists.