* 9625511
* Mathematical Sciences:  Algebraic, Geometric and            Combinatorial Structures Related to Multivariate            Hypergeometric Functions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Andrei Zelevinsky, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/1999
* USD 85,500.00

Zelevinsky This award provides funding for a project that will mainly be
conducted in the following two areas: (A) Multivariate discriminants,
resultants, and hyperdeterminants. (B) Representations of quantum groups and
piecewise- linear combinatorics. Both of these subjects have deep relations with
the theory of multivariate hypergeometric functions. Another unifying feature is
that in both areas an essential role is played by new kinds of combinatorics
whose main objects of study are lattice points in convex cones and polytopes and
their piecewise-linear transformations. The principal investigator is going to
continue his work on the following topics: (1) explicit polynomial formulas for
multivariate discriminants and resultants, (2) singular loci of discriminant
varieties, (3) algebraic and combinatorial properties of canonical bases in
representations of quantum groups, (4) geometry of totally positive matrices,
(5) Chow varieties of 0-cycles and symmetric functions in several vector
variables, (6) secondary polytopes and maximal minor polytopes. This research
explores connections between Combinatorics, Algebra, and Geometry. One of the
goals of Combinatorics is to find efficient methods to study how discrete
collections of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is
extremely important to modern communications. For example, the design of large
networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of
algorithms in computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this
makes use of combinatorial research.