* 9626326
* Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Analysis of   Inorganic, Organic and Biological Surface Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Thomas Mallouk, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 10/31/1997
* USD 96,900.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
(CRIF) will assist the Department of Chemistry at Pennsylvania State University
acquire an atomic force microscope (AFM). This equipment will enhance research
in a number of areas including the following: (1) structure, dynamics, and
physical properties of inorganic monolayers; (2) self- assembly of monolayers
for application in bio-interfaces and nano-electronic devices; (3) electron-
beam-induced chemistry in self-assembled monolayers with applications to
lithography; (4) nucleation and growth studies of poly(methylene) clusters via
Au-surface catalyzed decomposition of diazomethane; (5) surface orientation
effects in ultrathin polyimide films; (6) composite layer structures based on
self-assembled noble-metal colloid monolayers; (7) T4 replication system as a
model for DNA replication; (8) nanometer-scale structure in both continuous and
discontinuous Au surfaces and (9) comparisons of the tunable microwave frequency
AC scanning tunneling microscope (ACSTM) and AFM images. The atomic force probe
microscope (AFM) enables researchers to image atoms directly. The technique uses
the piezoelectric effect which involves bringing an extremely sharp metal needle
within a few angstroms of the sample surface. The distance is small enough for
electrons to leak or tunnel across the gap and generate a minute current. As the
gap between the tip and the sample increases, the current decreases. As then
probe crosses the sample, moving back and forth across its surface, it traces
out a contour map of the sample's surface atoms. The AFM is used in the control
of material used to fabricate semiconductor circuits.