* 9626404
* Mathematical Sciences:  Quantum and Finite Type Invariants  of Links in 3-Manifolds, Quasicrystals
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Thang Le, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/2000
* USD 72,364.00

9626404 Le Thang Le is studying links in 3-manifolds as well as quasicrystals.
The study of links concerns quantum and finite type invariants of knots and
links in 3-manifolds, including generalizations of Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev
invariants. The study of quasicrystals involves local rules that determine
quasiperiodic tilings of Euclidean space. Each of the topics in this project is
intimately related to physics. The most powerful invariants of knots and links
currently known (i.e., most likely to distinguish among different but similar
objects) find their motivation in quantum field theory. The algebraic aspect of
the theory is beautiful and rich in results. However, the invariants remain
difficult to compute except in simple cases, and their intrinsic topological
meaning remains obscure. The second topic, quasicrystals, stems from the
discovery in 1984 of solid substances whose spectrum has sharp peaks enjoying
some symmetries that real crystals do not (for example, 5-fold symmetry). It is
believed that a mathematical model of a quasicrystal is a quasiperiodic tiling
of space, such as the famous Penrose tilings of the plane discovered in 1973 by
the physicist Roger Penrose but considered at that time to be only a
mathematical curiosity. The project aims to shed light on each of these topics.
***