* 9626113
* Nonparametric Modeling and Prediction for Time Series       Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1999
* Rong Chen, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 05/31/1999
* USD 65,000.00

DMS9626113 Chen This research is concerned with nonparametric model building
procedures and nonparametric prediction methods in nonlinear time series
analysis. The first objective of this research is to develop a new nonparametric
modeling procedure for nonlinear time series. The investigator studies the
functional coefficient autoregressive models and makes the model easier to use
in practice. In particular, a weighted local linear regression procedure is
studied. This procedure differs from the classical local linear regression for
curve fitting where the response function is of interest. Here, estimating the
coefficient functions are of main interest. A procedure for detecting
discontinuities in the coefficient functions is studied as well. The second
objective of this research is concerned with multi-step predictions using
nonparametric smoothing techniques. The investigator studies the properties of a
multi-stage nonparametric predictor, which is closely related to the iterative
integration procedures for multi-step prediction. Preliminary study shows that
the new method does improve the accuracy of the prediction. The first goal is to
show that the predictor is applicable to a wide class of nonlinear AR models.
The second goal is to investigate the practical implementation of the method,
particularly the automatic bandwidth selection method and prediction strategy.
This research is concerned with model building procedures and prediction methods
in nonlinear time series analysis. A time series is a set of data observed over
a period of time. For example, daily ozone and pollutant readings for
environmental study, quarterly unemployment rate or GNP for economical study and
noisy telecommunication signals are all subjects of time series analysis. Time
series analysis tries to reveal the generating mechanism of the observed time
series and to provide sensible methods to predict future observations based on
current and past information. Linear ti me series models assumes the future
observations relate to the current and past observations in simple linear
functions while nonlinear models assume complex relationship. In this research,
the investigator follows the principle of `letting the data speak for
themselves' and develops modeling procedures for nonlinear time series. It is
used to overcome the difficulty encountered in real applications of choosing an
appropriate model. The second objective of this research is concerned with
multi-step predictions for nonlinear time series. Nonlinear time series models
have been shown to have certain advantages in multi-step forecasting over linear
models. In this research, the investigator studies the properties of a new
predictor that improves the prediction accuracy. There are sufficient reasons to
believe that the results of this research should have significant contributions
in nonlinear time series analysis, which has many important applications in the
fields of economics, telecommunication, meteorology, environment and many
others.