* 9626204
* Mathematical Sciences:  Topology of Smooth 4-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Selman Akbulut, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 38,200.00

9626204 Akbulut This project has two parts, (a)topology of smooth 4-manifolds
and (b)topology of real algebraic sets. In (a) the investigator intends to
construct some new 4-manifolds (such as manifolds with b+ even, and a product of
spheres) by using the new Seiberg-Witten technology and by some new algebraic
topological techniques (torsion invariants for 4-manifolds). He would also like
to use symplectic/contact structures to get a better structure theorem for
smooth manifolds (i.e., generalized "cork" structures). In (b) he intends to
continue with the "topological classification program" previously initiated
jointly with H.King. He will also try to construct submanifolds of Euclidean
space that cannot be isotopic to a nonsingular algebraic subset (i.e., strongly
transcendental manifolds). The investigator would like to construct some new
exotic 4-dimensional manifolds (generalizations of 4-dimensional spaces) that
have not been detected by the current techniques. He also would like to classify
"algebraic spaces" (spaces that are described by systems of polynomial
equations). The mysteries of 4-dimensional geometry and topology have been
recognized as of more than purely theoretical interest ever since the acceptance
of time as a fourth physical dimension, e.g., in Einstein's theory of special
relativity in the early years of this century. ***