* 9626381
* Mathematical Sciences: Stark's Conjectures on Number Fields and Theory Fields
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* David Hayes, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 12/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

Hayes 9626381 Stark's conjectures provide a major new insight into class field
theory. They are an ingenious and highly original answer to the questions raised
by the famous 12th problem of Hilbert. Hayes has given constructive proofs of
the abelian Stark conjectures in function fields using the theory of Drinfield
modules. He hopes to apply insights gained from the function field setting to
number fields. Hayes has shown that the Brumer-Stark units over a number field
satisfying Leopoldt's conjecture can be aligned into a Hecke character. In this
project, he will attempt to prove the existence of further Hecke characters
analogous to the well-known Jacobi sum characters introduced by A. Weil. The
existence of such character is intimately related to the invariance under base
change of the Brumer-Stark axioms, which is as yet unproved. Since Stark's
conjectures are based upon the special value of partial zeta functions at zero,
it is important to understand what such special values mean. Haye has given one
interpertation of this special value over a real quadratic number field. He will
try to extend this interpertation to the special values at negative integers and
to arbitrary totally real number fields. Finallly, Hayes will also continue his
work with Drinfield modules of rank one using the insights gained from the
computation of Drinfield modules associated to hyperelliptic functions fields.
This research falls into the general mathematical field of Number Theory. Number
theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole numbers, addressing
such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of one whole number by
another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics and was pursued for many
centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within the last half century it
has become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in areas such as data
transmission and processing, and communication systems.