* 9626119
* Dynamics of Nonequilibrium Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Susan Coppersmith, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/2000
* USD 167,100.00

9626119 Coppersmith This new award focuses on the theory of the dynamical
properties of inhomogeneous condensed matter systems. In particular, emphasis is
on the nonequilibrium dynamics of granular materials and of collective motion in
driven disordered systems such as flux lattices in type-II superconductors and
sliding charge density waves. Recent experimental work on these systems has
revealed rich dynamical behavior that may be amenable to detailed theoretical
understanding. The research goal is to understand both the deterministic and
noisy response of these systems and to identify unifying physical principles
that may be applicable to a broad range of complex systems. %%% This new award
focuses on the theory of the dynamical properties of inhomogeneous condensed
matter systems. In particular, emphasis is on the nonequilibrium dynamics of
granular materials and of collective motion in driven disordered systems such as
flux lattices in type-II superconductors and sliding charge density waves.
Recent experimental work on these systems has revealed rich dynamical behavior
that may be amenable to detailed theoretical understanding. The research goal is
to understand both the deterministic and noisy response of these systems and to
identify unifying physical principles that may be applicable to a broad range of
complex systems. ***