* 9626306
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Models and Methods in      Nonlinear Optics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Nicholas Ercolani, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 72,247.00

9626306 Ercolani In the projects proposed here, the PI intends to concentrate on
two particular areas where geometric methods are playing a fundamental role. The
methods to be applied here are, first, soliton and near-integrable systems
theory and, second, geometric singularity theory.The first concerns the
modelling of dispersive difference schemes. The equations of nonlinear optics
frequently operate in regimes where dispersive effects tend to dominate over
those of viscosity. A particularly relevant example of this is the effects of
numerical dispersion in modelling carrier wave shocking of femtosecond pulses.
An appropriate model that can provide a benchmark for these effects is the
integrable discrete nonlinear Schrodinger equations. The integrability of this
model enables one to entertain a precise analysis of continuum limits for this
system. The PI proposes to use the underlying Kahler geometry of this model to
deduce convexity estimates which should enable one to derive a valid
characterization of these limits including the appearance of modulational
instabilities. These characterizations will then be compared to modulation
equations derived by formal averaging as well as to numerical simulations of
non-integrable discretizations of the nonlinear Schrodinger (NLS) pde. The
second topic concerns pattern formation in nonlinear optics. Experiments reveal
a rich variety of transverse patterns for coherent fields in a nonlinear optical
cavity. The Nonlinear Optics group of the Arizona Center for Mathematical
Sciences has derived mean field models for a cavity filled with an isotropic,
nonlinear Kerr medium, and driven by a linearly polarised input field. The
equations for this model have the form of a damped, driven coupled pair of
defocussing NLS equations and have been numerically demonstrated to produce
patterns and defects of the type seen experimentally. The PI and his
collaborators are particularly interested to understand the formation and evolut
ion of defects in pattern forming evolution equations and have developed order
parameter equations which model the behaviour of modulated roll paterns in a
variety of such evolution equations. The PI proposes to derive and study such
modulation equations for the above mentioned mean field model. The PI has also
developed a general approach, based on geometric singularity theory, for the
description of singularties in systems of pde's. The goals of this project will
be first, to classify generic types of defects for the nonlinear optics model
and assess their temporal stability; second, to control the formation of defects
to the end of either eliminating them or using them to encode information in
patterns. Expectations concerning this second goal are supportied by recent
sucess in controlling pattern irregularities in one dimensional models. %%%
Nonlinear optics, which may be defined as the study of the interaction of
intense light with matter, was born with the invention of the laser in the
1960's. In those early days such interactions required very large intensities;
however, nowadays such systems can be constructed with only modest power
requirements. Along with this has come the possibility of constructing large,
so-called wide aperture, devices such as semiconductor lasers. Such devices will
play an important role in many areas of technology such as satellite
communications systems with an ultrafast switching capacity. With the
introduction of these larger physical scales one expects to see the formation of
patterns as well as defects in these patterns (analogous to crystalline defects)
which can be modelled by the equations developed in this proposal. Understanding
how such patterns arise and evolve can play an important role in efficiently
operating and controlling these devices. In the second project of this proposal
oscillatory solutions in a special class of interacting lattice systems will be
investigated. These systems have modelling app lications which range from
theoretical biology to the numerical methods used in numerically simulating
optical systems. The goal is to obtain, rigorously, a continuum description,
given by partial differential equations and valid on long spatial and temporal
scales, of the microscopic variations in these lattice systems. Such models can
help to explain how a microscopic system, such as an alpha-helix protein
molecule or a coupled laser array, can behave collectively, and hence
macroscopically, in order to contribute to phenomena on scales much larger than
those orignally present in the microscopic system. ***