* 9626371
* Development of a Luminescence Workstation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Joanna McKittrick, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1999
* USD 120,950.00

9626371 McKittrick The development of high brightness, thermally stable,
phosphor materials for display applications has become the limiting step in the
development of new flat panel displays such as color plasma and field emission
displays. Phosphors are luminescent materials when excited by an energy source
such as an electron beam or photons and are composed of an inert host lattice
with a small amount of dopant (activator). Most of the commercially available
emissive display phosphors have been developed for high voltage, cathode ray
tube applications which operate at 10-30 keV. There has been very little work
done on developing new compositions for low voltage (100-10,000 eV) or plasma
displays (UV emission at 147 nm). These new applications have demands on
phosphors that are not optimized or met by the existing compositions. This
project is to build a multipurpose workstation for the evaluation of
cathodoluminescent and photoluminescent materials for applications in CRT
screens, field emission devices and plasma displays. The workstation will
consist of vacuum pumps, a vacuum chamber, a mass spectrometer, and a
spectroradiometer with associated electronics for the evaluation of low and
medium voltage cathodoluminescent phosphors. The UV evaluation will be performed
by a commercially available luminescence spectrophotometer. %%% Our research has
focused on the synthesis of novel phosphor powder compositions, the deposition
of the powders to form highly adherent, dense screens and the characterization
of the luminescent properties of these screens. We have concentrated our
attention on understanding, modeling and predicting the luminescent behavior to
ultimately improve the brightness, efficiency, and to decrease the emission
decay time of high voltage phosphor screens. However, the role of surfaces
(point and line defects, absorbed species, morphology, grain boundaries, etc.)
is not understood on a fundamental level. Comparing the luminescent behavior of
single crystals, powder screen and thin film phosphors will yield basic
information on the how photoemission is affected by surfaces which in turn will
aid in optimizing phosphor screens for display applications. ***