* 9626417
* Development and Analysis of Models for the Spread and       Control of Weeds and Infectious Diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Edward Allen, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 88,500.00

Allen 9626417 The goals of this research involve two different but related
biological areas; one area is weed control and the other is control of
infectious diseases. By their very nature, weeds and infectious disease agents
are unwanted invaders in a host system; their introduction frequently has
adverse effects. Practical methods for control of weeds and infectious diseases
are under continual research and development. However, there is a need for
theoretical justification and predictability of these control procedures. This
project develops and analyzes mathematical models that provide quantitive and
qualitative means for evaluation of these control procedures. Integrodifference
equations provide a realistic starting point for modeling the biological
dynamics of these two processes; the time variable is discrete but the spatial
and state variables are continuous. Discrete-time models describe plant
populations whose generations are nonoverlapping and epidemics where the
observation of cases or the seasonal movement and population densities of
animals relate to the discrete time interval. Mathematical models for weeds and
infectious diseases are analyzed to determine the effects of spatial dispersal,
age or stage structure, multi-population interactions, and general growth
assumptions on model behavior. Two important questions are addressed: (i) How
fast does the weed or disease spread? and, (ii) What are the short- and long-
term effects of a control procedure? Determining effective control procedures
for weeds and infectious diseases has become a significant global environmental
problem. Around the world, native plant communities are being displaced by
nonnative plants and enzootic wildlife diseases are becoming a threat to humans.
In particular, agricultural land and rangeland, where the native plant community
structure has been altered, are especially vulnerable to invasions by introduced
plant species. Humans living in close proximity to an animal reservoir of a
disease are at an increased risk of contracting the disease. It is the goal of
this research to apply the mathematical models and theoretical techniques that
are developed in this project to two important and timely biological problems:
(1) control of weeds in agricultural fields or rangeland and (2) control of
rabies in wildlife populations. Formulation, analysis, and numerical simulation
of mathematical models provide a greater understanding of effective methods for
the control of the spread of weeds in fields or rangeland and of rabies in
wildlife. Various control strategies are compared to determine the most
effective short- and long-term strategies that prevent or reduce the spread
while causing minimal damage or change to the environment and minimal risk to
humans.