* 9626817
* Mathematical Sciences: Topology and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Sylvain Cappell, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 05/31/2000
* USD 175,500.00

9626817 Cappell Technical summary: In this project the investigator will study
several problems about topological invariants of singular varieties and their
relation to symplectic geometry and algebraic geometry. General formulae for
invariants of singular varieties will be developed and will be applied, using
toric varieties, to obtain precise comparisons of lattice summation and
integration. Analytical, combinatorial and number theoretical aspects of these
comparisons will be explored with a view to many possible applications. Another
line of investigation will be the use of symplectic geometrical methods in the
study of representation-theoretic invariants of three-manifolds. This will
include a series of studies of Maslov indices and analytical formulae for
Casson's SU(2) invariant as well as a study of SU(n) invariants. A third area of
investigation will be the development of a satisfactory general theory for the
topological classification of finite group actions on manifolds; this will
encompass such foundational questions as the appropriate notion of functoriality
for this classification problem in a given homotopy type. Non-technical summary:
In this project, constructions and ideas drawn from topology and geometry will
be used to get precise formulae that compare multidimensional integration with
lattice summations. Such comparison formulae have been available for several
centuries for one-dimensional integrals and sums, i.e., in the Euler-MacLaurin
expansion, but have not been available in adequate generality in the higher
dimensional settings needed for many applications. Through a series of
intermediate steps, such problems have been translated into questions about the
topology of spaces which have singularities (that is, which are not uniform) and
the measurement of how such singularities contribute to the computation of
invariants of such spaces. The deep methods of modern topology will be applied
to resolve these geometrical ques tions and hence ultimately to solve the
concrete problems of precise comparisons of integrals and sums. Envisioned
applications include new approaches to rapid integration and to discrete
optimization. ***