* 9626639
* Mathematical Sciences:  Research in Algebraic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Jerome Levine, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/2000
* USD 270,600.00

9626639 Levine Daniel Ruberman will continue to investigate applications of
gauge theory to the topology of four-manifolds. One application is to use
Seiberg-Witten equations to describe bounds on the genus of a surface
representing a homology class of negative self-intersection. A second is to use
the Seiberg-Witten invariants to give an obstruction to isotopy of
diffeomorphisms of certain reducible four-manifolds. Other projects involve a
computation of Casson's invariant in terms of the Yang-Mills moduli space, and
joint work with Z. Bizacka on ends of smooth 4-manifolds. Kiyoshi Igusa will
study the relationship between the higher Reidemeister torsion invariants
(algebraic K-theory invariants associated to the diffeomorphism space of a
smooth manifold) and analytically defined invariants such as the Kontsevich
integral and the Lott-Bismut analytic torsion. Using his complexified version of
Bokstedt's theorem, he plans to relate the topology of circular and planar
oriented graphs to algebraic K-theory. The methods to be used are Morse theory,
algebraic K-theory and cyclic homology. Jerome Levine will continue his joint
study, with S. Garoufalidis, of finite-type invariants of homology 3-spheres, in
particular, their relationship with filtrations of various subgroups of the
mapping class group of a surface. He will continue to study the Morse theory of
harmonic 1-forms, in particular, the question: for every closed Morse 1-form, is
there a harmonic 1-form with the same critical points and in the same cohomology
class? The next case to consider is when the associated foliation has all
compact leaves. He will also continue to study invariants of manifolds arising
from previous work on jumps of the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer eta-invariant and return
to questions about link concordance. Edgar Brown will attempt to extend his
previous work on rational homotopy theory to the mod-p setting, in particular,
the construction of a minimal model f or function spaces. He also plans to study
the Steenrod operations in an algebraic setting and the construction of minimal
models. To put it less technically, Daniel Ruberman's project is concerned with
properties of four-dimensional spaces called manifolds. Among the questions
under study are the existence and geometrical properties of two-dimensional
surfaces sitting inside a four-dimensional manifold. Ruberman will also
investigate symmetries of four-dimensional spaces in order to determine when a
pair of symmetries can be joined by a one-parameter family of symmetries. The
approach to these investigations is via the Yang-Mills and Seiberg-Witten
equations of mathematical physics, which arise in studies of the fundamental
particles. There are several formulas coming from various branches of
mathematics and physics that are known to represent the same geometric phenomena
that are manifested in many ways, ranging from the circles and lines in the
plane to the equations of gravity. Using his knowledge of these methods, Kiyoshi
Igusa will be investigating the relationship between these formulas. Jerome
Levine will be working to determine those invariants of 3-dimensional manifolds
that are computable in a very explicit sense and that seem to be closely related
to invariants coming from quantum field theory. Edgar Brown will be studying
various algebraic models of spaces that capture many of their properties but are
easier to manipulate and understand. ***