* 9626101
* Mathematical Sciences:  Some Problems in Geometric          Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Steven Ferry, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/1999
* USD 74,100.00

9626101 Ferry The investigator plans to study a number of topics in controlled
topology and differential geometry. The most pressing of these concern the
nonresolvable homology manifolds discovered by the investigator, J. Bryant, W.
Mio, and S. Weinberger. Simply put, the main project is to discover to what
extent the classical geometric theory of topological manifolds carries over to
these newly discovered spaces. This study is closely related to the well-known
Borel and Bing-Borsuk Conjectures. Other problems on the investigator's list of
projects include the construction of controlled Gamma-surgery theory and its
application to the study of topological embeddings in codimension two, the
construction of manifold structures on acyclic Poincare duality spaces, the
study of ``short'' maps defined on ``large'' Riemannian manifolds, and
applications of controlled topology to the study of spaces of Riemannian
manifolds. Much of topology is concerned with the study of mathematical objects
called spaces. The surface of a sphere is a space, as is the surface of a donut.
In the study of mathematical systems with many variables, it is common for
spaces of very high or even infinite dimension to play important roles. A
classical problem in topology is to find small checkable sets of axioms which
characterize particular spaces. One popular set of axioms involves the notion of
connectivity. Roughly speaking, a space is connected if it is all in one piece.
It is locally connected if it can be chopped up into arbitrarily small connected
pieces. (Be warned -- these plain English definitions are at best rough
approximations to the actual mathematical definitions.) In 1978, James Cannon
made an amazingly perceptive conjecture. He conjectured that if a space
satisfied certain generalized connectivity axioms and had enough room in it to
push certain sets apart, then it was a topological manifold -- a space which is
assembled by gluing together small pieces of ordi nary Euclidean space. (Both
the surface of a sphere and the surface of a donut are topological manifolds of
dimension 2. The ``curved spaces'' appearing in general relativity are
topological manifolds of dimension 4.) Combining work of F. Quinn and R. D.
Edwards shows that Cannon's conjecture is true whenever a connected space
contains even the tiniest manifold piece. This manifold piece acts as a sort of
seed which determines the entire local structure of the space. Working with J.
Bryant, W. Mio, and S. Weinberger, the investigator has shown that Cannon's
conjecture is not true in complete generality. The main question the
investigator will be studying is whether the ``seeding'' phenomenon from the
Edwards-Quinn case holds in general -- whether the local structure of connected
counterexamples is the same at every point. If this turns out to be true, these
new spaces could become objects of interest paralleling manifolds. Cannon's
axioms guarantee that from a large-scale point of view, these spaces look
exceedingly like manifolds. If the seeding phenomenon holds, one imagines that
there could eventually be theories speculating that we live in one of these new
mathematical objects rather than in ``ordinary'' Euclidean space. ***