* 9626177
* VPW:  Sequence Stratigraphic Backstripping:  Generating a   Cenozoic Eustatic Sea-Level Curve
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Michelle Kominz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 04/30/1998
* USD 112,674.00

This research establishes the magnitude and timing eustatic sea- level for much
of the Cenozoic by studying the subsidence of 3 thermal basins, The Baltimore
Canyon Trough (offshore New Jersey), The Northeast Gulf of Mexico and the North
Sea Basin. In each location the eustatic component of accommodation space will
be separated from the tectonic and sediment components via a sequence
stratigraphic backstripping. Procedure generation and study of the North Sea
Basin are funded by NSF grant EAR-9506572 to the P.I., Dr. Michelle Kominz.
Sequence stratigraphic data coupled with well logs and crustal thicknesses will
be the input. Flexural backstripping of this data produces accommodation space
by removing the effects of sediment loading. Separation of the eustatic and
tectonic components of accommodation space will be possible based on their
unique temporal and spatial properties. Forward modeling of each basin is
required to determine the effects of sediment on the thermal history of the
lithosphere and to determine the flexural rigidity of the lithosphere as a
function of time. Finally, the eustatic results of each basin will be integrated
to remove regional tectonism and to obtain a Pre-Pleistocene Cenozoic eustatic
curve. Interactive activities include: teaching upper level
undergraduate/graduate courses in Marine Geology and co-teaching a graduate
course on Sequence Stratigraphy and Backstripping. In addition, Dr. Kominz will
present individual lectures or sets of lectures in additional classes including
Introduction to Marine Science, Introductory Geology, Stratigraphy and
Geophysics.