* 9626189
* Multivariate Estimation for Astronomy
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Gutti Babu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 09/30/1999
* USD 95,000.00

DMS 9626189 Babu Many important problems in astronomical research require models
that are often composite and nonlinear, far more complex than the models assumed
in standard multivariate analysis. While these models can sometimes be
calculated analytically, they often can only be represented by Monte Carlo
simulations, particularly when selection biases are involved in the data
collection. In such cases, the empirical distribution does not approach the
underlying population distribution and standard parameter estimation is
inapplicable. The investigators study an estimation procedure, based on
projections of multivariate datasets on to 1-dimensional spaces, to derive
optimal values and constraints on the hidden parameters Kolmogorov-Smirnov-type
statistics based on the projections will be used to compare the data with
models. Asymptotic consistency and the asymptotic distribution of the new
statistics will be evaluated using approximation theory of empirical processes.
When applied to astronomical problems, `best-fit' model parameters may be
computed even for biased multivariate data and complicated models. %%% Many
important problems in astronomical research involve applying complicated
astrophysical models to datasets with many variables: the evolution of galaxies
since the Big Bang, the distribution of matter in our Galaxy, the age of the
oldest stars in globular clusters. The astronomer seeks insight into the
validity of the models and the range of model parameters consistent with the
data. The models are often very complex, and real datasets frequently suffer
from known selection biases (e.g. only the brighter galaxies are detected). We
develop and apply the mathematical and statistical tools necessary to treat such
problems. This project is part of a long-term effort to promote intellectual
integration of two disciplines: statistics, which has sophisticated tools for
understanding data; and astronomy, which confronts fundamental questions a bout
our physical Universe. ***