* 9626215
* Constructing Optical Interconnections for Massively ParallelComputing
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Si-Qing Zheng, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 07/31/1997
* USD 49,786.00

9626215 Zheng Massively parallel computation is a frontier computing field. An
extremely important aspect of parallel computation is data communication among
processing/memory components. Much research has been centered around building
point-to-point networks using the VLSI technology. The VLSI technology is not
suitable for interconnection intensive circuits due to its two- dimensionality,
I/O constraints, and electrical properties such as resistance, capacitance, and
inductance. The emerging optical technology has drastically changed the
landscape of interconnection schemes. There are many desirable characteristics
of optical interconnects. Optics can utilize free-space interconnects as well as
guided wave technology, neither of which has the problems mentioned for the VLSI
technology. The characteristics of optical interconnects have significant system
configuration and complexity implications. Architectural freedom and constraints
have shifted when optical interconnects are incorporated. The conventional graph
theory, which has been successfully used to characterize point-to-point
networks, is no longer adequate for modeling these interconnect technologies.
Recently, based on the hypergraph theory, the P.I. has introduced a new class of
network architectures, the hypernetworks, that are particularly suitable for
optical interconnects. This project will focus on the feasibilties of
implementing large-scale optical interconnection networks using current and
future optical technologies. Topological, communication, computation, fault-
tolerance, and implementation aspects of optical hypernetworks will be
investigated. During this project, the P.I. will interact with researchers in
the field of optical engineering, and develop a joint research plan for further
investigations. It is possible that the proposed research will have a
significant impact not only on the design, implementation and analysis of new
generation massively parallel computing systems based on current and future V
LSI and optical technologies, but also on the theory and practice of massively
parallel computation as a whole. ***