* 9626884
* Mathematical Sciences: An Experimental Tool for             Topological Surface Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* John Ringland, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2000
* USD 92,000.00

9626884 Menasco The investigators develop a computer program for studying
topological properties of maps of punctured surfaces. A central component of the
software tool is the Bestvina-Handel algorithm for the Thurston-Nielsen
classification of surface homoeomorphisms, which yields not only the
classification, but also a canonical representative - a "train-track map" - of
the isotopy class to which the homeomorphism belongs. Experimentation in this
field, essential to the formulation of theorems and conjectures, is currently
hampered by the very large amount of labor entailed in classifying and analyzing
even a single example of a surface homeomorphism. The software removes this
roadblock. It allows the researcher to rapidly generate train-track maps, and
representations and characterizations (both algebraic and graphical) of their
suspensions. The software is made available via the World Wide Web. One studies
dynamical systems to explain and make predictions about a vast range of
phenomena, from the motions of the stars and planets, to the circulation of the
Earth's atmosphere, to the behavior of machinery such as drilling rigs and human
hearts, to the self-propulsion of bacteria. In describing such phenomena, which
are repetitive in character, models in the form of iterated maps from some space
to itself frequently have great explanatory and predictive power. Perhaps the
simplest class of realistic models is that of continuous maps of two-dimensional
surfaces. Even simple members of this class can exhibit a bewildering complexity
of behavior, and many questions about these systems have yet to be answered.
Maps of punctured surfaces are of interest because of their bearing on the
relationships among periodic orbits and on long-standing problems of the theory
of knots. The purpose of this project is to develop a software tool for
experimentation in the topological properties of maps of punctured surfaces.
Topological properties, those that ar e persistent under distortions of the
surface or map, are the most fundamental. The software is made available via the
World Wide Web.