* 9626139
* WORKSHOPS: Institute for Mathematics and Its Applications   "Initiative in Materials Science"; January 24-26, 1996 and  February 1-3, 1996; Minneapolis, Minnesota
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/1996,12/31/1997
* Robert Gulliver, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1997
* USD 85,000.00

9626139 Friedman This award will provide partial support for two three-day
workshops to be held at the Institute for Mathematics and Its Applications of
the University of Minnesota in late January and early February, 1996,
respectively. The workshops will focus on the following topics: (1)
Microstructure and Thin Films and (2) "Smart" Sensing and Control of Thin Films.
The first workshop will concentrate on thin films. Computational approaches to
modeling thin films have generally focused either on the atomistic scale or on
the continuum scale. However, because of the drastically different time and
length scales involved in these disparate models, they are not currently linked.
This limits the ability of either model to describe the process adequately for
industrial materials manufacturing. Increased computational power will not solve
this problem because strategies for scaling up or scaling down from these models
do not yet exist. Although computational power might allow scaling up in size,
more sophisticated techniques must be developed for dealing with time scale
issues. The workshop will bring together mathematicians working in materials
science and materials scientists who use modeling and simulation in order to
jointly address the micro-macro linkage needed to understand microstructure
evolution in thin films. A series of talks and discussions are expected to lead
to a set of suggestions on how to develop models using multiscaling techniques.
The eventual goals in realizing these suggestions are: (1) high-fidelity
simulations of thin-film processes which link ab initio, calculations to
continuum microstructure/property models, and (2) approaches to extracting
physical non-empirical models from these full simulations that are suitable for
real-time process control. The second workshop will also focus on thin films,
but from a different perspective. Controllers operate at the macro level. At
this level the models are at the continuum scale and their evolution is dictated
by partial differential equations (PDE). Solution techniques for PDE require the
most powerful computers currently available. Models at this level of detail are
unsuitable for real-time process control. The workshop will explore research
ideas on mathematical approaches for extracting the dominant parameters from the
full model. Understanding the micro-macro linkage will be essential for success
in using feedback control. A topic of special interest of the second workshop is
"smart" sensors, that is, sensors that "understand" the process models and are
able to determine process parameters either directly or indirectly using these
models. It will emphasize algorithms which allow sensors to infer parameters of
interest from other parameters for cases where one cannot directly sense a
parameter that the physicochemical models indicates is critical to the control
of the process.