* 9626529
* The Study of Supertransients in Spatiotemporal Chaotic      Dynamical Systems with Applications to Nonequilibrial       Species Coexistence in Ecology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Robert Holt, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 91,956.00

Lai 9626529 The study of chaotic dynamics provides a new paradigm for
understanding complicated dynamics in a wide range of disciplines, ranging from
physics to meteorology to the biological sciences. This proposal focuses on one
problem that is of fundamental importance in nonlinear dynamics, and is
potentially of great importance in ecological systems: the phenomenon of
supertransients in spatially-extended chaotic systems. Specifically, we will
investigate the origin of supertransients, and develop a quantitative scaling
theory to explain how and why the lifetime of supertransients increases with
system size. This theory will be developed first for a simple, analyzable model,
then to test this theory on a number of model spatiotempral chaotic systems. We
will investigate supertransients in several realistic ecological model systems,
and focus on the potential for supertransiency to promote the long term (though
not indefinite) coexistence of competing species, and how such coexistence is
influenced by system size. 'Me models involve competition among species in
patches, with localized dispersal among patches. This work will contribute to a
long-standing debate in ecology about the importance of nonequilibrial dynamics
in understanding patterns in species diversity, and the influence of spatial
scale on species coexistence. A full understanding of the dynamics of physical
and biological systems requires a consideration of transient dynamics away from
equilibrium. Recently, it has become recognized that realistic models of
spatially-distributed ecological systems can exhibit superlong 'chaotic'
transients before equilibrium is reached, wherein for all practical purposes a
system never reaches its ultimate equilibrium. Our research focuses on
characterizing quantitatively the phenomenon of supertransient behaviors in
mathematical models, using both mathematical analyses and extensive numerical
simulations, and on ascertaining the potential relevance of supertransients for
import ant, unresolved questions in ecology, in particular the long-term
coexistence of species competing for limiting resources, but able to disperse in
space in heterogeneous, patchy landscapes.