* 9626377
* Mathematical Sciences: Group Definable in o-minimal         Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Sergei Starchenko, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diamond
* 05/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract DMS 9626377 Sergei Starchenko, Vanderbilt University The project
concerns the classification of groups definable in o-minimal structures. While
"an o-minimal structure" is a notion of model theory, it turns out that many
important expansions of real numbers are o-minimal, and this model theoretical
notion provides a natural framework for the study of "analytic-geometric"
categories. Tools of model theory have been successfully applied to these
categories yielding interesting theorems about the real numbers. The starting
point for this project is the observation that groups definable in o-minimal
structures can be viewed as Lie groups over real closed fields. Certain aspects
of these groups are easily overlooked when treated only over the field of real
numbers. These aspects come into full view, however, when we regard the groups
as definable in model-theoretically well-behaved structures. The main goal of
Starchenko's project is to obtain a reasonable classification of o-minimal
groups, in order to develop a model-theoretical analogue of Lie theory. He
conjectures that locally o-minimal groups are algebraic and Lie morphisms are,
essentially, Nash morphisms. If this is the case, then many properties of
algebraic groups can be transferred to o-minimal groups, thus providing new
tools to study such groups. Since the field of algebraic real numbers is
o-minimal, these tools can then be applied to study groups definable in
expansions of number fields. On the other hand, any negative example will
provide new information about interactions between geometric and algebraic
properties of Euclidean groups. The second part of the project concerns some
open questions in stability theory. It has been shown that many ideas and tools
of model theory have natural geometric analogues in o-minimal structures. The
investigator hopes that the presence of a nice geometry can help to solve
o-minimal versions of the two most famous questions in stability theory. This
project employs l ogical tools of model theory, and specifically a notion called
o-minimality, to deepen the mathematical understanding of several important
number systems, including the real numbers. An understanding of the real numbers
and of their geometric properties is basic to mathematics, and also to many
applications of mathematics, e.g. to manufacturing. Model theory provides a
valuable perspective in this understanding.