* 9626318
* CISE Postdoctoral Program: Scalability of Software          Distributed Shared Memory
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Willy Zwaenepoel, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 03/31/1999
* USD 46,200.00

9626318 Zwaenepoel, Willy William Marsh Rice University CISE Postdoctoral
Program: Scalability of Software Distributed Shared Memory This award supports
CES associate Povl Koch. Software Distributed Shared Memory (DSM) architectures
strike a balance between the distributed-memory and shared memory architectures
by providing an abstraction of shared memory in software on distributed
memories. They are built using standard processors/workstations and they are
easy to program using a shared address space based on virtual memory pages. DSM
systems are suitable for many parallel scientific applications. Although many
systems have been designed, only the scalability issues for hardware shared-
memory systems have been addressed. For software DSM systems, the focus has been
on performance with a moderate number of nodes using relaxed memory consistency
models and multiple-writers protocols. Most experiments have been on 8 nodes and
a few with 16 nodes. When going from 8 to 64 or more nodes, each may have
multiple processors, scalability problems exist with the current size of data
structures and their allocation and deallocation. A scalable DSM should only
capture actual causality of modifications, minimize space overhead per shared
page, and the address space should be dynamically partitioned. We plan to
analyze and build a scalable DSM system to run on a distributed-memory machine
with 64 nodes and a fast interconnect. ***