* 9626621
* Mathematical Sciences: Linear and Nonlinear Rigidity of     Discrete Subgroups Lie Groups and Manifolds of Negative     Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Chengbo Yue, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/1998
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract Yue The author is currently working on various aspects of the geometry
and rigidity of negatively curved manifolds and symmetric spaces using methods
from dynamical systems, Lie groups, several complex variable, quasiconformal
mapping, algebraic geometry: 1) Extensions of Mostow rigidity to general
discrete subgroups of infinite covolume. The author has achieved several key
results but still there are important open problems to be solved and it seems
that one has to combine techniques from ergodic theory, algebraic geometry,
complex geometry and Heisenberg geometry for further approach. 2) Nonlinear
extensions of Mostow rigidity--the rigidity of smooth actions of lattices in
noncompact semisimple Lie groups. In particular, the author will further study
the obstructions to the existence of an invariant conformal or projective or
affine structure under a smooth group action and to combine the theory of
differential invariants with Zimmer's cocycle superrigidity. 3)Geometry and
Dynamics around negatively curved manifolds. The author has obtained a number of
results concerning negatively curved manifolds by using techniques from ergodic
theory, global analysis. There are several deep and difficult open problems(for
example, the Katok entropy conjecture, the marked length spectrum problem). The
potential of the dynamical and global approach deserves to be further explored.
4)Hyperbolization of negatively curved 3-maifolds. Kleinian groups. The author
proved recently that a negatively curved closed manifold is either hyperbolic or
the geodesic flow preserves a measurable proper invariant distribution by
considering quasiconformality in the geodesic flow. This seems to be a first
nontrivial step towards another approach to the hyperbolization of negatively
curved closed three-manifolds(which is a big open problem in Thurston's
program). The author is also interested in the Ahlfors area conjecture. The
author's mathematical research are centered around the rigidity and flexibilit y
of negatively curved spaces. From a generic point of view, most spaces are
negatively curved. The intrinsic property of spaces are closely related to the
dynamics of its geodesic flow. Therefore to understand these spaces(including
the one we are living in)--their size, shape, and evolution, it is inevitable to
study the stability, the rigidity and flexibility of various dynamical
systems(i.e. group actions) on them.