* 9626430
* Mathematical Sciences:  Symplectic and Contact Geometry and Topology, and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Yakov Eliashberg, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/2000
* USD 203,616.00

9626430 Eliashberg This project will concentrate on several areas of symplectic
and contact geometry and topology in interaction with other areas of
mathematics. In particular, there will be continuing study of 3-dimensional
contact structures and the relationship between contact geometry and the theory
of codimension-1 foliations. The theory of confoliations initiated in joint work
with W. P. Thurston should help to clarify this relationship. Another important
part of the project will be devoted to symplectic geometry of Stein manifolds,
where one of the main tools should be an analog of Morse-Smale theory for
plurisubharmonic functions on Stein manifolds. Yet another focus (joint with H.
Hofer) will be contact homology theory, which should deliver new invariants of
contact manifolds in dimension 3 and higher. Finally, a significant part of the
project (joint with M. Gromov) will involve the symplectization of Morse theory.
The results here should help in understanding which part of stable Morse theory
can be generalized to the problems of Lagrangian intersections. Symplectic
geometry and topology have played an important role in such different areas of
mathematics as low-dimensional topology, Hamiltonian dynamics, foliation theory,
sub-Riemannian geometry, complex geometry and the theory of functions of several
complex variables. Despite much recent progress, many basic questions remain
unanswered. Moreover, the discovery of new interactions with these other fields
creates new demands for the interior development of symplectic geometry and
topology. The research under this project should answer some of the old problems
of the field and discover further applications. ***