* 9626366
* Acquisition of High Resolution Scanning Electron            Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Leonard Feldman, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1998
* USD 149,250.00

9626366 Wittig The Materials Science Program at Vanderbilt University will
acquire a high resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM) to support
materials science research and education projects. This instrumentation
represents the first joint commitment between the College of Arts and Science
and the School of Engineering to develop the basic infrastructure for materials
research. The existing SEM instrumentation, acquired from 1979 to 1982, has
insufficient resolution to adequately characterize the diverse types of
materials that comprise our expanding research efforts. A primary capability for
a new instrument is variable accelerating voltage from 0.2 to 30 kV with
resolution of at least 2 nm at 30 kV and 5 nm at l kV. This set of imaging
parameters must not compromise the analytical capabilities for x-ray energy
dispersive spectroscopy. In addition, the system will be fully automated with
remote operation capabilities ald integrated into the Vanderbilt computer
network. %%% A scanning electron microscope (SEM) is recognized as one of the
most widely used materials characterization tools for analysis of all class of
materials. The ability to image polymers, ceramics, metals, and semiconductors
at nanometer resolution will impact every area of materials research at
Vanderbilt. A high resolution SEM (HRSEM) will also strongly influence the
educational development of our graduate students in Physics, Chemistry, and
Engineering. ***