* 9627812
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Collaboration and Innovation in the Commerical Geographic Information System Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Alan MacPherson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 08/31/1997
* USD 9,888.00

Hartung, Valerie SUNY at Buffalo The study is designed to examine collaborative
efforts utilized by firms in the Geographic Information Systems (GIS) sector in
the U.S. through a series of site interviews. The goal is to investigate the
spatial and organizational nature of linkages with particular emphasis upon the
impact of joint ventures in technological development and innovation diffusion.
The research will investigate the nature and origins of innovation within the
GIS sector and whether technological innovation is approached internally or
externally. In addition the spatial connection, and especially the presence of a
distance decay factor, will be investigated. The presence or absence of
computing and telecommunication advances upon the scope of collaborative
ventures will be studied. A mail survey will be conducted upon the population of
GIS firms and is intended to assess the technical contribution of external
forward and backward linkages, export propensity, and locational attributes of
the responding firms. The survey will be followed by on-site interviews of firm
executives. The goal of these interviews is to understand the firm's observed
behavior in light of its competitive strategy, product technology, production
methods, labor relations and the behavior of competitors. The study will
illuminate the potential impact of information technologies in the North
American economy and on its ability to develop and transfer innovation into
marketable products and services.