* 9627924
* Paleontology and Biostratigraphy of the Terminal            Proterozoic and Earliest Cambrian Nama Group, Southern      Naimbia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Bruce Runnegar, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2001
* USD 129,824.00

9627924 Runnegar The Cambrian Explosion is the sixth of eight revolutionary
advances in the history of life and one with obvious geological effects. The
aims of this project are to document the history of life in the poorly
understood (Neoproterozoic) stage of the Cambrian Explosion when most
innovations were well underway. This will be achieved by using the largely
unexplored but appropriately fossileferous Nama Group succession in southern
Namibia as the primary source of data. The Nama Group succession is a well-
exposed, flat lying, foreland basin succession that contains a variety of
fossils (Ediacaran soft bodied fossils, trace fossils, calcareous fossils) at
several stratigraphic levels. Equally important, existing knowledge of the
sequence stratigraphy, carbon isotope stratigraphy, and U-Pb geochronology makes
it possible to relate the biological evolution to environmental events that
could be global in character. It may therefore be possible to tease apart the
intrinsic and extrinsic factors that were driving or being driven by the
Cambrian Explosion of complex multicellular life. Building on reconnaissance
work carried out in Namibia in 1993 and 1995, we shall begin to document the
biostratigraphy and paleoecology of the Nama Group in the southern Witputs Basin
in 1996. This will involve extensive field exploration and observation as well
as collecting fossils, measuring sections, tracing formation and sequence
boundaries, and sampling for carbon isotope chemostratigraphy. The laboratory
work will be completed in the following twelve months so that the results can be
sent to press before extending the field work to the northern Zaris Basin in
subsequent years. The expected long-term outcomes are: (1) Documentation of the
Stratigraphic ranges of the fossils and trace fossils with respect to
formations, facies boundaries, sequence surfaces, carbon isotope excursions, and
ash beds with precise U=Pb ages. These data will form the framework for a global
standard success ion for Neoproterozoic biostratigraphy. (2) A deeper
understanding of the evolution of the southern Namibian sedimentary basins
through better time control and better environmental interpretations based on
information obtained from the integrated data. (3) Documentation of the
morphology, taphonomy, and paleoecology of a wide range of fossils and trace
fossils, including some significant new soft-bodied organisms found in 1993 and
1995. The data should provide new evidence for the nature of core members of the
Ediacara "fauna" such as Pteridinium and Ernietta and their life habits. (4) New
sights into the timing and relationships of biological and environmental events
at the close of the Neoproterozoic. (5) Development and explanation of a major
natural heritage resource for the citizens of the Republic of Namibia.