* 9627865
* Calibrating Orogenic Denudation using Detrital Mineral      Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Douglas Burbank, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1998
* USD 200,514.00

Burbank 9627865 Traditional methods of defining hinterland deformation and
associated denudation typically have involved site-by-site calibration of
bedrock cooling histories and/or P-T-t paths. Results from a few sites are then
sometimes extrapolated regionally in order to speculate on broader
deformational/denudational histories. The ability to date individual detrital
minerals has provided a new technique to calibrate deformation and erosion,
whereby ages are generated for populations of detrital minerals which were
collected from strata of known age in a basin adjacent to a range. The measured
temporal difference between the time of cooling below an annealing or closure
temperature and the time of deposition can be interpreted as representing the
time required to uplift a mineral through its annealing/closure isotherm to the
erosional surface, transport it across the cooling and erosional history from an
entire drainage basin. Recent Himalayan studies have shown that some grains in
nearly every sample have experienced very rapid cooling, erosion, transport, and
deposition (often &lt;1-2 My from cooling to deposition). At present, the
interpretation of detrital mineral studies is strongly limited by numerous
uncertainties. The detrital record integrates age information from all tributary
basins. Often the drainage catchment contributing to a given site in the past is
unknown, changing through time, or poorly defined. The relative importance of
point sources (perhaps rapidly uplifting and denuding) within a catchment is
unknown. The impact of topographic and climatic variability on the total
detrital contribution for any given catchment is unknown. These uncertainties
permit detrital age data to be reliably analyzed only in broad, generalized
terms. If the relationships among spatial contributions, and downstream mixing
were known, much more useful information could potentially be extracted from
detrital age populations. We propose a baseline calibration of age distributions
of detrital minerals and related topography, geomorphology, and climate in order
to understand the interactions among factors which control the detrital age
populations as observable today. We will study a Himalayan drainage that extends
from the modern foreland to the Tibetan drainage divide and that includes areas
with strong climatic and topographic contrasts, areas for which marked
differences in bedrock uplift rates have been inferred or observed, and areas in
which the bedrock geology is quite well known and dated. The catchment is
largely covered by a 90-m digital elevation data set that provides a basis for
analysis of topographic effects. Through documentation of the changing detrital
age population along the river course and the contributions from tributary
catchments, we will assess the dependence of the detrital signal on bedrock
ages, inferred or defined bedrock uplift or erosion rates, topographic
characteristics, and climatic influences. This calibration will allow us to
assess the key controls exerted by these interacting factors in a tectonically
dynamic landscape and will form a conceptual basis for improved interpretation
of subsequent detrital mineral age studies. Moreover, this integration should
permit us to evaluate the potential for utilizing detrital mineral ages to
extract relative bedrock erosion rates: a key problem in geomorphic studies.
Given the global climatic effects attributed to Himalayan and Tibetan uplift, as
well as tectonic significance of the Himalayan collision, a firmer basis for
interpreting integrated uplift and erosion histories is clearly needed.