* 9627270
* SBIR Phase II: Triaxial Force Sensing for Automated         Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Allen Grahn, Bonneville Scientific Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/28/1999
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9627270 Grahn This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project takes
a crucial step towards making manufacturing more flexible by reducing or
eliminating the need for specialized end-effectors in many applications. This
will be achieved by endowing general-purpose end-effectors with triaxial force
sensing arrays. Information from these arrays. Information from these arrays can
be used to facilitate object grasping, manipulation, and slip detection and
correction, as well as increasing productivity and product quality through the
monitoring and feedback controlling of these forces during the robot task cycle.
Phase I established the feasibility of the proposed triaxial force sensing
concept and sensor construction was greatly simplified along with making the se
nsor more robust and more economical to fabricate. In Phase II of this project,
a small, high-density prototype triaxial force sensor array will be designed and
fabricated for use on robot end-effectors. Rubbers for use in the sensor's pad
will be extensively evaluated. Support electronics for the force sensor array
will be designed, fabricated, and integrated into an existing electronics uni-
axial tactile sensor system. System software will be developed for operating the
sensor and displaying the normal and shear force data. Once the triaxial force
sensor system is fully operational, its performance will be evaluated. Arrays
will find use in flexible manufacturing, industrial automation, telerobotics,
tire tread testing, foot force distribution, gait analysis, development of
handles on sporting goods, industrial tools, and surgical tools. Single-element
sensors will be used in computer cursor control, as accelerometers, and triazial
forceplates. ***