* 9627352
* Conference:  Organization of the 1996 Advances in Optical   Imaging and Photon Migration Topical Meeting to be held in  Orlando, Florida
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* David Hennage, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 03/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9627352 Hennage This proposal seeks support from NSF by the Optical Society of
America for the "1996 Advances in Optical Imaging and Photon Migration Topical
Meeting," to be held March 18-20, 1996, in Orlando, Florida. The meeting focuses
on progress in optical imaging which depends crucially on progress in a number
of disciplines. Moreover, various techniques need to be judged in the light of
competing methods and sharpened with the knowledge of progress of allied
methods. For example, imaging with light and with near infrared radiation may
soon lead to important new modalities for medical imaging and diagnosis of the
brain or breast diseases. Several time resolved, frequency modulation,
coherence, speckle and inverse techniques are now being developed to
characterize the key properties of tissues that are associated with variations
in the absorption and scattering cross sections. Use is made of coherent
backscattering, ballistic and early arriving light, ultrafast pulse techniques
and spatial filtering, spectral dynamics, time-resolved holography, interference
and coherence of nonlinear optical phenomena, and phase modulation approaches.
The funds requested from the NSF are to support travel to the conference of
outstanding graduate students, post doctoral fellows and junior faculty. This is
the second conference in this series. The first conference served as the
touchstone for the progress of the field. It represented a clear statement of
the state of the art of the time and played an important role in defining the
challenges ahead. ***