* 9627318
* Developing and Absolutely-Dated Holocene Tree-Ring          Chronology from Subfossil Huon Pine in Tasmania for         Paleoclimatic and Isotopic Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 12/31/1999
* USD 252,360.00

Abstract ATM-9627318 Cook, Edward D'Arrigo, Rosanne Columbia University Title:
Developing an Absolutely-Dated Holocene Tree-Ring Chronology from Subfossil Huon
Pine in Tasmania for Paleoclimatic and Isotopic Studies This award supports
research within the Earth System History Program (USGCRP) to develop a Holocene-
length, absolutely-dated annual tree-ring chronology from Huon pine wood in
Tasmania. This chronology will be used to provide dendrochronologically-dated
wood for developing an independent radiocarbon calibration for the Southern
Hemisphere. This will be used to compare for comparing with and extend the
calibration curve developed from Northern Hemisphere wood alone. The wood will
also be used to characterize the inter-hemispheric offset in atmospheric
radiocarbon throughout the Holocene. In so doing, periods of unusual
thermohaline circulation and ocean ventilation may identified. This project will
also provide dated wood for stable isotope studies and develop multi-millennial
annual tree-ring chronologies for dendroclimatic studies. Thus, these data will
provide high-resolution, precisely- dated estimates of climate variability for
most of the Holocene in this sector of the Southern Hemisphere. This will be the
longest tree-ring chronology in the world and will provide a wealth of
information about high-resolution climate and radiocarbon variations back to the
late-glacial period.