* 9627463
* SGER: Collaborative Research: Ecological Studies of         Organism-Flow Interactions via Advanced Simulation and      Diagnostic Techniques
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* David Hart, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/28/1998
* USD 29,498.00

9627463 Hart Organism-flow interactions are potentially important in a wide
variety of ecological settings. Unfortunately, it is often difficult to quantify
the complex flow fields in which organisms actually live, thereby limiting our
understanding of the direct and indirect effects of flow on various ecological
processes and patterns. This collaborative research, which combines expertise in
aquatic ecology and mechanical engineering (simulation and measurement of flow
and transport processes), will apply recent methodological advances in
engineering to describe the flow environments inhabited by stream benthic
animals. Specifically, the research will use computational fluid dynamic models
t o simulate benthic flow fields, and will validate the predictions using
recently developed acoustic Doppler velocimeters as well as hot-film
anemometers. These validated models can provide detailed descriptions of spatial
and temporal variations in flow field characteristics. The effects of different
flow fields on pattern of feeding, habitat selection, and distribution of
suspension-feeding stream insects will then be examined via experimental studies
in laboratory flumes and in the field. How such organism-flow relationships vary
with spatial scale will also be examined. This 'Small Grant for Exploratory
Research' will demonstrate the value of this interdisciplinary approach for
ecological studies in streams and rivers. It can ultimately lead to major
advances in the study of organism-flow interactions in a wide variety of
ecological systems.