* 9627842
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Study of the Changing     Socio-Economic Landscape of Nonmetropolitan America
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Judith Kenny, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 05/31/1997
* USD 9,112.00

SBR-9627842 Judith Kenny Rina Ghose U. Wisconsin, Milwaukee This doctoral-
dissertation improvement award supports a study of in-migrants to a non-
metropolitan county in Montana. The investigators propose that the kind of
migration occurring in this case differs from more common patterns of migration
from metropolitan areas in the wealth and the motivations of the in-migrants.
They will compare migrants' origins, motivations, and socio-economic
characteristics to these patterns in a process that has been called "rural
gentrification," a phrase most often used in British research on a perhaps-
similar British experience in the past 20 years. They will also compare the
Montana and the British experience in terms of the results of in-migration on
public and private resource ownership and use. The Student intends to make use
of Census records, real-estate-sales records, and questionnaires and interviews
with in-migrants and other inhabitants of the county. The research reflects the
fact that particular areas of the American West are changing rapidly because of
an influx of professionals who can either work far away from their actual
clients or markets or who can spend much time and money away from their work-
related residences. The geographic literature in the United States does not
include much study of these changes from a cultural and social perspective. This
study should be important both in interpreting these trends based on one case,
and in catalyzing further research in this area.