* 9627610
* Reduced Complexity Tree Coding of Speech in the Presence    of Background Impairments
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Jerry Gibson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Fuja
* 08/31/1999
* USD 245,735.00

Extraordinary advances in speech coding have been achieved in the past few
years, with the ITU and digital cellular industries producing voice coding
standards for telephony and videoconferencing with performance perhaps
unimaginable even ten years ago. At rates below 12 kbits/s, however, these
coders are sometimes criticized for their implementation complexity and for
their difficulty in coding speech in the presence of extraneous background
impairments. The complexity issue is omnipresent, but becomes increasingly
important in the mobile communications environment, both in digital cellular and
emerging personal communications systems, where battery power is a dominating
issue. Furthermore, there are many applications being developed and proposed for
packet-switched videoconferencing at various rates, where it is desirable to
have voice coders implemented either wholly in software on standard platforms
(Macs, PCs, Sparcs) or whose implementations do not usurp large portions of the
capabilities of a DSP chip. Being able to code speech in the presence of
background impairments has always been of interest, but has recently moved to
the fore because of the mobile environments encountered in digital cellular
mobile radio and evolving personal communications systems. Desktop applications
also present a challenge for coding with background impairments, since hands-
free interaction is critical and thus even some relatively quiet office
environments do not have the handset to aid in rejecting the background noise.
The challenge is therefore to achieve communications quality speech at 8 kbits/s
with medium-to-low complexity for a variety of implementation approaches without
changing background impairments into annoying artifacts. This research
approaches this problem by starting with a low delay waveform following coder,
called a tree coder, removing the low delay requirement and employing frequency
domain based variable rate techniques, forward adaptation ideas, code tr ee
adaptivity innovations, and improved perceptual weighting to reduce
implementation complexity while retaining reconstructed speech quality.