* 9627661
* SBIR Phase II: Parallel FLUENT/RUG: A Three-Dimensional     Finite-Volume Turbulent Flow Simulation Tool
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Ilya Staroselsky, Cambridge Hydrodynamics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/1999
* USD 299,963.00

9627661 Flannery This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to
develop a scalable, parallel FLUENT-compatible code for realistic time-dependent
laminar and turbulent problems. The rapid development of computer hardware,
especially superworkstations and parallel supercomputers, coupled with advances
in numerical and physical modeling of fluid dynamics have opened new
opportunities for working engineers and scientists to use flow simulations for
analysis and design in areas previously only amenable to costly, time-consuming
experimental laboratory exploration. Phase I demonstrated the significant
potential of a new code for general-purpose fluid dynamics computations on
parallel computers, with order-of-magnitude speedups over presently available
commercial codes achieved even on moderate problems. The specific research
issues to be addressed in Phase II include: (1) implementation, parallelization,
and testing of algebraic multigrid acceleration for the pressure solve, as well
as further study of other non-symmetric solver technologies; (2) introduction of
enhanced coordinate systems capability; (3) enhancement of ZFLOW to handle
turbulent heat transfer; (4) implementation, parallelization, and testing of
parallel block-unstructured techniques which potentially lead to order-of-
magnitude increases in maximum treatable problem sizes. Commercial CFD users
increasingly require problem solutions involving significant three-dimensional
COIIlplexity and/or time-dependence. These solutions demand the use of advanced
parallel supercomputers. This project provides a unique opportunity to integrate
advanced CFD and parallel computer technologies into a highly practical software
product that will quickly address this need. This new technology should have a
significant impact on the commercial CFD market.