* 9627872
* Collaborative Research: A Test of Eustatic and Local        Tectonic Controls on Lithofacies Development
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* John Delano, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 81,999.00

Delano 9627872 Sequence stratigraphic interpretations of facies development have
come into wide application. Yet this model has seldom been tested against an
independent set of high precision chronostratigraphic correlations. The proposed
research seeks to directly examine two of the central assumptions of sequence
stratigraphy: that unconformity bounded onlap/offlap cycles are synchronous
across broad regions, and that maximum flooding surfaces within cycles can serve
as regional isochrons. We propose to test these predictions by comparing the
timing of late Middle Ordovician depositional sequence along two regionally
extensive transects across eastern North America (Fig 1). The first will extend
to the southwest within the Taconic foreland basin, from the New York Promontory
through the Pennsylvania Reentrant to the Virginia Promontory. Along this
transect, we will examine sections in east central Pennsylvania, western
Virginia, eastern Tennessee, and northern Alabama. The second transect will
extend from the Taconic foreland basin through the Jessamine Dome, in North
central Kentucky, and into the cratonic interior, where we will examine sections
in Iowa, Illinois, and Missouri. These areas are widely separated geographically
and are known to have experienced different tectonic histories during this
interval. Along these two transects, we will examine the time-space distribution
of the upper-most Middle Ordovician third order stratigraphic sequence relative
to an independently constructed high-precision chronostratigraphy. We will focus
in particular on the equivalents of 1) the lower Trenton Group-Utica Shale
transgressive and highstand systems tract that developed in the Taconic basin of
New York during the Corynoides americanus Chron and 2) the succeeding lowstand
fan (Dolgeville Formation), which developed during the Orthographus ruedemanni
Chron. Predicted sequence equivalents of this cycle will be taken from published
literature. Our previous research on the Middle Ordovicia n Trenton Group and
Utica Shale in central New York State has produced a high resolution
chronostratigraphy that integrates data from geochemical fingerprinting of
K-bentonites with data from graptolite and conodont biostratigraphy. we propose
to extend this chronostratigraphic framework by a combination of 1) graptolite
and conodont biostratigraphic studies, and 2) high precision electron microprobe
analysis of apatite phenocrysts and glass inclusions within quartz phenocrysts
obtained from K-bentonites at the study sites. Chronostratigraphic resolution
based on graphic correlation within this system should be high (greatly
exceeding that of biostratigraphy alone or of radiometric dating) and sufficient
to provide a definitive test of the synchroneity of the rapidly onlapping
transgressive system track, the overlying maximum flooding surface/marine
hiatus, and the upper sequence boundary/lowstand fan. By extending this set of
time lines into the relatively stable cratonic interior and south into regions
that experienced collisional loading during the earlier, Blountain Phase, of the
Taconic Orogeny, it will be possible 1) to gain a precise and independent
measure of synchroneity among the transgressive-regressive cycles documented in
this interval in eastern North America and, therefore, 2) to use this system of
correlations to examine the relative contributions of changing eustatic sea-
level and regional tectonic events to the formations of late Middle Ordovician
stratigraphic sequences. The work will provide important and otherwise
inaccessible information about he physical and temporal connections between
geological events on the craton and those along a major orogenic belt.