* 9627922
* World-wide Web Traffic Characterization with                Application in In-network Caching and Prefetching
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Marc Abrams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 325,659.00

The original World-Wide Web (WWW) architecture--which requires a network
connection from a client to a possible distant server for each document
retrieved--is not scalable. Servers and network have limited bandwidth that
cannot keep pace with continuing growth in Web usage, particularly as the
popularity of bandwidth-intensive media types, such as video, grows. This
project addresses Web scalability by characterizing WWW traffic and applying
that characterization to design and evaluating algorithms to cache and prefetch
documents within networks. The project has five objectives: to 1) collect traces
from four disparate traffic sources; 2) prepare to handle the large volume of
collected traces by extending methods to collect, visualize, analyze, and model
Web traffic using the Chitra trace analysis tool; 3) use techniques from
objective two to characterize Web traffic based on the traces collected for
objective one; 4) develop a predictive model and simulation of clients, servers,
and Web traffic in the context of universities and community networks that
permits the design and evaluation of algorithms for in-network document caching
to reduce the bandwidth requirements of Web servers and networks. The simulation
will use results from workload characterization. The model will allow a network
manager to place and configure in network caches (e.g. proxy servers) within an
existing network; and 5) design and evaluate, through simulation, algorithms to
prefetch documents, thereby partially hiding latency.