* 9627778
* An Integrated First-Principles and Many-Body Theory         Description of Electron-Phonon Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Amy Liu, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 144,000.00

9627778 Freericks/Liu This grant supports a new program, consisting of two young
faculty members, one female (A. Liu) in condensed matter physics at the
Georgetown University. The grant supports work on a careful and detailed
analysis of the electron- phonon interaction based theory of superconductivity
in the regimes where Migdal's theorem is no longer valid. This work also takes
advantage of new theoretical tools that have been developed for many body
problems in large dimensions (or alternatively large coordination number for
atoms). The work proposed here includes first principles calculation of the
spectral densities (SD), derivation of SD from the experimental tunneling data
using more accurate algorithm, incorporate vertex corrections in the theory of
superconductivity and analyze the effects of lattice anharmonicity. %%% This
grant is to support collaborative research of two young faculty (one female)
with complementary interests and expertise in the theory of superconductivity at
Georgetown University. A major difference between the conventional
superconductors and essentially all of the ones that have been discovered
recently (doped fullerenes, high Tc materials) is that the theoretical
framework, so successful in elucidating superconductivity in conventional
materials, cannot be applied to the new materials. This project is to consider
the associated difficulties and find solutions for them. ***