* 9627069
* VPW:  Visiting Professorships for Women:  Theta Series and  Automorphic Forms
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Lynne Walling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 01/31/1999
* USD 102,927.00

In recent work, Dr. Lynne Walling developed an algebraic proof of Siegel's
representation formula, yielding formulas more explicit than those of Siegel to
describe average representation numbers of positive definite quadratic forms of
even rank and odd level. She is currently working with J.L. Hafner, using the
theory of automorphic forms to extend these results to indefinite quadratic
forms, obtaining explicit formulas for the measures of the representations of
the indefinite forms over number fields and over function fields. In work with
O. Imamoglu, Dr. Walling has defined a symplectic theta function over a function
field and computed the transformation formula nd will develop some theory of
Siegel modular forms and Jacobi forms in the function field setting. Information
will be gained regarding representations of quadratic forms by higher
dimensional quadratic forms. She also intends to extend the techniques developed
in work with J. Hoffstein and K.D. Merrill, explicitly computing the Fourier
coefficients of cusp forms of weights 0 and 1/2 for congruence subgroups that
admit only one-dimensional spaces of cusp forms. Interactive activities include
developing curricula for college/university mathematics courses based on
contemplation, precise reasoning and clear communication; developing a summer
research institute for women mathematicians; and running a one-week conference
for women in harmonic analysis and number theory.