* 9627016
* VPW:  Risk Sharing, Market Imperfections and Endogenous     Policy Formation
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/1996,09/30/1998
* JoAnne Feeney, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 09/30/1998
* USD 154,650.00

This research explores the importance of asset markets for rent- seeking
behavior and endogenously determined policy in democracies. Part I shows that
access to markets influences individuals' trade- policy preferences and
government policy choices. Part 2 determines the consequences of this
interdependence for human and physical capital accumulation, growth and
fluctuations. Part 3 examines international lending to economies in transition
from socialist to market systems where rent appropriation by foreign
entrepreneurs arises. This project will reveal the structure of asset markets
necessary to moderate protectionist interests, minimize rent-seeking behavior,
and further progression towards market systems in transition economies. The
analysis employs a formal theoretical framework and implications will be related
to empirical observations. The interactive component incorporates teaching,
research, and social elements. A course in international economics is being
offered to graduate students in the first semester, while a freshman course will
be offered on global economic issues in the second semester. Participation in
the organization of the International Workshop is ongoing throughout the visit
as is attendance at faculty meetings and departmental social functions. In
addition, initiation of more casual economics discussion groups at weekly
lunches is being promoted.