* 9627953
* Continental Paleoclimate Reconstruction Through Analysis of Oxygen Isotopes in Iron Oxides
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1999
* USD 150,781.00

Koch 9627953 To understand the influence that climate change has on the
evolution and ecological organization of the biota, detailed records of proxy
data for past temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and a variety of other
features are essential. While the marine climate record can be reconstructed
from a wide range of proxies, analysis of paleoclimatic change in the highly
variable continental realm has proven more difficult. The chief proxies that are
applicable to extremely ancient periods are analyses based on leaf shape, faunal
distributions, and the isotope chemistry of authigenic minerals and fossils. The
oxygen isotope composition of a mineral is determined by the temperature at
which it forms and the isotope composition of the water from which it
precipitates. In this project, iron oxides in soils and surface waters will be
used to reconstruct the oxygen isotope composition of meteoric water, which is
strongly correlated to mean annual temperature in modern mid- to high-latitude
regions. This proposal has four sections. First, we will determine the oxygen
isotope compositions of iron oxides and meteoric waters from sites with
relatively pure iron oxides under a variety of different climates in modern
soils and surface water systems to determine if iron oxides are forming in
oxygen isotope equilibrium with meteoric water. Second, there are discrepancies
between the hematite-water fractionation as a determined by synthesis
experiments and by theoretical calculation. If the calculation is correct, then
the hematite-water fractionation is insensitive to temperature, and the oxygen
isotope composition of hematite will reflect solely change in the composition of
meteoric water. A series of synthesis experiments are proposed to resolve this
discrepancy and shed light on natural formation mechanisms. Finally, oxygen
isotopes in ancient soil hematites will be used to study two of the most
significant transitions in the earth's climate in the last 100 million years,
the dramati c warming at the Paleocene/Eocene boundary and the stepwise
transition to cooler climates at the end of the Eocene. The study of ancient
climates will focus on western North America, where there are excellent records
of faunal and floral change from the same stratigraphic sections that will
supply hematities for the isotopic study. These studies will help resolve the
roles played by local versus global climate changes in the evolution of
continental faunas and floras, and will provide an opportunity to examine in
detail the contrast between the effects of warming versus cooling on the biota.