* 9627040
* Structure and Maintenance of Potential Vorticity in the     Midlatitude Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Noboru Nakamura, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 11/30/1999
* USD 269,596.00

9627040 Nakamura This project involves numerical and theoretical investigations
of the mean structure of the potential vorticity (PV) in the earth's midlatitude
atmosphere. Of particular interest are (1) how the nonconservative processes
(friction, radiation, latent heating, etc.) interact with advective processes to
maintain the highly inhomogeneous PV structures such as those found at the
tropopause and at the edge of the stratospheric polar vortex and (2) how the
values and gradients of the tropospheric PV are maintained. A new diagnostic
technique to define the mean PV profile, based on the Lagrangian mass coordinate
and recently developed by the principal investigator, will be employed. In a
radical departure from the conventional zonal- and time-mean approaches, the
method characterizes the isentropic transport as redistribution of mass between
PV contours for which nonconservative processes such as diffusion are essential.
Chaotic advection is viewed as the stretching of the PV contours, affecting the
available interface for microscale diffusion. This Lagrangian diagnostic appears
to identify strong PV gradients much better than conventional methods. Within
this framework the baroclinic adjustment and the height of the tropopause will
be investigated in terms of the mass budget of the troposphere, considering both
the stratosphere-troposphere mass exchange and the mass sink/sources (heat
fluxes) at the ground, with stirring due to baroclinic eddies regulating these
processes. Using a two-dimensional model, the PI will first simulate a
statistical steady state of the baroclinic atmosphere and examine the mechanism
of tropopause formation and maintenance. The analysis will be extended to three
dimensions, based on the high resolution simulations with the GFDL's SKYHI
global circulation model. The same approach will be used to investigate the
maintenance of the stratospheric polar vortex edge except that breaking Rossby
waves will replace baroclinic waves as the stirr ing agent. These studies are
directed at finding unifying theories of various aspects of the midlatitude
general circulation. ***