* 9627276
* Fundamental Photographic Observations of Triggered Lightning
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1997,12/31/2001
* Vincent Idone, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 12/31/2001
* USD 240,476.00

Idone/Abstract The objective of this research is the acquisition and analysis of
highly time-resolved photographic records of triggered lightning flashes to be
obtained during the summer of 1997 at Camp Blanding, Florida. The data acquired
will allow study of 1) the channel creation process, 2) the development of the
return stroke and dart-leader diameter with time, and 3) the evolution of
channel microscale tortuosity. These experiments will yield unique data sets
that are fundamentally new and that could be critical in the testing of newly
emerging models of different phases of the lightning discharge. The recordings
proposed would be made from two separate sites. A distant site (~ 1 km away)
would be used to provide an overall record of the luminous lightning components
propagating along most of the channel below cloud base. A "near photographic
site (80 m away) is also proposed to record new details of the evolution of
lightning channels during the course of the discharge. The totality of
photographic records obtained would correlate with and complement other data
sets to be acquired simultaneously by other researchers participating in this
campaign. The distant-site recordings would document the creation of the
lightning channel by the initial leader process using a near-UV photographic
system; this provides a superior rendering of the initial phase of the
discharge. The near-site experiments would provide highly time-resolved imagery
of the cross-sections of lightning channels for the same strokes, these records
being attained from a vertical section only 8 mm in extent. These close-up
recordings would yield a direct measurement of the luminous channel diameter as
small as 6mm with a time resolution of 0.9 ms. Once 10-20 return stroke images
are obtained, attempts would be made to image the cross-sections of downward
propagating dart-leaders or dart-stepped leaders from a channel section aloft as
the dart-leader luminous diameter has not been examined directly before. Framing
photographs (4000 fr/sec) of the same field of view would document the movement
and geometric variation of the channels on the microscale (~2 cm). It is
anticipated that the field observations could be acquired in a single field
campaign during the first summer of support. The remainder of the project would
be devoted to analysis of the photographic data in its own right along with use
of these results in collaborative analyses with other researchers.