* 9628342
* Experimental Investigation of the Depth of Origin of the    Alpe Arami Peridotite Massif, Switzerland
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Harry Green, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/1998
* USD 110,000.00

9628342 Green Preliminary observations and analyses have been made on the fresh
garnet lherzolite of the Alpe Arami peridotite massif in southern Switzerland.
The new data suggest a history involving much higher pressure than the 4-5 GPa
calculated from pyroxene thermobarometry. The older generation of olivine has
large numbers of oriented oxide inclusions that are almost certainly products of
exsolution. The difficulty is that the implied solubility of trivalent and
tetravalent cations is very much greater than previously reported for olivine
from any environment. Preliminary experiments at 6 and 14 GPa, 1700(K, confirm
that the solubility of TiO2 in olivine increases greatly with pressure, and that
it is significantly higher still in the high pressure polymorph of olivine. This
project consists of a series of experiments at very high temperature and
pressure to delineate under what conditions, if any, olivine can dissolve the
observed amounts of Ti, Al and Cr, and under what conditions the observed
structures, morphologies and topotaxies can be precipitated from solid solution.
Three specific testable hypotheses will be examined. (1) The FeTiO3 rods
originated by exsolution. (2) Their abundance probably represents more TiO2 than
can dissolve in olivine under any circumstances, hence they may reflect some
pre-existing phase. (3) If exsolution takes place in the ilmenite stability
field, ilmenite would have precipitated directly as platelets and the
(presumable) metastable oxide rods would not have formed at all.