* 9628236
* Adaptive Receivers for Uncertain, Time-Varying Channels
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Don Johnson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 186,542.00

In this research the goal is to develop a nonparametric adaptive communications
receiver strategy by exploiting results from the theory of universal
classification and data compression. Analysis based upon the "typicality" of the
data has become one of the primary theoretical and practical concepts in modern
information theory. The so-called "Type" (appropriate histogram estimators of
the amplitude distribution) have not only been shown to be sufficient statistics
for both classification and compression, but have also been shown to converge
exponentially fast to the true underlying distribution. Because type-based
detectors make no a priori assumptions about the channel characteristics and
measure the quantities needed to provide asymptotically optimal reception, these
detectors can theoretically achieve the same exponential error rate as the
clairvoyant receiver that knows the channel characteristics perfectly and uses
them optimally. Measurements made during succeeding transmissions, possibly
using the data transmissions themselves in a decision feedback paradigm, can be
used to track channel variations. The approach will be extended to deal with
intersample dependencies and colored noise by using channel measurements in an
optimally effective way. Two techniques drawn from data compression work,
context trees and Lempel-Ziv (universal) coding, will be examined to determine
which represents channel-induced dependencies most efficiently and which is most
adaptable. By merging systems based on these two theories, a receiver that
adapts to unknown, time-varying channels will be developed. It will be
demonstrated that this receiver can be used in multiuser channels, both wireless
and optical fiber, with little modification. The research will develop the
theoretical underpinnings of this adaptive receiver strategy, and will develop a
complete software implementation of the receiver, using as test data actual
communication channel recordings. This work will be performed by a close
collaboration of researchers from Rice University and George Mason University.