* 9628520
* CAA:  U-Pb Geochronology of Squantum 'Tillite' and Related  Rocks Around Boston, MA:  Implications for Terminal         Proterozoic Glaciation and Supercontinent Breakup
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Margaret Thompson, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 01/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Thompson 9628520 For more than a century, geologists have congregated at the
Squaw Head seacliff in Quincy, Massachusetts to argue over the possible glacial
origin of the Squantum "Tillite". Although recent sedimentological opinion has
finally titled toward glaciomarine deposition, much remains to be learned by
dating this rock. Squantum age data, for example, will provide the first
radiometric evidence for the timing of sedimentary-volcanic events post-dating
the well known ca. 625-590 Ma Avalonian magmatic arc complex around Boston. The
Squantum "Tillite" will be dated in the Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory at MIT
using methods of high precision U-Pb zircon geochronology. Volcanic rock clasts
as well as detrital zircons from Squantum diamictite will be analyzed to fix its
maximum depositional age. Volcanic flows interbedded with a conglomeratic
Squantum sequence farther south in Houghs Neck, Quincy will also be dated. This
result will constrain the age of deposition, and thus the age glaciation in this
area, more directly. A broader view of Squantum provenance will be sought via
detrital zircon studies. For a Principal Investigator who has spent twenty years
teaching undergraduates, the opportunity presented by this project to learn the
methods of U-Pb geochronology in MIT's Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory represents
a major career advancement. Much broader and more stimulating research questions
will certainly arise once high precision age determinations can be integrated
with existing field, petrographic and geochemical data. The results of such
research will surely come full circle by returning an intellectually energized
instructor to Wellesley classrooms.