* 9628949
* Codifying Knowledge About Agile Business Practices
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Thomas Malone, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1999
* USD 675,000.00

*** 9628949 Malone This grant provides funding for research leading to the
establishment of a knowledge base for agile manufacturing. The purpose of the
knowledge base will be to collect and disseminate knowledge about agile
manufacturing and other agile business practices. The project will develop
conceptual methodologies and software tools to help gather, codify, organize,
and distribute information on agile manufacturing practices. The primary
objectives of this research are to demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed
approach and to develop the tools and methods to expand and maintain an agility
knowledge base. This research will build on the Process Handbook project, which
is developing methodologies for analyzing business processes and an on-line
repository of business process descriptions, and the Intelligent Information
Infrastructure Project, which is developing tools for facilitating large scale
electronic discussions and for accumulating bodies of knowledge and experience.
If successful, this research will augment ongoing activities in the area of
agile manufacturing. It should enable the collection of information from several
agile manufacturing projects and provide for the dissemination of that
information within the projects themselves and to industry seeking to implement
agile practices. The overall objective of the agile manufacturing projects is to
increase the productivity and profitability of U.S. industry. ***