* 9628321
* RIMI:  Effects of Crystal Field in Quasi Four-Level Lasers
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Carl Bonner, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 261,063.00

HRD-9628321 Bonner The production of smaller, more energy efficient lasers offer
the promise of a convenient light source for many applications. The key to the
efficiency is an understanding of the energy loss processes in the lasing media.
Many useful lasers operate in quasi-four level mode where they experience large
losses and low efficiencies. When the laser media is a crystal, the crystal
field interacts with the energy manifolds of the dopant. The crystal field
interaction can adjust the energy manifolds of the dopant in the crystal by as
much as 500 cm-1 and cause large splittings relative to the free ion. The
position and splittings of these manifolds are critical for efficient laser
performance. The proposed research will investigate the effect of the crystal
field on the critical factors affecting the performance of quasi-four level
solid state cross sections which are key metrics in rare earth ion laser
performance and the effects on processes such as energy transfer, upconversion,
and non-radiative relaxation will provide full understanding of effect of the
crystal field on laser performance. The degree crystal field splitting in the
lower laser level and the upper level manifold dictates the thermal population
on each level and ultimately laser performance. The larger crystal field
splitting, the smaller the lower laser level population and higher upper laser
level population. The decreased lower laser level and increased upper laser
level populations and larger absorption and emission cross sections will
significantly improve laser thresholds and slope efficiencies. A favorable
effect of these splittings on key processes such as energy transfer,
upconversion, inter-manifold, and intra- manifold relaxation contributes to
improved laser performance. For the proposed three years, the specific
objectives of the investigation are to determine the effect of crystal field on
the threshold and slope efficiency of quasi-four level systems and understanding
the field effects on the parameters and processes influencing laser performance.
The effect of the crystal field on parameters such as absorption and emission
cross sections, and processes such as energy transfer, upconversion and non-
radiative relaxation will be studied. The fluorapatite family, specifically
Ca5(PO4)3F, Sr5(PO4)3F, and Ba5(PO4)3F have been chosen since they are excellent
candidates for efficient quasi-four level lasers due to their large crystal
field splittings and crystal field parameters are varied by substitution of the
alkaline earth metal. This trend on the crystal field parameters from Ca to Ba
will be utilized to study its affect on the parameters and processes influencing
the laser performance above mentioned. Tm3+ will be utilized as the probe since
it exhibits a wealth of processes which affects the laser performance in many
quasi-four level systems. Tm3+ itself is also an important quasi-four level
laser ion. In the proposed investigation, a full understanding of the effect of
crystal field parameters on quasi-four laser performance will be achieved while
evaluating a potentially useful laser system such as Tm3+ doped fluoroapatites.
The investigative team combines the expertise of crystal growth of high quality
di-electric crystals, spectroscopy in solid state materials, ultrafast kinetics,
and rare earth ion laser development. This team will grow, fabricate, and fully
evaluate the materials in laboratories housed on campus. Temperature dependent
absorption and emission will be used to determine the crystal field splitting,
absorption and emission cross sections and energy branching ratios. Time
resolved emission and absorption will be used to examine the radiative, non-
radiative, and upconversion rates in the materials. A laser test bed will be
constructed to evaluate the laser performance of the materials.