* 9628640
* RIMI: Enhancement of Computer Applications in Biological    Research
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Susan DeRiemer, Meharry Medical College
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 228,645.00

HRD 9628730 New Mexico State University -- Bernard J. McNamara The proposed
research will (1) investigate the long term behavior and energetics of the low
mass X- ray binary (LMXB) Sco X-1 (2) recruit highly qualified minority
undergraduates into the space sciences (3) involve minority undergraduate
science and engineering students in two NASA programs and (4) recruit two
undergraduate minority students into the astronomy program at NMSU . The project
will use X-ray data obtained by the Compton Gamma- Ray Observatory and the X-ray
Timing Explorer as well as optical data obtained at Cerro Tololo InterAmerican
Observatory and New Mexico State University. The primary research goal is to
obtain a multi-year record of the high energy flux and x-ray color of the LMXB
Sco X-1 to search for expected long term emission variations from this system.
The high energy data sets will also be combined with optical data to better
understand this system s energetics. Abstract HRD -9628568 University of Texas
at El Paso ---E.Walsh This RIMI project will attempt to provide a cladistic
phylogeny of the major planktonic families using a molecular approach. The goals
of the proposed research are to (1) isolate, amplify and sequence nuclear
ribosomal DNA from representatives of 13 families of the monogonont rotifers,
(2) determine the sister group of the monogononts by obtaining comparable data
from four bdelloids and a seisonid, (3) construct cladograms and develop
phylogenetic hypotheses using molecular characters (4) compare these results
with tree topologies derived from morphological characters and (5) evaluate the
placement of the Rotifera within the ex isting metazoan phylogenies based on 18S
rDNA sequences. The phylogenetic hypotheses generated by the proposed research
can be used to further resolve relationships among rortifers. They will
constitute a basis from which to incorporate a historical component into
understanding questions of broader evolutionary significance. In addition, the
relationships among rotifers and other pseudo coelomate taxa will be explored.
ABSTRACT HRD- 9628726 City College of C.U.N.Y. ----Moore The long term objective
of this laboratory research project is to determine mechanisms cells use to
maintain normal DNA function. Mutants will be studied to help determine these
requirements. The RIMI project will focus on the characterizations mutants
isolated in the laboratory on the basis of their hypersensitivities to killing
by ionizing radiation, H2O2 , and a radiomimetic family of chemical congeners.
This approach will acquire knowledge from interrelated studies at the cellular
and molecular levels, using genetic characterizations, molecular biology and
biochemistry, DNA sequence analyses, methodologies for studying DNA damage and
repair / transmission and scanning electron microscopy. Cloning and
characterizing the blm mutants will enable their relationship to already
characterized genes to be determined and seems likely to add new knowledge of
general importance to fields of DNA repair , metabolism and genetics. A variety
of research training experiences will be provided for students at all levels of
education including postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and high school.
ABSTRACT HRD---9628640 Meharry Medical College---S.Williams This RIMI project
will support the establishment of a core facility in computational molecular
biology consisting of state of the art equipment and software ( GCG Package and
Molecular Simulations Protein Modeling Programs ), and provide training in their
use. This facility will be available to all Meharry researchers. Specific
research projects critically dependent on nucleic acid and protein analyses to
be directly supported by this initiative are (1) identification of motifs that
contribute to structure and function of hetero chromatin; (2) analysis of
primary structure and folding patterns of RNA and its effects on viral
recombination and replication; and (3) analysis of structural effects of site-
directed mutations on flavin-containing monooxygenase. ABSTRACT HRD---9628388
Howard University ---M. McKenna Support is sought for the acquisition and
installation of controlled environment growth chambers in the biology department
greenhouse. The addition of these chambers will significantly increase research
capabilities in plant science, aid in recruitment of talented undergraduates ,
graduate students and new faculty, and provide a facility that can support
precollege outreach programs designed to increase the entry of minority students
in science careers. The installation of controlled environment chambers will
extend and enhance ongoing research in the areas of plant anatomy and
development, phytoremediation, plant ecophysiology, plant ecology , plant
systematics, mycology, plant molecular biology and genetics . The facility will
allow the institution to maintain experimental plant populations over long
periods, maintain clones or plant families for genetic experiments , grow source
material for cellular and molecular experiments including tissue culture, DNA
analysis, and phytoremediation, maintain plants for systematic study , and
design experiments under controlled environmental conditions to study cellular,
physiological or ecological processes. ABSTRACT HRD ----9628514 University of
Texas at San Antonio----D.Jaffe The primary goal of this RIMI project is to
expand the research capabilities of researchers at UTSA with a state of the art
computer facility that will satisfy specific needs in molecular sequence
analysis and three dimensional image processing. Studies that utilize molecular
biological methods regularly produce data that need to be analyzed by comparison
against large databases of existing sequences for similarities. pattern
searching algorithms are used to unveil nonrandom sequence features that may be
of biological relevance. Two computer workstations will be used to carry out
molecular sequence analysis using the Intelligenetics Suite, a comprehensive
molecular biology software package providing access to sequence databases
worldwide and a broad spectrum of sequence analysis tools. The second half of
the Computational Biology Facility will focus on cellular anatomy and
physiology. Characterization of cellular morphology is critical, for
understanding physiological function. Confocal microscopy permits the
examination of cellular morphology in three dimensions. In addition