* 9628221
* Taphonomic Tiering:  Preservational Constraints on Micro-   and Macrofauna
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Sally Walker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 140,000.00

Walker 9628221 Preservation and destruction of marine carbonate systems (e.g.,
hardgrounds, shells, reefs, foraminiferan tests) has figured prominently in the
paleontological and sedimentological literature from the preservation of shelly
hardparts thorough time to destruction by various physical and biological
processes. This area of research , carbonate production and destruction, is
gaining more momentum in ecological and environmental fields, and in conjunction
with paleontologists, will provide information on global carbon budgets both in
modern environments and for the past. A review of the pertinent literature in
experimental field taphonomy from benthic marine systems focusing on two
important carbonate producers (mollusca and foraminifera), revealed that most
taphonomic work on these important organisms primarily concerns the processes
that affect preservation at the sediment/water interface, and rarely are
processes examined which happen below the sediment-water interface and deeper,
within the sediments. At this interface and within the sediments, skeletal
hardparts are presumably degraded and recycled or preserved. Little is known
about the rate of degradation on micro- and macroorganisms that inhabit these
sediments. This proposal directly addresses the need for experimental work and a
reevaluation of the previously estimated carbonate retention rates of skeletal
hardparts in shallow, siliciclastic settings. This proposed research provides
methods to address retention rates at varying depths within the sediments for
molluscan shells, calcareous and agglutinated foraminifera and crustacean
exoskeletons. Additionally, little is known about how these hardparts are
preserved or degraded in varying geochemical milieus. Emphasizing experimental
field work and porewater geochemistry, this proposed 3-year study will evaluate
skeletal retention rates and preservational signatures of molluscan shells,
crustacean exoskeletons, and tests of both calcareous and agglutinated foramin
ifera within the "taphonomically active zone" or TAZ, of selected depositional
settings of coastal Georgia. Taphonomic gradients will be examined in
conjunction with porewater analyses from the sediment surface to a depth of one
meter to assess preservation stratification or "taphonomic tiering." Goals of
this proposed research are 1) document taphonomic gradients of skeletal
preservation with increasing burial depths in the sediments, across different
siliciclastic environments within coastal and estuarine settings. Importantly,
we will study how the different geomicrobial zones (using porewater chemistry
analyses) within the sediments affect preservation of skeletal hardparts; 2)
assess taphonomic characteristics across salinity gradients at different
localities and depths within the sediments; 3) assess scale dependency, with
regard to size, of taphonomic rates of degradation or preservation between
foraminiferans and molluscs; 4) determine the effects of shell/test
microstructure and mineralogy on preservation at different burial depths in
these depositional settings; and 5) test our modern findings with a subfossil
deposit to determine if geomicrobial signatures are retained on shells or forams
in subfossil and fossil estuarine environments in light of the modern studies.
Experimental data on invertebrate and protist retention rates would greatly
enhance paleoecological studies on associations from comparable settings
preserved in the rock record.