* 9628943
* CAREER: Limiting and Regulating Factors In Populations      of a Tropical Forest Rodent
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Gregory Adler, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 09/30/2000
* USD 225,000.00

9628943 Adler An important issue in ecology is to determine what limits
densities of animal populations. This problem is particularly acute in the
tropics where there are few long-term experimental studies of population
limitation. Rodents are ideal organisms for testing hypotheses of density
limitation because they are often abundant and easily sampled. This study will
test five theories of density limitation in the spiny rat Proechimys
semispinosus, a common rodent in tropical forests in Central America. This
species is of particular interest because it is an important predator and
disperser of tree seeds and may therefore influence forest regeneration. Twelve
islands in the Panama Canal will serve as experimental systems in which food
abundance and rat densities will be altered. Responses to the experiments will
be monitored over a four-year period. This study will advance our understanding
of animal populations in tropical forests, and the results may be applicable to
many other organisms. Spiny rats are also important hosts for many infectious
agents that cause diseases in humans, including leishmaniasis and Chagas'
disease. Better knowledge of host populations will aid in finding points in the
transmission cycles of these pathogens that are most vulnerable to intervention
and that decrease the risk of transmission to humans.