* 9628765
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Late Quaternary Climate     Variation Within the Maya Lowlands, Belize, Central America as Evidenced by Variations in Speleothem Deposition
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1996,10/31/1998
* George Brook, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 10/31/1998
* USD 9,975.00

Webster, James W U of Georgia This proposal examines late quaternary climatic
variation within the Maya Lowlands, Belize as evidenced by variations in
speleothem deposition. Currently available paleoclimatic records for the Maya
Lowlands of Central America are inadequate because detailed paleoclimate proxy
data are difficult to obtain in humid, tropical areas. Speleothems are thought
to be a source of high resolution paleoclimate data. The aims of the research
are to examine speleothems as a source of paleoclimate proxy data and construct
a regional, high resolution proxy record of climatic variation for up to 2000
years B.P. In addition, an attempt will be made to establish whether climate
variation may have contributed to the decline of the Mayan civilization. Such
results may allow prediction of future climate fluctuations for the region.
Speleothems from the study area will examined petrographically and by digital
image analysis. Spectral methods will then be used to analyze the observed
record and compare it with existing climate data. The research is significant
because it is the first high-resolution record of paleoclimate for Central
America. The results will contribute to our understanding of the Maya collapse
and add to the growing body of knowledge concerning speleothems in climate
research.