* 9628575
* Postglacial Tephra Chronology and Eruptive History of       Mount Rainier, Washington
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* James Vallance, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2000
* USD 64,600.00

9628575 Vallance This study will focus on the dating and correlation of tephra
layers and their association with downstream debris flows and pyroclastic flows
with the goal of delineating the postglacial volcanic history of Mount Rainier
and the behavior of the volcano during eruptive cycles. It will have as
secondary goals the development and refinement of geochemical correlation
techniques for andesitic tephras, and the magmatic evolution of the volcano
during postglacial time at Mount Rainier volcano. The goals of the project will
be met through traditional field methods and through geochemical fingerprinting
and correlation techniques. Traditional methods include basic stratigraphy,
radiocarbon dating, and component analysis of ferromagnesian minerals.
Geochemical fingerprinting will be accomplished by analyzing whole rock and
groundmass glass for major and trace elements and by microprobing groundmass
glass and ferromagnesian minerals for major and minor elements then applying
statistical analysis of similarity and variation coefficients to test possible
correlations. The proposed study would greatly improve the hazard assessment at
Mount Rainier by synthesizing stratigraphic sequences of past eruptions into
genetic packages. Once understood, past eruptions can be used as models for
potential behavior at the volcano if it becomes active.