* 9628023
* Studies in the Fundamental Nature of Mineral Surface        Reactivity
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Michael Hochella, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1999
* USD 174,606.00

9628023 Hochella The proposed research continues long-standing research
committed to rethinking, and sometimes reformulating, perceptions of how mineral
surfaces communicate with their geologic environment. The specific objectives
are: (1) To show that sophisticated mineral surface investigations can be
performed on natural mineral surfaces instead of only surfaces created by
fracture. (2) To probe electronic structure of different sites on unreacted
hematite, pyrite, and pyrrhotite surfaces at the atomic level. (3) To probe the
electronic structure of reaction products on these surfaces at the atomic level.
(4) To characterize complex surface reaction sequences, and to specifically
define "reactive surface area" for a given reaction on a given mineral surface.
(5) To incorporate newly identified fundamental reaction mechanisms and
processes into kinetic models that describe macroscopic observables. The methods
that will be employed include: experimental ultra-high vacuum scanning tunneling
microscopy and spectroscopy, calculation of tunneling images and spectra at the
ab initio level, ultra-violet and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, low energy
electron diffraction, scanning force microscopy and standard wet chemistry
techniques. The significance of the proposed research is in its ability to
determine fundamental reaction parameters and mechanisms.