* 9628783
* Enhanced Nucleation of Monomer Droplets in Miniemulsion     Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* E Sudol, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2000
* USD 196,842.00

Abstract - El-Aasser - 9628783 The potential advantages of applying miniemulsion
technology to the preparation of latexes through free radical polymerization of
vinyl monomers have not been realized, one reason being that only a fraction
(circa 20%) of the initial droplets (50 - 500 nm) are nucleated to become
polymer particles. This limits the control of the particle size and copolymer
composition by requiring diffusion of monomers from the droplets which are not
nucleated to the growing polymer particles. This is a particular disadvantage
for monomers with low water solubility which do not readily diffuse through the
aqueous phase (e.g., macromonomers). Recent developments in the miniemulsion
polymerization of styrene have shown that the addition of a small amount of
polymer to the miniemulsion droplets enhances their nucleation which can reach
100% under certain conditions, thereby increasing the polymerization rate and
resulting particle number. This phenomenon has been attributed to an increased
rate of radical entry into these droplets which improves their ability to
compete with the existing polymer particles for aqueous phase free radicals. The
mechanistic explanation for this phenomenon and the extension of the method to
other monomer systems are the focus of this research. A combination of
techniques will be applied in this investigation including continuous
measurements of the reaction rate via reaction calorimetry and monitoring the
evolution of the number of particles through the particle size distribution. The
nature of the added polymer will be varied in terms of its molecular weight and
the functionality of its end-groups in order to determine whether it is an
interfacial phenomenon or a ObulkO phenomenon. Likewise, the composition of the
droplet/water interface will be varied and characterized. In addition to the
normal water-soluble initiator (i.e., persulfate), oil-soluble initiators will
be used to determine the effect of the origin of the free radicals (aqueous vs.
droplet phase) on particle nucleation. Other monomer/comonomer systems will also
be investigated. And finally, mathematical modeling will be used in conjunction
with the above findings to aid in mechanistic understanding of the miniemulsion
polymerization process as a function of the variables chosen in these studies.