* 9628252
* Collaborative Research:  Origins of the Ontong Java         Plateau, SW Pacific:  A Stratigraphic and Geochemical Study of Exposed Plateau Basement in the Solomon Islands, Part 2
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Clive Neal, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/1999
* USD 89,400.00

9628252 Neal This project is for a continuation of research into the origin and
evolution of the world's largest oceanic plateau, the Ontong Java Plateau (OJP)
in the SW Pacific. Previously funded study, complementing work on submarine OJP
lavas drilled by the Ocean Drilling Program (ODP), focused on plateau basement
sections on Santa Isabel and Malaita, Solomon Islands. This research involves
the following tasks. FIELDWORK: Detailed, stratigraphically controlled sampling
in south and southeastern Makira, in what is expected to be the deepest part of
the Makiran section. 40Ar-39Ar DATING: Dating of samples from throughout the
Makiran section is required to determine if 90 Ma and/or 122 Ma lavas are
present, and to establish the significance and thickness of the 34 Ma and 64 Ma
events. GEOCHEMISTRY AND PETROGRAPHY: Systematic major and trace element, and
Nd-Pb-Sr isotopic analyses are required to define Makiran geochemical
stratigraphy; in particular, the geochemical variation of OJP-type lavas with
depth, the nature and stratigraphic extent of the broadly MORB-like basalts, and
the nature and causes of intercalation of the two types. PLATINUM GROUP ELEMENTS
(PGEs): Results from previous study show that lavas from Malaita and ODP drill
sites are enriched in the siderophile elements W and Mo, and may indicate a
core-mantle boundary origin for the OJP's mantle source. Further evaluation of
this hypotheses requires determination of abundances of the ultra-siderophilic
PGEs for a subset of OJP lavas.