* 9628368
* Stream Catchment Interaction Controlling DOC Concentration  and Composition under Varying Flow Regimes in Rocky Mountain Streams
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* George Hornberger, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9628368 Hornberger In many catchment-stream systems, the concentration and
composition of dissolved organic material (DOM) is a critical water quality
characteristic. Examples of processes controlled by DOM interactions are: 1)
complexation of trace metals by the humic fractions of DOM which control both
trace metal transport and bioavailibility; 2) enhancement of the solubility of
hydrophobic organic contaminants; 3) formation of trihalomethanes in drinking
water as a result of interactions between Chlorine and components of the DOM
during water treatment; and 4) absorption of visible and UV radiation by DOM and
generation of photoproducts. The DOM also can have indirect effects on water
quality by influencing internal processes of aquatic ecosystems, e.g.,
photosynthesis and heterotrophic activity. In this proposal, we advance a plan
of study to investigate in-stream processes and their interaction with catchment
processes in determining the spatial and temporal patterns of quantity and
quality of DOC in streams in the Rocky Mountains. The research tasks will
include experimental additions of DOC-enriched water to stream segments to
quantify interactions in the hyporheic zone, field monitoring to deermine
synoptic spatial patterns along stream channels and in hillslope lysimeters of
amounts and composition of DOC, and the extension of mathematical models to
interpret the results. Studies of the in-stream processes will include
continuing assessment of the roles of near-stream and catchment-scale processes.