* 9628804
* Monumental Architecture in the Context of Emerging          Sociopolitical Complexity at Chalcatzingo, Morelos, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1998
* David Grove, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. David Grove, MS Maria Aviles will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological research at the site
of Chalcatzingo which is located in the highland region of Central Mexico. The
oldest part of the site dates from the Early Formative Period (1500-900 BC) and
therefore it provides direct information on the first stages in the rise of
complex stratified Mesoamerican society. In past research the investigators have
noted the presence of large earthen mounds at the site and have partially
excavated one of them. In this project MS Aviles will excavate an additional
well preserved example together with an associated structure. For this stage of
the research, goals will focus on determining the size and horizontal extent of
the features. An area will then be opened on all sides of the platforms to
uncover associated remains of activities and related structures. Artifacts such
as ceramics, obsidian, ground stone, faunal and other remains will be collected
and analyzed and maps and photographs generated. Radiocarbon samples will also
be obtained. The project has well established methods for the recording and
analysis of materials. On the basis of this research MS Aviles hopes to
determine the uses to which these mounds were put and to gain insight how
Chalcatzingo developed over time. Archeologists wish to understand how complex
societies develop and they focus on the several areas of the world where this
occurred independently. Mexico is one such region. Work in many parts of the
world has demonstrated that monumental architecture, of which the Chalcatzingo
mounds are one example, are associated with early stages of this process. They
clearly provide evidence of the ability to mobilise large amounts of labor for a
sustained period. However the functions which such mounds served are often
unclear. In some cases it is likely that important individuals inhabited houses
constructed on the tops and in others that the mounds served ritual functions.
Because of the well preserved nature of the Chalcatzingo mounds as well as their
early dates, the structures are of particular interest. The site itself was
occupied for a long and crucial period of Mexican prehistory and the research
will also provide insight into how complexity increased over time. This project
is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists. It addresses a theoretical issue of great significance and will
assist in training a promising young scientist.