* 9628344
* A Test of Models for the Evolution of Water-Column Anoxia   in the Black Sea Over the Past 8.5 Years
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1997,08/30/1998
* Katherine Freeman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/30/1998
* USD 85,000.00

9628344 Arthur This proposal seeks to resolve a debate as to the intensity and
depth distribution of oxygen deficiencies in the water column of the Black Sea
and to provide a test of the efficacy of new techniques for elucidating
paleoenvironments of ancient "black shales". Previous workers have suggested, on
the basis of interpretation of the fabric and geochemical characteristics of
sediments deposited from about 8 ka to 2 ka, that finely laminated, organic-
carbon (OC) rich sediments of Unit II, often referred to as sapropels, either
were deposited under an anoxic water column for which initiation of anoxia was
time transgressive, beginning earlier in deeper water, or were produced under an
anoxic water column as the result of high surface-water productivity. New
results from the study of Black Sea cores recovered during the 1988 R/V Knorr
expedition suggest that the onset of water-column anoxia at about 7.5 ka was
virtually synchronous across the basin over a depth range of about 200 m to 2250
m, and that anoxia prevailed throughout deposition of Unit II. However, the
concentration, accumulation rate, and degree of preservation of organic matter
all decreased in the upper part of Unit II, perhaps as a result of decreasing
productivity and possible erosion of the top of the chemocline. Various redox-
sensitive geochemical indicators have been interpreted by different workers in
contrasting ways. In the proposed study, we will use two new techniques, one
involving pyrite (framboid) size distributions that constrain the site of pyrite
precipitation (water column vs. within sediment), and the other a set of organic
biomarker compounds indicative of the presence of photosynthetic sulfide-
oxidizing bacteria in the water column. These techniques will be used in
analysis of a depth transect of available Black Sea gravity cores that recovered
complete sequences of Unit II in order to test models of the Holocene evolution
of the Black Sea and the origin(s) of sediments enriched in organic car bon in
general.