* 9628367
* Effects of Intra-Basinal Structures on Early Cretaceous     Fluvial Systems (Lakota/Cloverly Formations), Central       Cordilleran Foreland Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Lee Suttner, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1999
* USD 80,783.00

Suttner 9628367 The goal of the proposed work is to quantitatively reconstruct
paleochannel geometries and hydraulics, and associated alluvial architecture for
early Cretaceous fluvial deposits in the Central Cordilleran Foreland Basin
(CCFB). Previous work has shown that the location and flow patterns of the major
early Cretaceous rivers in the medial and distal parts of the CCFB were
controlled, in part, locally by syndepositional intra-basinal faulting. This
study will elucidate precisely how this faulting influenced channel geometries
(e.g. widths, depths, sinuosities, channel patterns), hydraulics (e.g. channel
slopes, velocities, discharges), and the distribution of associated channel-bar,
channel-belt, and floodplain deposits. These parameters will be compared and
contrasted in (i) medial and distal setting within the CCFB, (ii) in places
where the rivers were located essentially on or adjacent to known structures
versus places where the structures were several kilometers away, and (iii) where
the rivers locally crossed the structures versus where they paralleled them.
Results of this study should be valuable for those who attempt to model how
intra-basinal tectonism is manifested n the accumulation of nonmarine fill in
the medial and distal parts of foreland basins. Moreover, this work will be the
first of its kind to document quantitatively the effects of localized
syndepositional faulting on pre-Quaternary fluvial sedimentation.