* 9628694
* Twinning, Phase Transformations, and Film Formation of      Zirconia-based Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Arthur Heuer, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2000
* USD 420,000.00

9628694 Heuer The proposed research contains three topics: i) Deformation
twinning in undoped monoclinic zirconia (m-ZrO2 ) single crystals and
polycrystals as a function of load, orientation and temperature will be studied
using microhardness indentation. At temperatures up to 1100C, m-ZrO2 is the
stable phase. The competition between indent-induced slip and twinning will be
studied; ii) Heating these crystals into the tetragonal (t) phase field will
allow similar studies in t-ZrO2; here, the emphasis will be on slip systems, the
competition between slip and ferroelastic deformation, and the role the
indentation damage plays in nucleating the martensitic t to m transformation on
cooling; iii) A bio-inspired chemical route to thin film formation of pure and
Y203-doped ZrO2 has been discovered. The aqueous chemistry needed to optimize
film formation will be systematically studied.. Deposition of ZrO2-based films
on semiconductor grade Si and Ni-base alloys have implications for oxygen
sensors and thermal barrier coatings, respectively. The proposed research will
examine the fundamental mechanical behavior of zirconia-based ceramics. Zirconia
has been used as a model system for understanding toughening in a number of
other tough ceramics. This proposal includes three research topics: deformation
twinning in 1) monoclinic and 2) tetragonal zirconia studied by microhardness
indentation, and 3) a study of the chemistry to optimize the deposition of self-
assembling thin films of zirconia-based ceramics. Understanding these self-
assembling films has the potential to enable materials researchers to deposit a
film of any material on any substrate.