* 9628652
* The College Park Conference on Undergraduate Physics        Education:  The Changing Role of the Physics Department in  Modern Universities; College Park, MD, July 31 - August 3
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Edward Redish, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1997
* USD 66,340.00

The International Conference on Physics Undergraduate Education will be held
from July 31 to August 3, 1996, at the University of Maryland, College Park. The
conference is sponsored by the University of Maryland, the American Association
of Physics Teachers, the American Physical Society, and the American Institute
of Physics, and it will concentrate on the changing role of physics education in
the contemporary university. Major issues of the conference are (1) The physics
baccalaureate as a passport to the workplace; (2) Physics in the service of
students in other sciences and engineering; (3) The physics department's
responsibility in pre- and in-service education of teachers. Underlying themes
are the (1) changing goals for contemporary students; (2) results of educational
research; (4) role of technology in the educational process; (4) challenge to
educate all students equitably. The conference is directed by an International
Advisory Board who will develop the program and speakers list, and will consist
of plenary sessions addressing the issues, poster sessions, and sample classes
demonstrating the most innovative and exciting new university physics classes
being developed in the world today. The results will be published as a summary
and recommendations. The outcome will be a better understanding of the best of
physics education throughout the world and a group of about 400 participants who
have seen and experienced these developments first hand and can use and build on
them.