* 9628819
* EROC:  Ecosystem Feedbacks to Climate Changes:  Extending   Results from an Ecosystem-Warming Experiment to the         Landscape Level
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* John Harte, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/1999
* USD 449,650.00

I Abstract 9628819 Predictions of global climate change resulting from the
buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are based on models that largely
ignore climate-ecosystem interactions. Yet such interactions have the potential
to generate large positive or negative feedbacks to the climate system, thereby
either enhancing or alleviating the magnitude of climate change. To quantify
these feedbacks, a detailed and mechanistic understanding of climate-ecosystem
interactions on the scale of experimental plots is needed, along with reliable
methods for extrapolating knowledge obtained from ecosystem experimentation to
the landscape scale. A widely used technique for acquiring landscape-scale
understanding of ecosystem responses to climate change is to develop from data
acquired at sites across the landscape a set of correlations between the local
ecosystem variable in question and the local climatic conditions. These
correlations can then be used to generate predictions of response to climate
change, but the value of such predictions hinges on the assumption that
ecosystem variables track changing climate in the same way that such variables
now track climate differences over space. Climate manipulation experiments
provide a more mechanistically-based approach to forecasting responses to
climate change, and can identify the most important contingent factors (such as
interannual climate variability) that influence those responses, but practical
difficulties preclude carrying these out at many sites over many landscapes.
Moreover, the existence of contingent factors influencing ecosystem response to
climate change precludes scaling up by simply assuming that information learned
on experimental plots at one site will apply in a straightforward manner to all
the similar habitat (based, say, on a vegetational classification) over a
landscape. This project will combine manipulations with elevational transect
studies to 1) deepen understanding of the mechanisms and contingent factors that
shape climate-ecosystem feedbacks, and 2) evaluate and improve the use of
transect studies for extrapolating results about ecosystem response and feedback
to the landscape scale. The focus will be on two linked ecosystem responses to
climate variation that have been observed over four years of an experimental
simulation of climate warming in mixed shrub/ grass/forb habitat in Colorado: 1)
a heating-induced net outflow of carbon dioxide from the ecosystem and 2) a
shift in dominant vegetation from forbs to shrubs. Because carbon dioxide is a
greenhouse gas and because a shift in vegetative cover will alter energy and
water exchange with the atmosphere, these responses to warming, on a larger
scale, could be a source of significant feedback to the climate. ??