* 9628117
* Fast and Numerically Accurate Algorithms for Matrices       with Displacement Structure
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Thomas Kailath, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 05/31/1999
* USD 79,180.00

Numerous applications in sciences and engineering, as well as in computational,
applied and pure mathematics give rise to problems involving matrices with
Toeplitz, Hankel, Toeplitz-plus-Hankel, Vandermonde structures, controllability,
observability, Cauchy, Loewner, Pick, Schur-Cohn, Routh-Hurwitz matrices,
Bezoutians, along with many other patterns of structure. standard mathematical
software tools (e.g., MATLAB, MathCad, Maple V, NAG library, LAPACK), are based
on standard (structure-ignoring) methods, and therefore their use is often not
appropriate for obtaining a satisfactory solution. Here are two major reasons.
First, ignoring the structure artificially squares the size of the data, which
requires unnecessary storage and an extremely large amount of CPU time.
Secondly, many structured matrices, e.g. Hankel, Pick, Hilbert, Vandermonde, are
extremely ill- conditioned, which means that all available standard methods
often fail to produce even one correct digit in the computed solution. The theme
of this project is the study of several theoretical and computational problems
related to Cauchy and Cauchy-like matrices, which arise in many applied areas,
including signal processing, system Theory H-infinity control. Use of the
concept of displacement structure suggests that algorithms for Cauchy-like
matrices can be used to design efficient practical algorithms for many other
important kinds of structured matrices, such as Toeplitz, Hankel, Toeplitz-plus-
Hankel, Vandermonde, Chebyshev-Vandermonde matrices, etc. In fact, all these
matrices can be transformed into Cauchy-like matrices just by applying a few
fast Fourier, cosine of sine transforms. It is planned to extend the results to
develop fast and numerically accurate algorithms for new classes of structured
matrices. ***