* 9628968
* SBIR Phase II:  A 3-D Image Matrix Processor
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Jolyon Browne, Advanced Research and Applications Corporation (ARACOR)
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9628968 Browne This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is a key
part of an ARACOR initiative to develop a practical volumetric computed
tomography (CT) scanner for three-dimensional (3-D) imaging applications. In the
Phase I program, a high-level design for a specialized hardware accelerator, an
Image Matrix Processor (IMP), was developed. The IMP is capable of performing,
low-cost, high-speed 3-D reconstruction's with the principal reconstruction
algorithms: VOIR, Grangeat, and Feldkamp. The truly innovative aspect of the IMP
is its ability to perform both 2-D and 3-D reconstruction's with a single
design. This is a significant technological innovation, eliminating the major
technical obstacle to the progress of commercial 3-D CT: the exceedingly long
reconstruction times required to process volumetric data. The goal is to build
upon the successful Phase I effort by demonstrating the practicality of an IMP-
based workstation, where practicality is defined in terms of speed and
affordability. In particular, the technical objectives of the Phase II study are
to refine the IMP design; assess its performance through detailed, gate-level
simulations of the custom integrated circuits (ICs) which lie at the heart of
the IMP; produce and test enough ICs to build one IMP circuit board; and
characterize and benchmark the workstation with the power to reconstruct 10243
images in about an 2 hours (at today's CPU speeds) can be constructed for an
order of magnitude less cost than a multiprocessor workstation capable of
similar performance. This workstation of comparable power, will, for the first
time, make it feasible for emerging medical, industrial and scientific
applications requiring the creation and visualization of large volumetric
images, to be within the domain of an ordinary desk-top environment. The
commercial benefit of the IMP could prove to be extremely significant for
America's industrial, medical, and scientific markets. The advent of practical
volumetric indust rial CT systems will usher in a new era in manufacturing that
will embody emerging concepts such as reverse engineering, rapid prototyping,
and solid freeform fabrication. In the medical and scientific communities, and
high resolution 3-D CT instrument will be an indispensable tool for in-vitro
study of bone samples for osteoporosis research, for in-vivo study of small
laboratory animals for oncology and other research, and novel 3-D visualization
technologies such as surgical planning and 3-D modeling.