* 9628929
* Direct and Indirect Effects on the Trophic Dynamics of      Holly Leaf Miner Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2001
* Howard Cornell, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 09/30/2001
* USD 125,000.00

9628929 Cornell Whether top-down effects due to enemies or bottom-up effects due
to resources control the dynamics of herbivore populations has been a venerable
and divisive controversy in ecology. With the realization that natural systems
are diverse and heterogeneous the argument has become sterile, and the focus
must shift to the relative importance of these two forces and what controls them
in different environments. Moreover, it has recently become obvious that
exploring these interactions thoroughly requires differentiation between direct
and indirect effects. Indirect effects mean that the intensity and symmetry of
an interaction between two species may be altered by the presence of a third.
For example, plant defenses might be able to reduce herbivore abundances but
only in the presence of natural enemies because the primary effect of the
defense is to make the herbivore more susceptible to attack. In this study, the
investigators are employing a multi-pronged approach using a combination of
experiments and statistical path analysis to study top-down and bottom-up
effects on the distribution and abundance of the holly leaf miner on American
holly. A combination of path analysis and experiments provides a new way of
increasing inferential power beyond what is possible when either technique is
used separately. The investigators have measured heterogeneity of plant quality
and enemy abundance for the holly leaf miner and its host and are now setting up
factorial experiments to test their direct and indirect effects on miners. This
will be the first study to use such an integrated approach to answer fundamental
questions about the structure and function of terrestrial food webs. It should
have special relevance to theories of trophic dynamics as well as to the applied
areas of forest pest management and biological control.