* 9628202
* Magnetosusceptability Stratigraphy (MSS):  Key to "Floating" Orbitally Forced Timescales, Cyclostratigraphy, and        Cyclochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Rex Crick, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 08/31/1997
* USD 35,000.00

9628202 Crick Are developing a new method for high-resolution cyclocorrelation
and cyclochronology based on a combination of biostratigraphic control and
quick, easily performed magnetic measurements. We are calling the method
magnetosusceptibility stratigraphy (MSS). The high resolution of Mss is derived
from high-frequency events under the control of orbital forcing cycles with
current frequencies of the Milankovitch band (19-23, 41, 54, 100, 413 ka). The
preliminary data used to document the proposal are from a number of Devonian
marine sequences: Morocco, an area chosen because it contains outstanding
outcrop exposures, excellent biostratigraphic control, and the Eifelian/Givetian
GSSP; Europe, two internationally recognized Devonian sequences in the Montagne
Noire, southern France (including the Frasnian/Famennian GSSP); and the
Frasnian-Tournaisian of southern Oklahoma. The proposed work will allow use to
demonstrate that (1) MSS works, (2) it can provide correlations at better than
the best biozone resolution within basins, among basins, and between regions,
(3) trends inherent to the MSS curves are evidence of transgressive/regressive
or deepening/shallowing sequences, (4) with close sampling MSS proxies for
orbital forcing cycles, and (5) once calibrated for the geologic time of
interest, the duration of orbital forcing cycles identified from long and
reasonably complete stratigraphic sections can be used to establish or construct
"floating" orbital forcing timescales. While the recognition that orbital cycles
can be traced by the record left in sediments is an important contribution, even
more important is the duration of cycles important in the creation of "floating"
orbital forcing timescales. These timescales, based on the recognition of the
several orbital forcing cycles but not referenced to a curve anchored in the
Holocene, will serve to further our understanding of the forces of evolution and
sedimentation and to fix the duration of biostratigraphic zones within the l ess
precise framework of radiometric time. Such cyclochronologies must eventually
lead to a coherent geochronology with increased resolution of at least one order
of magnitude over that presently in use.