* 9628402
* Zeolites--A Potential New Tool for Environmental Studies?   Isotope and Elemental Studies of Zeolites
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Xiahong Feng, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 139,905.00

Feng 9628402 This proposal describes a three year project that studies natural
zeolites and their relationship to environmental change. Since the exchange rate
between zeolite and the environment is affected by many factors, our approach
includes collecting samples from a number of different environments and using
chemical and isotope tracers that respond to various environmental factors with
different sensitivity. These tracers are oxygen, hydrogen and nitrogen isotopic
compositions, K/Ar dating, and major and trace elements. Our initial efforts
will be focused on Yucca Mountain drill core samples for two reasons. First,
preliminary results on oxygen isotopic compositions of zeolites and clay
minerals and the K/Ar dates have provided very affirmed indication for the
feasibility of the project. Oxygen isotope compositions show that clinoptilolite
from Yucca Mountains is out of equilibrium with the current temperature and
fluid conditions. The results also imply a possibility to determine groundwater
level variations since zeolite formation. The second and an obvious reason is
that there has been a great amount of interdisciplinary research done for the
site as a result of the site characterization efforts of the nation's first
high-level nuclear wastes repository. A number of other zeolite-containing units
will also be sampled to do a comparative study. These units will include the
John Day Formation of Oregon, The Barstow Formation, Mud Hills and Lake Tecopa
of Inyo County, California, and few zeolite ore deposits in Northeast China.
These sites vary in age, diagenetic history and hydrological environments, and
can be compared to the Yucca Mountain site. For each tracer, we will study
mineral separates of zeolites and other authigenic minerals that are much less
exchangeable, such as feldspars and clay minerals. These less exchangeable
minerals can be considered to have preserved the formational information, and
can be used to derive the conditions and environments (temperat ure and chemical
and isotopic compositions of fluid) at the time of zeolite formation. If we
assume that all the authigenic minerals formed at the same time and from the
same fluid, the current compositions of zeolites may be related to the
environmental changes occurred after their formation. For zeolites, we will also
study, if possible, the chemical and isotopic compositions of different size
fractions. This would help us understand the mechanisms (diffusion versus
recrystallization) of exchange between zeolite and fluid, and determine whether
zeolite has reached equilibrium with the current pore fluid and at the current
temperature. Experimental studies will be conducted to understand the mechanism
for chemical and isotopic exchange between zeolites and the environmental fluid,
and to determine the physical constants (such as diffusivity and rate constants)
necessary for quantifying the rate of exchange from the analytical data of
natural zeoliltes.