* 9628573
* RIMI:  Strengthening the Research Environment by            Acquisition of a 300 MHz NMR Spectrometer
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Aderemi Oki, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 08/31/1998
* USD 180,243.00

HRD-9628573 Long Island University "Strengthening the Research Environment by
Acquisition of a 300 MHz NMR Spectrometer" Long Island University's Brooklyn
Campus requests support for the acquisition of a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Spectrometer with a superconducting magnet, operating at 300 MHz. The University
will provide non-federal matching funds on a one to one basis. The University is
a private institution and its Brooklyn Campus has an enrollment of 8,000
students, more than 50% of whom are minorities underrepresented in the sciences.
This proposal is made on behalf of the department of chemistry, which
experiences approximately 900 undergraduate and 70 graduate (master's level)
registrations per semester. There are 41 undergraduate chemistry majors: 14 are
Black and 3 are Hispanic; 27 are women and 14 are men. The Molecular Biology
undergraduate program (co-sponsored by the chemistry and biology departments)
has 20 undergraduate majors: 7 are Black and 2 are Hispanic; 12 are women. The
master's program in chemistry has 16 majors: 7 are Black, 2 are Hispanic, and 12
are women. The acquisition of the NMR spectrometer will fill a major gap in the
otherwise adequate research and instructional equipment of the department. It
will strengthen the research environment of the institution and will enhance
very significantly the research capabilities of five faculty, will bring about
significant improvement in the laboratory training of those student majoring in
chemistry. The proposed research to be performed on the instrument includes
classical organic syntheses, the development of new catalysts for organic
compound transformations and polymerizations, the development of new materials
with interesting electrical properties, the better understanding of properties
and thermodynamics of unsaturated molecules, and the better fundamental
understanding and modeling of industrial resin manufacture. These projects are
for the immediate future and it is expected that the equipment will remain in
service for the next 10-15 years, maintained by the University, will support
many more research undertakings, and will increase significantly the
contribution of this institution to the Nation's scientific research activities.
***