* 9628481
* Noble Gases and Isotope Systematics in Continental and      Hotspot Volcanism
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Harmon Craig, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/1999
* USD 183,117.00

9628481 Craig Noble gas systematics show that atmospheric gases are introduced
into magma chambers of volcanoes by injection of gases originally dissolved in
ocean water, and thus contaminate the deep mantle gases in the pristine magma. A
major question is whether this process is localized, regional, or global in
extent, and whether both continental and oceanic hotspot volcanoes are affected
in similar ways. The PI proposes to investigate this problem by mass
spectrometric analyses of noble gases extracted from olivine crystals in
volcanic lavas. Correlations with radiogenic isotopes will provide information
as to the nature and extent of this process in the oceanic and continental
volcanic environments. Secondly, 3He provides a unique signature for mantle
hotspots, and can be used to elucidate hotspot tracks across continental regions
(e.g., the Ethiopian hotspot). The PI has shown that the helium signature
identifies the Yellowstone Park volcanic center as a mantle hotspot, akin to the
Ethiopian hotspot and the oceanic hotspots. The Yellowstone hotspot has been
tracked back along the Snake River Plain south-south-west to the Idaho border by
measuring 3He/3He ratios in olivine crystals in lavas along this track. It is
proposed to continue this study by collecting and analyzing olivine basalts from
the western edge to the continental border, to determine if the Yellowstone
hotspot originally intersected the North American continent at its far western
edge.