* 9628257
* Environmental and Biologic Controls on Carbonate Platform   and Reef Development, Terminal Neoproterozoic Nama Group,   Namibia
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* John Grotzinger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 240,220.00

Grotzinger 9628257 This project will attempt to improve our understanding of the
first-order, long-term evolution of carbonate platforms by investigating the
transition from Proterozoic platforms formed of microbial and abiotic carbonates
to Phanerozoic platforms formed of calcified metazoan and metaphyte skeletons.
The proposed research will attempt to document the detailed paleoenvironments of
several carbonate platforms and reefs in the Nama and Witvlei groups (Namibia)
that span terminal Neoproterozoic time, and the first influences of calcified
invertebrates and metaphytes on sediment production, platform paleoecology, and
facies development. We will specifically study: 1) the composition and
distribution of various facies, 2) the relationships between microbialite
morphology and microfabric, 3) the relationships between microbialities and
calcified metazoans and metaphyytes, and 4) primary mineralogy of skeletal
grains, microbial components, and cements. We have selected three representative
units for investigation based on their diversity of facies, microbialite and
skeletal fossil assemblages, and progressively younger stratigraphic positions
and age. In ascending stratigraphic order these include: 1) the Bushmanskippe
Formation (Witvlei Group), whose basal unit (Bildah Member) is considered to be
a "cap carbonate" (peculiar carbonates possibly associated with deglaciation of
Neoproterozoic ice sheets; 2) the Omkyk Member of the basal Nama Group which has
3-D stratigraphic exposures and contains spectacular microbialite-Cloudina
pinnacle reefs; and, 3) the Huns Member of the middle Nama Group which contains
calcified metaphyte-microbialite patch reefs and microbialite-shelly fossil
pinnacle reefs. The proposed research will provide important information that
will be useful in understanding interactions within the earliest calcified
metazoan/metaphyte and microbial ecosystems, the sources of terminal
Neoproterozoic carbonate sediment, and impact of skeletal sediment on the f
acies and long-term evolution of carbonate depositional systems.