* 9628288
* U-Th-Ra Isotope Systematics of the Historical Lavas of      Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Michael Garcia, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/1999
* USD 135,000.00

9628288 Rubin Geochemical correlations indicate Kilauea's summit lavas were
derived from a heterogeneous source. In contrast, lavas erupted during sustained
rift zone eruptions show rapid and systematic temporal decreases in their
incompatible trace element ratios (e.g., Ce/Yb) but little or no change in Pb,
Sr, and Nd isotope ratios. These short-term geochemical relationships may be
caused by progressive depletion of a localized, relatively homogeneous mantle
source. Out hypotheses to explain these observations are : (1) the overall
compositional variability of Kilauea lavas results from melting a heterogeneous
mantle source. (2) The rapid trace element changes during sustained rift-zone
eruptions are observed because the magmas for these eruptions bypassed the
summit reservoir and avoided it buffering and/or contaminating effects; and (3)
The timescale for melting and magma transport are short (1-2 ka). To
specifically examine the above hypotheses it is planned to determine the
activities of the major isotopes of U, Th, and Ra in three different Kilauea
sample suites. High-precision mass spectrometry methods will be used to
determine 238U, 234U, 232U, 230U, 228Ra , 226Ra, and Ba concentrations in these
lavas. Integrating the results of these measurements with other available
geochemical data will allow us to evaluate: (1) the relative importance of
variations in the partial melting process versus heterogeneity in the mantle
source region for creating the compositional diversity of Kilauea lava, and (2)
the structure (geometry and size) of Kilauea's shallow magma plumbing system.