* 9628364
* Documenting the Early Diagenetic History of Articulate      Brachiopods Using Transmission Electron Microscopy
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Sandra Carlson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 105,000.00

9628364 Carlson Paleozoic isotopic studies of paleoclimate and paleoceanography
rely on the assumption that 18O values are obtained from original, unaltered
brachiopod calcite. Recently, the reliability of the standard tests (textural
and chemical) used to detect diagenesis in low magnesium calcite has been
questioned. It has been suggested that the well-documented Paleozoic trend of
depleted 18O with increasing geologic time may indicate post-depositional
alteration rather than a primary trend in ocean temperatures. As assessed by the
standard tests of optical and scanning electron microscopic images, trace
element analyses, and cathodoluminescent microscopy, "pristine" brachiopod
calcite often exhibits signs of isotopic alteration. Apparently, fine-scale
dissolution/precipitation indicative of early diagenesis will alter the original
isotopic composition without affecting the calcitic fabric. Transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) is the only technique able to detect fine-scale
diagenesis by imaging the crystal ultrastructure at an atomic level. TEM
analysis provides both optical images of specimens at a resolution of 0.2 nm and
X-ray diffraction patterns. X-ray diffraction is used to determine crystal
lattice structures, whereas, TEM images can reveal structural features such as
grain and twin boundaries. The purpose of this study is to use TEM to
characterize fine-scale diagenesis in fossil brachiopods. A comparison of TEM
features of original low magnesium calcite in extant brachiopods with TEM
features identified in Plio-Pleistocene relatives of diagenetically altered low
magnesium calcite will establish criteria to identify fine-scale diagenesis.
Examination of fossil brachiopods should reveal features that characterize
diagenetic low magnesium calcite such as increased microporosity, cross-cutting
relationships at twin boundaries and dislocation sites, and a higher dislocation
density with respect to original low magnesium calcite. These criteria that
typify early diag enesis will be compared with standard diagenetic tests and
with isotopic values from extant and fossil brachiopods to test the reliability
of the standard test to diagnose fine-scale diagenesis necessary to alter the
original isotopic composition. The significance of the research described herein
is that the proposed TEM examination provides a direct and unique means of
identifying fine-scale diagenesis that alters the original isotopic composition
without altering the calcitic fabric. The ability to successfully identify
diagenetic features that indicate isotopic alteration should have a profound
effect on our ability to accurately interpret isotope data from fossil
brachiopods.