* 9628115
* RUI: Inflation Cycles of the Resurgent Dome, Long Valley    Caldera, California
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* John Reid, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1998
* USD 68,155.00

Reid 9628155 Since 1979, the resurgent dome of Long Valley caldera, California
has risen more than 50 cm apparently due to the injection of 0.2 km3 of magma at
depth. Floodplain geomorphology suggests that the Owens River, that circumvents
the dome, oscillates between two parallel meander belts depending on whether the
dome is inflated or deflated, and that the current uplift is part of a long term
inflation that may total 15-35 meters. The central goal of the renewal proposal
is to understand the inflation history of Long Valley and the nearby Inyo Crater
eruptions over the past several millenia. The hope is that patterns between
eruptions and Owens River avulsions in the past will clarify the potential for
future eruptive activity. Efforts with NSF-RUI 91-17474 funding to determine a
chronology for these oscillations have revealed three major findings: (1) In
dating plant remains in abandoned channel system, with live aquatic plant "ages"
as high as 13.3 kyr. Cation geochemistry and 13C in plants and waters suggest
predominantly magmatic sources for the "dead" CO2 feeding these plants. Tree
kills at Mammoth Mountain also manifest this CO2 release (Farrar et al, 1995)
(2) Inyo Crater pumice fills an abandoned channel of the Owens River and
contains charcoal apparently derived from trees charred during the pumice
eruptions. This suggests a connection between Owens River avulsions and
eruptions in the Inyo Craters. The chemical and petrographic stratigraphy of
these pumices and the proposed AMS dates on their charcoals will allow the
timing of past eruptions and avulsions to be determined, and estimates to be
made of where the caldera stands today in terms of potential for similar
activity in the future. (3) The topography of deformed shorelines of Pleistocene
Long Valley Lake has been measured. The shorelines have recorded caldera floor
deformation over longer time periods than the river channels; the data suggest
that relatively little net uplift of the dome has occurred over the life of the
lake. The proposed research seeks to complete the work that has been begun and
includes: (1) synoptic14C, pH, alkalinity, dissolved ion determinations and
discharge measurements with finer resolution at sites of major springs to
quantify the "dead" CO2 emanations entering the streams, (2a) AMS 14C age
determinations on charcoal in the pumice to time earlier river avulsions and
associated pumice eruptions, (2b) XRF analyses of a large suite of pumicies to
fingerprint them as to their site of origin, and (3) completion of the
topographic surveying of the lake shores and dating of tufa cements in them by
U-series dating to better understand the longer history of the dome. The results
of this study offer valuable information about the recent tectonic history of
Long Valley caldera, and perhaps give an indication of the caldera's potential
behavior in the near future. They are thus of central concern to residents of
Mammoth Lakes, CA. The study offers undergraduate students an excellent
opportunity to investigate in the field and in the laboratory an important
example of silicic volcanism.