* 9628832
* Career Advancement Award: Hormonal Factors Affecting        Reproductive Dominance, Cooperation and Parental Behavior   in Communally-Breeding Burying Beetles
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Michelle Scott, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1997
* USD 47,256.00

A key area of behavioral biology is the mechanisms of hormonal regulation of
social behavior. How the endocrine system and the environment, including the
behavior of other individuals, might interact is of growing interest. Yet hardly
anything is known of the endocrine mechanisms for the regulation of social
behavior of insects, in spite of their rich repertory of behavior. Burying
beetles prepare and bury small carcasses that will become food for their larvae.
They are unusual in several respects. They must coordinate reproduction with the
location of a necessary resource that is unpredictable in both time and space.
Their behavior must undergo regular changes from competitive to cooperative and
from infanticidal to parental. Males and females must also coordinate their
reproductive behavior and endocrine system with those of their mates. Dr.
Scott's research project has the following aims: 1. to establish the profiles of
juvenile hormone (JH) and ecdysteroids, using radioimmunoassay, during a
breeding cycle, especially during parental care, for both males and females, 2.
to identify the hormonal control of parental behavior, especially the cue for
switching from infanticide to feeding and parental care of larvae, and 3. to
characterize the role of JH and ecdysteroids in establishment of reproductive
dominance in communally breeding females.