* 9629229
* Neurotransmitters and their Receptors:                      University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, South Africa:  September 1996
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Roberta Schoen, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 06/30/1998
* USD 69,603.00

9630440 Ryan The field of endocrinology is a rapidly advancing area of biology.
A number of highly significant advances in biology have been derived from
investigations into the action of hormones on cellular and organismal function,
and the mechanisms used for cellular communication. This discipline now spans
the great diversity of research interests from investigations into the molecular
events in cell nuclei caused by steroid hormone interactions with intracellular
receptors to understanding hormonal regulation of behavior. The International
Congress of Endocrinology to be held in San Francisco, CA in June, 1996
represents a mechanism for investigators, young and old, to come together to
learn about the latest advances in this rapidly evolving field. With this award,
the Women in Endocrinology will support the travel of 10 young female
investigators to attend the International Congress. Attendance at this Congress
will be a mechanism for new investigators to present their data to their peers
and to discuss the recent advances in this field. In addition, it will provide
young female investigators with a mechanism to develop relationships with more
senior female investigators in endocrinology, who can help them in the future
successfully navigate a career path. Attendance at this meeting will positively
impact the young investigator, as well as the other investigators in attendance.