* 9629424
* SBIR Phase II:  An Optical Data Processing Technique for    Communication Switch Node
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Freddie Lin, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 290,176.00

*** 96-29424 Lin This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 11 project is to
develop a novel optical self-routing technique for data switching applications
in an optically interconnected network. The optical self-routing technique is
based on a holographic optical associate memory (HOAM) technology. The global
association, high processing speed, and simplicity of the HOAM concept offers
significant improvements over conventional electronic and photonic data
switching techniques, in both data rate and in the number of available channels
in a self-routing switching node. In Phase I, a complete, small-scale optical
self-routing interconnected network based on the HOAM technique was constructed.
The network successfully demonstrated the unique advantages of the HOAM and the
proposed self-routing switching node for use in optically interconnected
networks. In Phase II, the full-scale design/packaging development of the HOAM
and its self-routing switching node will be completed. A Phase II testbed will
be designed, constructed, and demonstrated. The commercialization effort for the
developed technology also will be initiated in Phase 11. Federal and Commercial
applications of the high-performance self-routing optical interconnect network
include C3I networks, tactical information exchange systems, distributed
computer-to-computer networks, multimedia communication, and the National
Information Infrastructure. ***