* 9629088
* Main Group Rings, Clusters, and Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Alan Cowley, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 05/31/2000
* USD 454,500.00

Dr. Alan Cowley, Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at Austin, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for studies of main group rings, clusters, and assemblies.
Several new unsaturated ring systems featuring the group 13 elements will be
prepared, some with potential as candidates for ring opening metathesis
polymerization (ROMP). Heteronorbornadienes will be investigated for their
potential as thermal or photochemical sources of, for example, intermetallic
materials. Assembly of bicyclic ring systems that incorporate group 13 - group
13 bonds into stacked architectures will be investigated for their potentially
interesting electrical and/or magnetic properties. Various approaches to anion
recognition, including multidentate Lewis acid assemblies that incorporate group
13 or 14 elements, will also be pursued, and new approaches to the formation of
cluster and cage-type compounds of the heavier group 13 elements will be
developed. New combinations of main group elements (boron, aluminum, gallium,
and indium) with carbon ring systems and with one another, will be prepared and
investigated. Apart from the intrinsic interest in the structures and bonding
descriptions of these rings, these compounds have potential as precursors to new
polymeric and intermetallic materials with novel electrical and/or magnetic
properties. The larger ring systems are appropriate for the selective and
reversible binding of anions, and thus have potential applications in anion
transport and homogeneous catalysis