* 9629994
* Solid-State Reactions of Molecular Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Bruce Foxman, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 09/30/2000
* USD 274,000.00

Abstract 9629994 Foxman This research is focussed on the investigation of a
broad range of solid-state reactants. First, metal salts of unsaturated
carboxylic acids will be exposed to ionizing radiation. By using criteria
established in previous studies, it will be possible to discover new types of
oligomerization and polymerization reactions. Crystallographic studies of
reactants will aid in the understanding of the geometrical and chemical
mechanism associated with each process. Parallel studies of the structures and
thermal solid-state reactivity of amine:carboxylic acid cocrystals will enhance
understanding of chemospecific Michael addition reactions. A proposed X-ray
structural and topographic investigation of radiation-induced phase transitions
in copper carboxylate complexes will elucidate the role of strain and
dislocations as a twinned triclinic phase transforms to a monoclinic single
crystal. Second, a series of molecular solids ranging from cinnamic acids to
acrylamide to metal acrylates will be irradiated in the low-energy "tail" of the
absorption band of the corresponding chromophore. Based upon preliminary
experiments, this research promises to produce single crystals of dimers,
oligomers and polymers. Similarly, solid-state condensation reactions in A:B
cocrystals, where A = an aminopyridine or hydroxypyridine and B = a substituted
benzoyl chloride, will provide valuable information on thermal reactions where
an evolved gas (HCl) is trapped, for example, by a pyridine acceptor. Such a
process is expected to lead to a solid-state reaction with a negligible change
in unit-cell volume. Both of these processes will provide the necessary
guidelines for the production of highly ordered crystalline polymers. Third,
experiments, using synchrotron X-rays, in which solid metal salts are irradiated
at specific wavelengths near the absorption edge for the metal, promise to
provide definitive information about the detailed role of the metal in the
radiat ion-induced oligomerization of metal propynoates. The phenomenon of
isomorphous substitution, where metals can be substituted without changing the
structure of the material, will be used in propynoate salts to tailor their
sensitivity to ionizing radiation, allowing the radiation sensitivity to be
varied over a wide range. Metal propynoates are thus excellent prospects for new
applications involving radiation dosimetry; experiments will be conducted to
establish the useful dosimetric ranges of these materials. %%% Solid-state
reactions offer exceptional opportunities for chemospecific and stereospecific
synthesis, the production of single crystals of oligomers and polymers, and the
discovery of novel applications for new materials. In optimal cases, irradiation
or thermolysis of crystals can lead to unusual stereospecific intermolecular
reactions that cannot be accomplished in solution. The challenge lies in
discovering new classes of materials capable of solid-state reactivity, and in
determining the principles which govern their behavior. A proper set of
objectives for a research program in this area must involve (a) the design,
discovery and characterization of new solid-state reactions, (b) the study and
exploitation of new phenomena discovered in the course of the research, (c) the
design of new experiments which will help to identify geometrical criteria
and/or pathways for the reactivity of solids, and the chemical and physical
factors responsible for that reactivity, and (d) a search for applications for
either the reactants or the products associated with a solid-state reaction
and/or phase transition. In the past, this research has concentrated on the
discovery of new solid-state reactions to increase both the quality of the
materials and the understanding of how basic processes occur. Critical
experiments are now designed to investigate a broad range of solid-state
reactants, and to firmly establish new applications for the new materials.