* 9629273
* A Multi-Agent Approach to Feeder Reconfiguration
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Mohammad Shahidehpour, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 09/30/1999
* USD 50,000.00

ECS-9629273 Ramesh As competition in the power industry intensifies,
distribution automation is sure to become increasingly attractive both from the
economic and from the security point of view. Feeder reconfiguration for
transformer and feeder load balancing is an effective control action both for
avoiding outages and for faster restoration. Load balancing is particularly
important today since many of these devices (transformers and feeders) have been
in service for many decades, in most cases. Replacement or even reinforcement of
these aging facilities is difficult due to the emphasis on cost reduction due to
competition. Load balancing will help minimize failures of these devices thereby
preventing outages. Feeder reconfiguration is a combinatorial optimization
problem with multiple conflicting objectives and nonlinear constraints. Not
surprisingly, it continues to be an active research area since many local optima
exist and the aim is to find the globally optimal Pareto surface that reflects
the tradeoff between the objectives. So, we are not just looking for one global
optimum (which itself would be difficult to obtain efficiently), but we are
looking for many such solutions that form the Pareto surface. Many solution
approaches have been suggested, but none appears to be totally up to the task.
Heuristics are inevitable; the question is: which ones? Our proposed approach is
based on this observation: multiple heuristics and algorithms working together
(in parallel) might be more effective than any one of them working in isolation.
We call each individual algorithm/heuristic, an agent. In this context, the term
agent refers to the ability of the individual algorithms to "cooperate" with
each other, enabling a synergistic enhancement of their isolated capabilities.
Such an approach has proved useful for other combinatorial optimization
problems, including some in the power systems area, and hence, there is reason
to believe that it will be successful for feeder reconfiguration as well. We
propose to demonstrate that our multi-agent approach is able to obtain the
Pareto set of optimal solutions for this problem with a computational effort
acceptable for online operational planning purposes (if not real-time). We also
propose to develop a theoretical framework, based on Markov chains, for
analyzing the computational behavior of our multi-agent approach with a view
towards providing insights into its performance, its scalability to large
distribution systems, and its applicability to similar combinatorial problems in
power systems. Three results are of particular interest: 1) the "convergence" of
the solutions in the memory towards the global optimum as time progresses; 2)
the decrease in the value of the most important objective towards the global
optimum as agents are added one by one, 3) the "speedup" (decrease in overall
execution time) obtained as more processors are added (we expect a near-linear
speedup). Finding the optimal feeder reconfiguration strategy is a multi-
objective combinatorial optimization problem that is difficult to solve in the
online environment. The proposed multi-agent approach has the potential of
offering an effective way of combining, various heuristics in a synergistic
fashion so as to obtain the Pareto surface for the conflicting objectives. By
improving both the overall solution quality and the computational time, the
approach will significantly advance the state-of-the-art in feeder
reconfiguration research and practice. Further, since the approach is inherently
parallel, it can take maximal advantage of the distributed computing platforms
that are becoming commonplace in distribution control centers. The applicability
of the multi-agent approach and of the Markov chain model extend beyond the
feeder reconfiguration problem. The utility of similar approaches to a couple of
other power system problems has been reported in the literature. This proposed
research will lay the foundations for a theoretical and an experimental
framework for answering the important question: Given that there are various
algorithms and heuristics for solving this difficult problem, what is the best
approach for combining them such as to extract a better performance than any of
them is capable of, in isolation? Answering this question successfully has
fundamental value for advancing the practice of solving combinatorial problems
in the power industry. ***