* 9629592
* CAREER: Using Known Phylogenies to Evaluate Methods of      Phylogeny Reconstruction
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2002
* Mary White, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 262,199.00

9629592 WHITE One of the goals of systematic biology is to reconstruct the
historical (phylogenetic) relationships among organisms. A number of analytical
methods have been devised that will produce phylogenetic reconstructions. When
identical sets of data obtained from organisms are evaluated by the different
reconstruction methods, differing phylogenies sometimes result. Because the true
phylogenetic relationships of organisms in nature are not known, it is difficult
to assess which of the different reconstructions best approximates their actual
history. In the laboratory, rapidly-changing organisms can be raised in which
the true history of each lineage, and its characteristics, can be precisely
known and manipulated. Phylogenies reconstructed by the various analytical
methods in use in systematic biology can be compared with the known history, and
in this way the efficiency of each method in discovering the correct or true
phylogeny can be evaluated. In this study, Mary White will produce lineages of
bacterial viruses, including Bacteriophage T7 and Bacteriophage phiX 174. The
histories of these lineages will be precisely known, as will their
characteristics, monitored by molecular methods such as DNA sequencing and
restriction enzyme mapping. The molecular characteristics will provide the data
from which phylogenies will be reconstructed and compared against the known
histories. Knowledge gained from this work will lead to a better understanding
of the proper application of existing phylogenetic methods to recover the
history of organisms in nature, and to refinements and improvements in these
methods. The project will be used as a tool for teaching students, in classroom
and laboratory settings, about such diverse topics as mutations and mutagens,
virology, molecular biology and biotechnology, and systematics, and will be
instrumental in developing discovery-based approaches to the teaching of these
areas of science. Students will be involved in all stages of the research.