* 9629135
* Presidential Faculty Fellows/Presidential Early Career      Awards for Scientists and Engineers (PFF/PECASE):           Atomistic-Level Studies of Complex Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* Juan De Pablo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9629135 In recent years, much progress has been made in theory
behind molecular simulations; it is important to recognize, however, that
available methods are still in their infancy and that much more work will be
necessary before large scale problems can be addresses. I am currently
developing further the theory behind molecular simulations and implementing
novel simulation methods for the study of macromolecules. I am particularly
interested in applying such methods to investigate equilibrium structural and
thermodynamic properties of complex macromolecules in confined geometrics, as in
porous media, surfaces or as in model biological membranes. I am also applying
such methods to study phase equilibria for both concentrated and dilute polymer
solutions, and to investigate at a microscopic level the rheological properties
of polymer melts in simple flows. These simulations have provided a fundamental
understanding of these systems at the atomic level, thereby leading to improved
theoretical models and novel engineering applications. We are currently
investigating the mechanisms through which complex, articulated molecules
diffuse in fluids and in random media. To this end, I have developed strochastic
methods that try to mimic the motion of flexible molecules through such media.
For several models systems, comparison of the results of the stochastic approach
to those of non-equilibrium dynamic simulations have been favorable. We have
also found that mixtures of cryoprotectants can act in a synergetic manner to
form improved and unique cryoprotectants. We have developed molecular models
that describe quantitatively these findings, thereby providing much needed
guidelines for the selection and design of new cryoprotectant systems. Our work
in this area will have an impact not only in the preservation of living systems,
but also in that of pharmaceutical products. One of our goals is that of
designing room-temperature glasses for long-term storage of proteins and
enzymes. If that goal is achieved, it will be possible, for example, to store
vaccines at room temperature for extended periods of time, thereby facilitating
use and distribution in underdeveloped areas where refrigeration is a problem. A
college education must comprise the following elements: fundamental principles,
realistic applications, experimentation, self motivation and independent
research. These elements are not unique to engineering disciplines; they are
essential components of any complete educational program. More than ever, with
modern technology and communication systems it is possible to incorporate all of
these aspects of education into our undergraduate and graduate curricula. I am
committed to doing so not only in the department of chemical engineering but
also at a campus-wide level.