* 9629774
* Cost-Benefits Tradeoffs Associated with Dimorphism          in a Dioecious Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Janet Gehring, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/29/2000
* USD 150,000.00

9629774 Delph Some flowering plant species have separate male and female
individuals and are termed dioecious. In addition to differing in their primary
function (males produce pollen, whereas females produce seeds), males and
females often exhibit sexual dimorphism in other traits (e.g., petal or leaf
size, frequency of reproduction, and physiological traits). As a consequence of
producing fruit, females of most dioecious species invest more biomass in
reproduction than do males. This higher reproductive effort by females should
mean that females will invest less in other structures than do males.
Consequently, they should have a higher "cost of reproduction" than males; i.e.,
females often exhibit relatively slower rates of growth and/or higher rates of
mortality. The investigators plan to study the dioecious plant, Silene
latifolia, which does not appear to fit the pattern of females having a higher
cost of reproduction. In this species, males grow less vegetatively and die at a
younger age than females, even though females of this species do invest
relatively more biomass in reproductive structures. In addition, in this species
males produce 10 to 15 times more flowers than females, and male flowers are
relatively small. The investigators will test the hypothesis that production of
many, small flowers imposes a high cost of reproduction for the males, and that
this cost can not be predicted simply by measuring biomass (i.e., carbon)
invested in reproductive structures, because physiological differences between
the sexes may also exist. The investigators will test this hypothesis in two
ways: 1) by growing plants of known parentage in a common garden and greenhouse
to observe whether variation in morphological and physiological traits is
genetically based and correlated with flower number, and to observe relative
longevity, and 2) by conducting an artificial selection experiment to reduce the
magnitude of differences in flower size and number that exist between the sexes
and obse rve whether certain physiological traits thought to be responsible for
the cost of reproduction (such as respiration rate) also change with the change
in the morphological traits. This will be the first test in plants of a
phenomenon that has been reported for some animals: that sexual selection
(selection for obtaining many mates) imposes a survival cost on males.
Furthermore, the proposed research will contribute to our understanding of the
evolution of sexual dimorphism in plants.