* 9629866
* Risk Sensitive Control of Hybrid Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Thordur Runolfsson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2000
* USD 191,283.00

ECS-9629866 Runolfsson Dynamic systems that depend on a auxiliary parameter that
characterizes the mode of operation of the system arise in many applications. In
some applications this parameter can be measured, in others it can be estimated
and in still others it is completely unknown except for, perhaps, some apriori
estimate about its size. The methods that are chosen in incorporating the
auxiliary parameter in the design of a control systems depends on the
characteristic of the parameter. If the parameter is deterministic and can be
measured, gain scheduling methods are frequently employed in the design of real
systems. If the parameter is (deterministic) unknown and not measurable, robust
design methods are usually used. If, on the other hand, the parameter is
stochastic with known statistic, stochastic methods are usually employed. A
particular case of this situation is the case when the auxiliary parameter can
be modelled as finite state continuous time Markov chain. Such systems arise in
various applications and system formulations such as power systems,
manufacturing systems and fault-tolerant control system. In this research we
study risk-sensitive control for hybrid systems with a Markovian jump parameter.
In particular, the objective of the control is to minimize the infinite-horizon
risk-sensitive cost functional. Preliminary investigations show that the
relationship between H(_ control, linear differential games and risk-sensitive
control does not hold for hybrid systems. The main reason for this appears to be
that the risk sensitivity cost functional measures the risk sensitivity of the
system to transitions caused by the random jump parameter as well as the noise
input. The risk sensitivity of the cost functional to transitions induced by the
jump parameter may be of a great value in the design of systems where it is
desired to make the system performance as insensitive to the effects of the jump
parameter as possible. In this research we will develop risk sen sitive control
of hybrid stochastic systems and study in detail both system theoretic
properties and design techniques for such systems. Furthermore, the benefits of
the developed techniques will be evaluated for the applications described above.