* 9629008
* Presidential Faculty Fellow/Presidential Early Career       Awards for Scientists and Engineers (PFF/PECASE)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Marc Edwards, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9629008 Edwards This is an award to provide the support this investigator
requested in response to NSF 94-134, "Presidential Faculty Fellow Awards." The
research component of this project is a continuation of the research this
investigator has been conducting under NSF Grant No. 95-03079, "Copper Pitting
and New Approaches to Teaching: A Career Development Plan," as part of the
National Science Foundation Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program.
His research is directed toward improving our fundamental understanding of
factors that result in corrosive behavior of materials used in distribution
systems for water. Materials used in construction of water distribution systems
are subject to corrosion over long periods of time which reduces the effective
life of the system's components and has a potentially degrading effect on the
quality of water delivered to users through the distribution system. Procedures
to adequately determine the effect of corrosion can be useful in improving the
engineering design of water distribution systems. This award also continues to
have the intent of encouraging the investigator's early development as an
educator. The investigator's education plan involves exploring changes in basic
course structure that include active learning, development of supportive
learning classroom environments,, and implementation of a reward structure that
encourages development of non-traditional target skills such as teamwork, class
motivation and interest in learning outside the classroom. His teaching plan
involves implementation and evaluation of new approaches to learning in the
undergraduate engineering classroom environment that will improve the way in
which undergraduate engineering courses are taught. ***