* 9629932
* Developing Statistical Indicators To Monitor the Condition  of Undergraduate Mathematics Education: A Feasibility Study
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Kenneth Travers, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/2000
* USD 668,353.00

9629932 Travers This project will carry out a feasibility study to produce a
national set of statistical indicators for monitoring the condition of the first
two years of undergraduate mathematics. This work is based on an ongoing
project, Undergraduate Mathematics Education Indicators (UGMEI), of the Grants
Board of the American Educational Research Association (AERA) to develop a
conceptual framework for indicators of undergraduate mathematics. The UGMEI
Project now under way is being carried out under the guidance of a Steering
Committee, chaired by the proposer, Travers, and a national panel of
mathematicians and mathematics educators. It is expected that me indicators that
are developed by the proposed project will be useful in helping to monitor
possible effects of various reform initiatives in undergraduate mathematics
education, including the NSF calculus reform program. The feasibility study will
develop a large set (approximately 200) of statistical indicators of
undergraduate mathematics education, approximately 50 in each of four
categories: curriculum and instruction; student outcomes and assessment; student
participation; and institutional/departmental factors. I Development of the
indicators will take place in the mathematics departments at each of three
sites: a research university; a comprehensive state university and a community
college. Each of the sites will conduct its own data collection, analysis and
reporting, as well as take part in the cross-institutional data collection
activities. The overall coordinating unit, directed by the proposer, will
produce a data dictionary and archive, a technical report on the data collection
activities, a popularized (glossy) report suitable for publication by a
professional organization such as the Mathematical Association of America (MAA),
a handbook for departmental administrators on how to carry out such a data
collection and analysis activity, as well as 2-3 newsletter articles for use by
professional organizations. A continuous update of the progress of the project
will also be provided at the Project's Web Site, linked with the Home Page of
the University of Illinois Office for Mathematics, Science and Technology
Education.