* 9629100
* RPG: Proteoglycans: Secondary Regulators of Growth Factor   Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1997
* Kimberly Williams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 12/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9629100 Forsten This is a Research Planning Grant for Women Scientists and
Engineers. The overall objective of this research is to understand how the local
cellular environment influences accessibility of growth factors to target
stimulatory cells. IGF-I, an endocrine factor, is found almost exclusively in
serum bound to a subset of a family of specific binding proteins known as the
insulin-like growth factor binding proteins (IGFBP). Endothelial secreted
proteoglycans may impact IGF-I activity through regulation of IGFBP binding. The
hypothesis of this proposal is that vascular endothelial cells secrete heparan
sulfate proteoglycans (P-HS) which can displace and thereby liberate IGF-I from
serum binding proteins (IGFBP-3). This liberation will affect IGF-I binding to
receptors on endothelial cells, and consequently transport of IGF-I by
endothelial cells to the underlying tissue. Presently, it is not clear whether
P-HS will potentiate or inhibit accessibility. The specific aims of the overall
research project are to: 1, determine if P-HS influences IGF-I binding to bovine
aortic endothelial cells (BAE) in the absence or presence of IGFBP; 2, evaluate
how cell density and IGF-I addition impact P-HS secretion by BAE; 3, measure the
effect of P-HS on IGFBP-3, IGF-I, and IGFBP-3/IGF-I complex (cell-free); and
develop and validate a mathematical model incorporating all the elements of the
IGF-I/BAE system. In order to plan for the full research proposal, the following
activities will be done during the research planning period: 1, obtain and
purify P-HS from endothelial conditioned medium; 2, demonstrate an effect of
P-HS addition on IGF-I binding to BAE; 3, determine if P-HS binds to
IGF-I/IGFBP-3 and if IGF-I can be liberated from the complex; and 4, develop a
quantitative binding assay for P-HS binding to the complex and determine if the
effect is proteoglycan specific. ***