* 9629886
* Relationship Between Mesoscale Environment and Hawaiian Rain Band (II)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Thomas Schroeder, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2000
* USD 292,607.00

9629886 Chen The interactions of atmospheric flows with mountains is an
important issue in atmospheric sciences. Orography plays a role in both local
weather as well as influencing the larger scale flow. The isolation of the
mountainous Island of Hawaii provides a natural laboratory for studies of the
impacts of orography. In 1990 a cooperative project among several researchers,
the Hawaiian Rainband Project (HaRP), was executed to study the influence of the
island on local weather and fundamental mountain/atmospheric flow interactions.
The Principal Investigator will continue his analysis of data from the HaRP with
a focus on furthering understanding of the impact of local environmental
conditions on the formation of rainbands. A specific emphasis will be the
evolution of downslope flow on the windward side of the island of Hawaii
throughout the night for relatively dry and relatively rainy cases. In addition
to downslope flow evolution over land, the deepening of the downslope flow in
the Hilo Bay area, the extension of offshore flow over the ocean before sunrise,
and the effects of clouds and rains on the downslope flow evolution will be
studied. Furthermore, the Principal Investigator will examine the meteorological
conditions that affect the daily amounts of nocturnal rainfall west of Hilo and
the early morning rainfall along the coast. ***