* 9629770
* LTREB: Long-Term Soil Organic Matter Dynamics in Subtropical Agroecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2002
* David Coleman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/2002
* USD 260,000.00

9629770 Hendrix Since 1978, long-term research has been conducted on the effects
of tillage regimes and the impacts of biotic manipulations on soil organic
matter (SOM) dynamics and nutrient cycling processes in a subtropical
agroecosystem. After 15 years of conventional tillage and no tillage management,
dynamics of water-stable aggregates and aggregate-associated soil organic matter
have been described and monitored at the Horseshoe Bend experimental area at the
University of Georgia. The formation and stabilization of macroaggregates in no
tillage soils represents an important mechanism for the protection and
maintenance of SOM that may otherwise be lost under conventional tillage
practices. This mechanism may explain the nearly 18% higher soil organic matter
content of no tillage soils as compared to conventional tillage soils. These
differences in SOM are translated to changes in soil biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning. Funding of this LTREB proposal will maintain these long-term
experiments, and allow several short-term, mechanistic field experiments to be
conducted. The dynamics of soil organic matter and the response by the soil
community to these dynamics take place over decades. LTREB funding will allow
these investigators the appropriate time frame to monitor these dynamics.