* 9629760
* Career Advancement Award: The Role of Multiple Cellulases in Arabidopsis Plant Development
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Elena Del Campillo, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/1998
* USD 55,800.00

The plant cell wall is modified as part of many physiological processes. One of
the most important classes of enzymes for cell-wall catabolism is cellulases.
Dr. del Campillo will attempt to identify the cellulase genes involved in
floral-organ abscission (shedding from the parent body) in Arabidopsis and to
determine their function in the process. She will test the hypothesis that
abscission of each floral organ, i.e., petal, sepal and stamen, is sequential
and coordinated, and that abscission of each organ requires several types of
enzymes and principally involves two classes of cellulases. One class is up-
regulated and involved in the production of intertissue signal(s) and/or in the
actual cell-cell separation process, and another class is down-regulated and
involved in cell-wall maintenance. Dr. del Campillo will search for and select
up-regulated and down-regulated cellulase genes. She then will analyze the
spatial and temporal expression of these genes by in situ hybridization
experiments to be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Zhongchi Liu in the
Department of Plant Biology at the University of Maryland, College Park. She
also will analyze the pattern of cellulase expression in abscission-defective
mutants isolated by Dr. Anthony Bleecker in the Botany Department of the
University of Wisconsin, Madison. Dr. del Campillo will attempt to identify
Arabidopsis T-DNA insertional mutants with impaired expression in the selected
cellulase genes. Once cellulase mutants are obtained for both the up- and down-
regulated abscission cellulases, crosses will be attempted in order to obtain
stable double mutants, to determine if coordinated gene expression of both
cellulases is required for abscission. All abscission experiments will be
conducted in collaboration with Dr. Bleecker.