* 9629567
* Interaction of Convective Elements and Entrainment with     Mesoscale Cloud Bands in the Lake-Induced Convective        Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* George Young, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 03/31/2001
* USD 186,807.00

9629567 Young Much of the energy that drives atmospheric circulations is
obtained through exchanges of heat, moisture, and momentum with the surface.
Lake-effect events, where cold air masses are rapidly modified over the Great
Lakes, are excellent natural laboratories for studying these exchanges. The
Lake- Induced Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) is a multiple- Principal
Investigator project which seeks to use this natural laboratory to determine how
boundary layer growth processes are controlled by mesoscale boundary layer
convective structures and how the modified boundary layer effects the production
of precipitation and the larger scale meteorological conditions. Because of
strongly nonlinear multi-scale interactions, the study of lake-induced phenomena
requires a highly collaborative team effort taking advantage of the skills of
multiple investigators and the capabilities of a range of instruments and
platforms. Within the broader framework of Lake-ICE the research to be performed
under this award will focus on two scientific objectives: 1. To determine the
nature, causes, and consequences of the two-way interaction between individual
km-scale convective elements (i.e. three-dimensional thermal plumes) and the
two- dimensional mesoscale lake-effect cloud bands in which they are embedded.
2. To ascertain the degree to which these interactions lead to a mesoscale
modulation (i.e. cross-roll variation) in the rate at which air is entrained
across the temperature inversion that caps the lake-induced convective boundary
layer. ***