* 9629300
* RPG: The Isolation and Characterization of Recombination    Activating Genes (RAGs) from a Lower Chordate
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,10/30/1998
* Simona Bartl, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 10/30/1998
* USD 22,892.00

Bartl MCB-9629300 Recombination activating genes (RAG-1 and RAG-2) are essential
for gene rearrangement in mammals. Previously isolated PCR products from nurse
shark DNA that have sequence similarity to mammalian RAG-1 genes will be used to
screen a genomic library. Since mammalian, avian and amphibian RAG-1 and RAG-2
are tightly linked, the same may be true of the shark homologs. Genomic clones
containing shark RAG-1 will be assayed for linked RAG-2 homologs using PCR,
heterologous probes or by searching for an open-reading frame. Following the
proposed planning period, the shark RAG-1 and RAG-2 homologs will be used to
assay expression in lymphoid organs from nurse sharks of different ages using
Northern blots and in situ hybridization. Recombination activity of shark RAG
proteins will be assessed in mammalian fibroblasts using artificial substrates.
The immune system of higher vertebrates is a complex network of cells, organs
and tissues. The intricate workings and the evolution of such a tightly linked
system are not well understood. A basic process required for immune function is
the rearrangement of subgenic elements to form functional antigen receptors.
Elucidating the mechanism in organisms distantly related to mammals is crucial
for our understanding of the evolution of adaptive immunity. For the proposed
research plan, shark is selected because they are the taxon most distantly
related to mammals in which an adaptive immune system has been documented.