* 9629825
* Characterization of In-Situ Structure Development During    Processing of Semicrystalline Polymer Fibers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Jerold Schultz, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2000
* USD 682,075.00

9629825 Schultz This is a grant under the GOALI initiative in the Polymer
Program in the Division of Materials Research. The principal investigators, Dr.
Jerold Schultz (University of Delaware) and Dr. B. S. Hsiao (DuPont Central
Research and Development) are proposing to study the development of structure in
polymers in situ during processing. Primary to this study is the use of
synchrotron radiation to obtain small- and wide-angle x-ray scattering results
during spinning and post-spinning processes. The research will focus especially
on the earliest stages of structure formation, where the structure which
ultimately controls fiber behavior is initiated and in which the course of the
remainder of the transformation is set. The synchrotron work will be carried out
at NSLS and APS in this country and at DESY in Germany, using one- and two-
dimensional detectors, with processing apparatus which simulates industrial
practice operating at the beamline. %%% This study utilizes the GOALI initiative
to weld industrial and academic personnel and resources for long range fiber
research. The objective of this study is to obtain new knowledge towards
fundamental fiber manufacturing processes, using newly available and highly
appropriate synchrotron X-ray techniques. Such knowledge is lacking today, but
is crucial to future process and product improvement in the fiber industry.
Additionally, the project will provide a unique opportunity for graduate
students to apply state-of-the-art science to industrially relevant problems in
a joint university/industry setting. ***