* 9629546
* Collaborative Research:  Systematics and Evolutionary       Biology of the Drosophila Quinaria Group
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Greg Spicer, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 160,000.00

9629546 SPICER This award will support Dr. Greg Spicer's contribution to a
research project being done in collaboration with Dr. David Grimaldi. Grimaldi
will utilize morphological, ecological, and behavioral information for a group
of flies, the Drosophila quinaria species group (Insecta: Diptera:
Drosophilidae), to derive a phylogeny of relationships among the species. He
will also pursue a biogeographic analysis of the group which is largely
Holarctic in distribution but does include a single described species of unknown
affiliation from China that may represent the tip of an iceberg of undescribed
species from that region. Grimaldi's results will be integrated with those of
Spicer who will pursue a molecular phylogenetic analysis of these same species
based on mitochondrial (cytochrome oxidase) and nuclear (Adh) sequences. At
present, the group is of a manageable size, with 28 described species that show
interesting biological diversity in habitat and breeding sites. It is hoped that
the combined morphological and molecular evidence will result in a fully
resolved phylogeny that, in the future, can be used to address several
interesting evolutionary questions, including determinants of Drosophila host
range in parasitic nematodes and phylogenetic constraints on shifting to a new
ecological niche such as mushroom breeding with possible concomitant shifts in
tolerance of mushroom toxins. This award will contribute to our understanding of
an element of insect biodiversity and begin to provide information concerning
how species change habit and host associations through time.