* 9629787
* Collaborative Research: Mammalian Phylogeography in Regional Warm Deserts of North America
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Brett Riddle, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/2000
* USD 139,871.00

9629787 RIDDLE The recent appearance of extensive regions of aridlands in
southwestern North America has led many to assume that pattersn of relationships
among the plants and animals adapted to these regions are also recent. Yet many
of the species are ancient, having persisted in scattered dry sites for many
millions of years. In collaborative investigations, Brett R. Riddle and David J.
Hafner, together with their collaborators, will investigate the possibility of
ancient structure among the regional deserts and reconstruct the sequence of
divergence of these deserts. They will examine, by means of sequence divergences
in mitochondrial DNA, the genetic relationships among four groups of rodents.
These rodents are currently restricted to regional warm deserts and neighboring
chaparral or thornscrub habitats, and have fossil records that indicate their
presence in the study area during the early development of the regional deserts,
up to 5.5 million years ago. Relationships among these rodents will serve as
indicators of relationships among other animals and plants in the deserts. Dr.
RiddleOs portion of the collaboration will involve examination of the
mitochondrial DNA of the groups of rodents, which include white-footed and
pocket mice, antelope ground squirrels, and kangaroo rats. These animals will be
collected during field work in the Chihuahuan, Great Basin, San Joaquin,
Sonoran, and Peninsular deserts of the southwestern United States and northern
Mexico, as well as the neighboring California chaparral and Sinaloan thornscrub
regions, and six islands off Baja California. The island samples are expected to
provide estimates of the geographic distribution of the rodents on the Baja
California peninsular mainland ca. 5,000 years ago, when the islands were
separated from the peninsula. Gene sequences isolated from the mitochondrial
DNAs will be sequenced, and the sequences used to construct phylogenetic trees
that will test the degree of relationships among the animals. The re search is
expected to contribute to human understanding of how species, and the
distribution of species, change over time, and especially how such changes in
species may be influenced by changes in the topology and climate of the regions
in which the species live.