* 9629767
* Taxonomic Monographic Study of Podostemum (Podostemaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* C. Thomas Philbrick, Western Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 08/31/2000
* USD 179,982.00

9629767 Philbrick Among some of the poorest known groups of tropical plants are
the "riverweeds" of the New and Old World, some 19 or so genera of the family
Podostemaceae. Many of these flowering plants grow attached to rocks in swift-
flowing streams and rapids in tropical regions, and can be locally abundant.
They harbor invertebrates, larval fish, amphibians, algae, and aquatic mosses,
and are likely important in tropical river ecosystem function. With their
stereotyped, ribbon-leaf morphology and infrequent flowering and fruiting, they
provide few characters upon which to construct a reliable classification.
Problems with species identification thus hinder ecological research; analysis
of biogeography and migration pathways is hampered by lack of knowledge of
phylogeny. Dr. C. Thomas Philbrick of Western Connecticut State University with
colleague Dr. Donald Les of the University of Connecticut will be collecting and
studying riverweeds in Mexico and South America, with additional work in India
on Old World taxa. The goal is to collect new material for critical taxonomic
study of vegetative and reproductive features, and to supplement these with new
molecular information from DNA sequencing. Another component of the project is a
series of common-aquarium growth experiments, to factor environmental and
genetic effects on morphology. The inventory and documentation of tropical
biodiversity remain priorities among taxonomists and evolutionists. The peculiar
riverweeds of the angiosperm family Podostemaceae are the focus of modern
monographic and phylogenetic research by Dr. Philbrick and Dr. Les, in
collaboration with foreign colleagues in Mexico, South America, and India. An
improved classification of these plants, with reliable means of species
identification and a robust estimate of phylogenetic relationships, will advance
understanding of their ecological roles and evolutionary histories.