* 9629319
* Systematics of Lipotyphlan Insectivores, An Early Lineage of Placental Mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Marc Allard, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1999
* USD 116,000.00

9629319 ALLARD The insectivores in the order Lipotyphla (shrews, moles,
hedgehogs and their relatives) represent one of the largest orders of living
mammals. However, the genealogical (phylogenetic) relationships among these
insectivores, and between Lipotyphla and other groups of mammals, remain poorly
understood. Several different and competing explanations for how these animals
are related to each other have been suggested. Insectivores are among the first
mammals to appear in the fossil record, suggesting that the various lineages of
insectivores diverged early in the history of the group (and of mammals in
general). It is more difficult to reliably reconstruct the phylogenetic
relationships of ancient groups of organisms than of more recent ones. In this
study, Marc C. Allard will use a multidisciplinary approach to investigate the
problem of robustly reconstructing the phylogeny of Lipotyphla. Allard will
obtain sequence information from mitochondrial and nuclear genes found in
representatives of all families of insectivores. The sequences will be compared
with each other and with sequences from other mammalian groups, and will be used
to construct phylogenetic trees. The gene sequences will be analyzed
individually and in combination; also, data from published morphological and
anatomical information will be encoded, included in a single data matrix with
the gene sequence data, and used in phylogenetic reconstructions. The results
should provide fundamental information on the early history and present-day
relationships of mammals.