* 9629639
* Causes and Consequences of Seasonal Changes in the          Transparency of Lakes to Ultraviolet Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1996,10/31/2001
* Craig Williamson, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Dr. Carol Johnston
* 10/31/2001
* USD 719,617.00

Morris 9629639 The attenuation of ultraviolet radiation (UVR) within the water
column of aquatic ecosystems varies strongly as a function of dissolved organic
compounds that absorb ultraviolet wavelengths. This attenuation allows many
organisms that are quite sensitive to ultraviolet radiation to persist in the
plankton community though they may be inhibited in various ways near the
surface. Among lakes, there is great variability in attenuation of ultraviolet
radiation, which the investigators have successfully modeled as a simple
function of dissolved organic carbon concentration. This model does not
adequately explain large seasonal variations within lakes, however. The primary
objective of the proposed research is to partition wavelength-specific
attenuation coefficients into contributions from water, dissolved compounds, and
particulate matter; and then to model seasonal changes in attenuation from
changes in these components as driven by the dynamic interaction between
ultraviolet irradiance and in situ photooxidation of dissolved organic carbon
(i.e. to less absorptive compounds and to carbon dioxide)- The most significant
feature of this interaction is a positive feedback operating during late spring
and early summer, when increasing solar irradiance, decreasing attenuation
coefficients. and shallow thermal stratification cause high ultraviolet exposure
of organisms in the epilimnia of clear lakes. The work represents a novel
season-by-season integration of incident ultraviolet radiation into the organic
carbon cycling of lakes, including quantitative tests of: (1) photooxidation
rates as predictors of seasonal changes in ultraviolet attenuation, 2) algal
excretion and zooplankton grazing as UV-sensitive sources of UV-absorbing
dissolved organic matter, (3) UVR-catalyzed increase in availability of
dissolved organic carbon substrates for bacterial growth as a mitigation of
direct negative effects of UVR on bacteria, and 4) seasonal adaptations in the
phytoplankton community as mitiga tions to direct UVR photoinhibition of primary
productivity. Studies will be performed in small lakes on the Pocono Plateau of
northeastern Pennsylvania, where differences in hydrology and land use have
created a wide range of previously characterized limnological conditions. All
studies are focused on a highly UV-transparent lake where the potential for
direct biological effects is greatest. Most studies will contrast conditions in
this lake with those in a slightly humic lake, where UVR photooxidation rates --
though high in absolute units -- leave enough residual UVR attenuation in
midsummer to preclude most direct negative effects of ultraviolet radiation.
Sampling for attenuation coefficients and dissolved and particulate matter will
be 1-2 times per month throughout 2 full years in three lakes, adding a third
slightly humic, eutrophic lake with seasonally high algal populations. Less
frequent measurements of photooxidation, primary productivity, and UVR effects
on bacteria and algal excretion will utilize quartz bottles exposed to natural
solar radiation at the lake surface or at depth. Ultraviolet radiation will be
measured continuously above, and periodically within, the lakes with multi-
waveband radiometers in order to reconstruct spectral irradiance. Results from
the study will contribute new and fundamental insights into the role of
ultraviolet radiation as an ecological regulatory factor that were not
attainable until the recent commercial availability of these instruments .