* 9629287
* RUI:  Experimental Investigation of Ecological and Genetic  Correlates of Parthenogenetic and Reproduction in a Fresh   Water Snail
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Steven Johnson, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 108,130.00

9629287 Johnson One of the outstanding problems in biology today is why sexual
reproduction is so common in many organisms when there appear to be considerable
costs to sexual reproduction relative to alternatives like parthenogenetic
reproduction (individuals develop from unfertilized eggs). Of the many
hypotheses developed to explain the widespread maintenance of sexual
reproduction in many organisms, the parasite theory appears to be the most
plausible and testable. According to the parasite theory, sexual reproduction is
favored over parthenogenetic reproduction in hosts under high risk of parasitism
because sexual offspring may be less susceptible to infection by parasites.
Parthenogenesis should be favored when there is minimal risk of parasitism.
Parthenogens may, however, suffer high levels of parasitism if parasites
recolonize parthenogenetic populations with limited genetic variation. Field and
laboratory experiments will be undertaken to distinguish among the causes of
higher levels of parasitic flatworms in parthenogenetic population of the North
American freshwater snail, Campeloma decisum. Parthenogenesis may be favored due
to sperm limitation caused by a trematode worm or, alternatively, parthenogens
may have had an advantage colonizing lakes and rivers after glaciers receded.
High parasitism results from lack of genetic variation in asexual populations.
Field and laboratory experiments will test the prediction from the parasite
theory that sexual individuals should experience lower levels of infection and
greater variation in infection relative to parthenogenetic individuals. The
research outlined above should provide important insights into how epidemic
diseases spread in organisms with limited amounts of genetic variation. Two
important groups of organisms that may have limited genetic variation are inbred
lines of agricultural crops and small populations of endangered plants and
animals.