* 9629735
* CAA:Impact of Heavy Metals On DNA Damage and Survival In Two Grasshopper Species
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* MaryCarol Rossiter, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1997
* USD 57,000.00

9629735 Rossiter Impact of Heavy Metals on DNA Damage and Survival in Two
Grasshopper Species Pollution, particularly heavy metal contamination of soil
and waterways, often causes species to become locally extinct. To assess the
impact of toxin pollution in a community or an ecosystem, we usually measure
which species are present and which are absent. While this approach offers a
good method for the expedient delivery of information for safety recommendations
concerning human and ecosystem health, we are still in the dark about why some
species go locally extinct and others are able to withstand toxin stress. In
other words, we know nothing about the changes in population quality which
precede local extinction or adaptation as a result of toxin stress. The goal of
this work is to learn new techniques to examine this issue. Using grasshoppers
as a model system, Dr. Rossiter will subject insects to a range of lead doses at
several points in their lives. Their response will be measured in terms of
behavior, development, and DNA integrity. This will provide baseline data for
interpreting the impact of toxins on population quality and suggest which traits
might be used to determine the health of "indicator species", those species
whose presence or absence gives information on the health of the local
community.