* 9629981
* Dissertation Research:  The Reconstruction and              Revitalization of Tahitian Healing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Carolyn Sargent, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/1998
* USD 11,463.00

This award supports the dissertation research of a cultural anthropologist from
Southern Methodist University, studying how people in the developing world
select medical treatments. Most developing societies afford two ranges of
choices for health services, traditional healing and biomedical treatment. The
project will observe and interview people in two Tahitian locations, Papeete (an
urban center) and a rural village. Using ethnographic techniques of participant
observation and intensive interviews, as well as a census-sample of 100
households in each area, and a `morbidity survey` of 30 households in each
location who will be visited every 3 weeks to record cases of illness and
treatment, the project will make a `cultural model` of how people select medical
treatments for various illnesses; describe the Tahitian traditional healing
system as it is evolving to incorporate modern biomedicine. The student will
test hypotheses that neither socioeconomic status nor urban-rural location
govern medical treatment choice, but that religiosity and nationalist cultural
feelings will predispose people towards traditional medicine. This research is
important because it will advance our understanding of a system of traditional
medical treatment and explain its persistence and adaptation in the face of the
alternative biomedical system. Such tension between alternative medical systems
is a fact of life in most countries of the world, and increases in our
understanding of how and why people choose each for specific illness episodes
will be valuable for health planners. In addition this research increases or
society's expertise about this important region of the world.