* 9629972
* Chiral Probes of Polymer Conformation
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Mark Green, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Chadwick A. Tolman
* 05/31/2000
* USD 509,162.00

With funding from the Organic Dynamics Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Mark M. Green and co-investigators S. Matsuoka, H. Morawetz, and B.
Garetz, all of Polytechnic University, will study chiral probes of polymer
conformation. Chiral polymers containing chiral monomer groups exhibit optical
activity properties which are identical whether formed from monomers which are
enantiomerically pure or formed from a mixture of the enantiomers in which the
enantiomeric excess is only slight. The result is understood as a cooperative
effect in which the preferred conformations of the polymer are driven by local
conformational effects. This project will extend the concept, so far proved only
for linear (polyisocyanate) polymers in solution, to liquid crystalline
polymers, dendrimers, and polymeric amorphous solids. It also will apply the
concepts developed to study fundamental questions of secondary and tertiary
structure in synthetic polymers, as well as to understand solvent sorting
(called local composition effects industrially). Systematic and predictable
variation of the properties of materials offers a prime strategy for
optimization of their behavior. This work will explore a new approach to
studying and controlling properties of polymeric materials. The materials to be
studied provide an opportunity for amplification of small optical effects and,
for example, for use of the materials as optical switches based on circularly
polarized light.