* 9629740
* CAA:  Synthetic Signal Peptides:  Probes of Molecular       Interactions During Secretion
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Debra Kendall, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1998
* USD 42,778.00

9629740 Kendall This is a Career Advancement Award for Women Scientists and
Engineers. This project concerns how proteins are targeted to and transported
across cell membranes. In most cases, whether the membrane in question is the
bacterial membrane, the eukaryotic endoplasmic reticulum, or the mitochondrial
or chloroplast membrane, a unifying feature of such protein transport systems is
the involvement of an amino-terminus signal peptide on the protein to be
transported. In the case of transport across the eukaryotic endoplasmic
reticulum, the signal peptide interacts with a signal recognition particle (SRP)
prior to the initiation of transport. The proposed studies are aimed at
elucidating the interaction between the signal peptide of a bacterial secreted
protein and P48 (also called Ffh), the Escherischia coli homologue of the 54 kD
protein of the mammalian signal recognition particle (SRP). Like its mammalian
counterpart, there is growing evidence that P48 plays a vital role in the
initial stages of protein secretion through recognition of the signal peptide
region of export-competent proteins. This interaction will be investigated using
a series of model synthetic signal peptides which vary systematically in their
degree of hydrophobicity and which represent different levels of secretion
competence in vivo. These peptides will be chemically synthesized, purified, and
characterized to verify their physical properties, including secondary
structure. A binding assay will be developed based on displacement of a
radiolabeled peptide. A Scatchard analysis will be used to determine the
dissociation constant for the signal peptide-P48 pair under different
conditions, including the association of 4.5S RNA and the present of various
forms of guanine nucleotides. Subsequently,, a chemical crosslinking approach
will be used to map the location on P48 involved in the signal peptide
interaction. These studies will help in our understanding of early events in
protein secretion in E. coli and in the several other systems which have been
found to have an SRP homologue. ***