* 9629776
* Density-Dependent Host Acceptance Behavior as a Possible    Contributing Factor to the Population Dynamics of Insect    Herbivores
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Kenneth Raffa, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Michener
* 12/31/1999
* USD 210,000.00

9629776 Raffa Host plants can strongly affect insect population dynamics.
Eruptive species undergo order-of-magnitude changes, exhibit qualitatively
different phases, and impact sustainable resource management. This project will
investigate interactions between population density and host acceptance behavior
as a contributing factor to insect outbreaks. Specifically, population density
and behavior may exert mutually positive feedback. This hypothesis will be
tested using bark beetles, which are major mortality agents to conifers. Local
populations are usually limited to stressed trees, but under some conditions,
they can kill almost all host trees regardless of prior vigor. Underlying
mechanisms by which bark beetles convert from endemic to outbreak densities are
not well understood. Several aspects of their plant relations suggest a link
between density-mediated host selection behavior and numerical change: 1)
Beetles locate stressed trees using chemical and other cues; 2) Once entered,
their likelihood of success is affected by both host resistance and the number
of beetles responding to pheromones: Rapid concentration can collectively
deplete host defense; 3) Field observations suggest different categories of
trees may be selected during endemic and eruptive phases. To test whether
changes in host selection behavior influence population dynamics, one must first
understand whether individual behavior changes with density. This project will
test three nonexclusive hypotheses: 1) Individuals become less discriminating as
they age or deplete energy; 2) Actions of other beetles, e.g. pheromones, raise
repellent thresholds; 3) Selective pressures vary with population density. These
questions will be addressed using one eruptive and one non-eruptive species, the
spruce beetle and pine engraver, respectively. A common laboratory assay will
evaluate the effects of age, repeated rejection, flight and lipid depletion,
synthetic pheromones and the presence of other beetles, and popu lation phase
and response to selection. Bark beetles are responsible for severe economic
damage to various conifer species. Understanding sources of variability in bark
beetle host acceptance behavior will improve the ability to manage sustainable
forest ecosystems.