* 9629742
* Research Planning Grant: Phloem Water Relations: Direct     Measurements of Sieve-Tube Turgor Pressures
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Noel Holbrook, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 12/31/1998
* USD 17,967.00

The water status of the xylem and phloem are closely coupled, yet the driving
force, tissue structure, and generally the direction of transport are
diametrically opposed. In contrast to the numerous studies on how xylem
structure influences patterns of water transport, the water relations of sieve
tubes and their effect on assimilate transport have received little attention.
Lack of a technique to monitor sieve-tube turgor pressures means that some of
the most basic questions regarding phloem transport remain unanswered. In
particular, estimates of the magnitude of turgor gradients and how sieve-tube
turgor responds to changes in xylem water potential are largely unknown. This
project lays the groundwork for a long-term effort in phloem water relations and
phloem:xylem interactions. Dr. Holbrook will develop techniques for in-situ
monitoring of sieve tube-turgor pressure through combining aphid stylets and
cell-pressure probe, and will explore spatial and temporal variation in sieve-
tube turgor pressure in response to changes in plant water balance. With this
Research Planning Grant, she will visit other labs to learn component skills and
will perform preliminary experiments in her own lab. Development of an in-situ
method for monitoring sieve-tube turgor pressure in intact plants will greatly
enhance understanding of phloem water relations. In particular, it would enable
researchers to examine interactions of xylem tension and phloem physiology and
to explore experimentally how the capacity for water transport through the xylem
is balanced with the requirement of generating sufficient turgor pressures for
long-distance movement through the phloem.