* 9629789
* MPRF: Effects of Ethnicity on Information Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Paul White, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/28/1998
* USD 21,118.00

9629789 White Social psychological research on persuasive communications
generally shows that message quality determines persuasive impact when the
message recipient is both motivated and able to process message content. In the
absence of either motivation or ability, persuasion is often determined by
extra-message factors such as source expertise or source attractiveness, but not
typically by message quality. Recent research has shown that White college
students who ordinarily would not be motivated to scrutinize a persuasive
message nevertheless engage in deeper processing of message content if the
source is described as a Black or Hispanic person, or if the message is about
members of those ethnic groups. These effects suggest that source or target
factors can moderate the likelihood of message elaboration. It is hypothesized
that the observed increase in scrutiny of such messages occurs because most
people hold ambivalent attitudes toward members of certain ethnic groups other
than their own. The proposed research investigateq these effects, focusing on
the underlying cognitive processes that produce them and on variables that
moderate the effect. A reaction-time procedure, similar to that used in research
on stereotyping, will be developed to better understand how people respond to
questions about their attitudes and to measure the amount of time people spend
reading specific parts of a persuasive communication. %%% Research in social
psychology has shown that characteristics of the source of a persuasive
communication (such as a person's attractiveness) can influence the persuasive
impact, independently of message quality. This is most likely to occur when the
recipient of a persuasive communication is either not able or not motivated to
scrutinize message content. Recent research has shown that White college
students who ordinarily would not be motivated to scrutinize a persuasive
message nevertheless do engag e in deeper consideration if the source of the
message is described as Black or Hispanic, or if the message is about members of
those ethnic groups. It is hypothesized that the observed increase in students'
scrutiny of such messages occurs because of ambivalent attitudes held toward
members of certain ethnic groups. The proposed research investigates these
effects, focusing on the underlying cognitive processes that produce them and on
variables that increase or decrease the effect. A reaction-time procedure,
similar to that used in research on stereotyping, will be developed to better
understand how people respond to questions about their attitudes and to measure
the amount of time people spend reading specific parts of a persuasive
communication. The research has the potential to shed new light on how different
ethnic groups respond to each other, ultimately contributing to theory and
research on intergroup relations. ***