* 9629086
* Development and Selection in the Correlated Evolution of    Breeding System, Life History, and Physiology in            Clarkia xantiana
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1996,10/31/2001
* Monica Geber, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 10/31/2001
* USD 378,856.00

9629086 Geber A very common evolutionary occurrence in flowering plants is the
evolution of a self-pollinating breeding system from an outcrossing breeding
system. Unlike its outcrossing ancestor, the self-pollinating species,
subspecies or variety does not depend on pollinator visitation for successful
seed set. This project addresses two questions. First, what changes in the
development of structures (such as flowers and leaves) and of whole plants have
been responsible for the differences in morphology and flowering time between a
selfing taxon and its related outcrossing ancestor? In particular, is small
flower size and early flowering in the selfing taxon achieved by means of an
accelerated rate development or a shorter duration of development. The second
question is whether early maturation of structures and whole plants is adaptive
in the marginal environments occupied by the selfing taxon. Early maturation is
postulated to be advantageous because environmental stress is often associated
with a shorter growing season. The proposed study focuses on a comparison of the
outcrossing and self-pollinating subspecies of Clarkia xantiana (Onagraceae), a
winter annual in which the selfing subspecies occurs in arid environments at the
margin of the outcrosser's range. Floral and vegetative plant development in the
two subspecies will be examined. Natural selection on developmental and
morphological characters in experimental gardens will be measured along a
rainfall gradient that spans a portion of the geographic range of the two
subspecies. Physiological differences between the subspecies and selection on
physiology will also be examined, because physiology is an important determinant
of plant growth under stress. The significance of the project is that it
addresses a little-studied aspect of a major evolutionary transition in plants,
including the origin of new species. In addition, by analyzing the roles of
development and selection in the evolution of suites of characters, the project
addresses a fundamental issue in evolutionary biology: why do traits evolve
together? Lastly, the project also addresses the nature of evolution in
stressful environments, a topic that has acquired particular significance as
habitats are facing the impacts of anthropogenic stresses and climate change.