* 9629440
* CAA: RNA Virus Molecular Evolution: Fitness, Competition, and Recombination
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Marilyn Smith, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/1999
* USD 54,979.00

9629440 Smith Virus Molecular Evolution: Fitness, Competition, and Recombination
In a natural infection of an animal by an RNA virus, the virus consists of a
'swarm' of virus with a distribution of related, but not identical genetic
material. A major cause of diversity in these viruses is that the mechanism for
copying their genetic material is prone to copying errors. In the special case
of retroviruses, which contain two copies of their genetic material, a high rate
of recombination during the copying of the RNA genome into DNA allows it to have
some advantages proposed to be important for sexually reproducing organisms:
removing damage to the genetic material; increasing the rate of incorporation of
new mutation into the population; and increasing variability by allowing new
combinations of mutations. The goal of this proposal is to measure precisely
several aspects of virus growth; to use these results to predict the ability of
mutants to compete with each other in the presence or absence of a novel
environment (specific chemical selection); and to examine recombination between
viral genomes at these mutation sites. A member of this group, HIV-1, possesses
unique qualifications as a model system to study the molecular evolution of a
RNA virus: it is available as a clone for which the entire nucleotide sequence
has been determined, and chemically-resistant mutants are known for which the
exact mutation has been identified. This allows the mutant and its isogenic
wild-type strain, with exactly the same sequence except for the mutation in
question, to be compared. Likewise, competition of completely isogenic strains
in the presence or absence of specific selection can be carried out. The rate of
evolution of this virus in nature is approximately 100,000 to one million time
higher than that estimated for genes of higher organisms. In addition, the half-
life of this virus in nature is on the order of 2 days, such that large numbers
of generations may be studied in a rela tively short time. This model system
therefore provides a unique opportunity to study questions in population biology
that heretofore have been modeled theoretically, or in which sufficient data are
difficult to obtain due to long generation times.