* 9629816
* Does Bacterial Community Structure Covary with Functional   Response of Gradients of Dissolved Organic Carbon
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Robert Sinsabaugh, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 02/28/1999
* USD 100,000.00

The sediments below and adjacent to the stream channel are collectively called
the hyporheic zone (hypo - beneath and rheos - flow, therefore, below the flow).
The microbial communities in these sediments rely on the supply of materials
from surface water entering the hyporheic zone. This research project will
examine how these microbes respond to variations in the supply of dissolved
organic carbon entering this zone. The principal investigators will vary carbon
supply in an experimental mesocosm facility to determine whether the bacteria in
this zone simply change their growth rates or whether a new set of bacteria
become predominant as the carbon supply changes. By extracting bacterial DNA
from samples collected from different hyporheic sediments they will determine
the similarity among hyporheic bacterial communities. The investigators will
perfect techniques to extract DNA from hyporheic sediments and conduct DNA-DNA
hybridization assays. Stream ecologists have recognized that the sediments
beneath the visible stream channel are an important habitat for a wide range of
aquatic organisms. Many of the chemical changes that occur in stream water can
be attributed to the action of microbes inhabiting the subsurface sediments
adjoining streams. Human activity tends to increase dissolved organic carbon in
streams, and understanding the response of microbial communities to chemical
changes in streams will enhance management of stream water quality and stream
community function.