* 9630577
* Investigations of PAH-Mineral Surface Interactions Using    Luminescence and NMR Spectroscopies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1996,11/03/1999
* Mark Schlautman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 11/03/1999
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9630577 Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are some of the
most widespread of environmental pollutants. Understanding PAH sorption
processes in aqueous environmental is important because sorption reactions can
greatly affect their mobility, chemical reactivity, bioavailability and
toxicity, as well as our ability to remediate PAH-contaminated sites. The
proposed project is a multidisciplinary effort that will use fluorescence and
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopies to probe PAH-mineral surface
sorption reactions at a molecular level. Steady-state and time-resolved
measurements of adsorbed PAH fluorescence intensity, fine structure, anisotropy
and excimer/exciplex formation in addition to NMR rotational line-broadening
will provide information on the strength of interaction and distances of
approach between PAH molecules and mineral surfaces. The specific objectives are
to: (1) develop fluorescence and NMR techniques for studying the various PAH-
inorganic surface reaction particular to aqueous environmental systems, (2)
compare and contrast the information obtained from the two types of spectroscopy
for simple model systems of various organic solvents and aqueous solutions of
varying viscosity, (3) monitor adsorbed PAH spectroscopic PAH spectroscopic
properties for different minerals, (4) monitor the spectroscopic properties of
adsorbed PAHs with varying solution chemistry conditions, and monitor adsorbed
PAH spectroscopic properties for different surface loadings. Results from the
proposed research project will enhance efforts to model the fate and transport
of PAH in low carbon environments. The results will also help the design of
heterogeneous photolytic systems for the destruction of PAHs. In addition to
addressing the fundamental questions of PAH-mineral surface interactions, this
project will also motivate for the development of new fluorescence and NMR
techniques.