* 9630350
* Anthropological Field Research on the Giant Lemurs and      Associated Fauna of Madagascar
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Elwyn Simons, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/2001
* USD 315,281.00

Recent years have seen an explosion of interest among scientists attempting to
understand the long term effects of interaction between humans and plant and
animal species which have only recently become extinct in Madagascar. This
involves documenting environmental change there through time. Such change is
also reflected by variations in primate community structure in different times
and places on that island. As humans and the fauna and flora of this island
increasingly come into conflict, scholarship relating to the causes of
extinction, the proper husbanding of biological resources, and insights about
the protection of endangered life forms have gained prominence. Research on
extinction processes comes from analyzing the past. Specifically, advances in
knowledge of the human-animal/plant interaction can come about by gathering new
dates for times of occurence of various animals in the past by finding new and
more informative skeletal parts of these vanished animals, especially giant
lemurs. This research elucidates their lifestyles and potentially will provide
better dated evidence of contemporaneity between humans and giant lemurs. These
findings document human predation on the vanished lemurs. Much light should be
shed on the timing and causes of giant lemur extinction. Through this award, the
team of researchers expects to extend previous collections and produce new
publications. The timing of primate extinctions in Madagascar will be further
documented by radiocarbon dates for plant and animal fossils from particular
sites. A controversy exists as to the primary cause for giant lemur extinction
in Madagascar: whether by disease, environmental change, or human hands. The
project proposes to discover new dates that should establish the temporal length
of the wave of extinctions in Madagascar and better document environmental
change. The giant extinct lemurs of Madagascar include most of the kinds of
really bizarre relatives of humans ever to have existed on earth. Better
anatomical knowledge of these animals will contribute significantly to
understanding the extremes of potential adaptive range within our own Order of
mammals. Many of these fossils are found in extremely remote parts of Madagascar
in nearly inaccessible caves causing the project to make heavy demands on field
equipment and to make use of trained caving experts. The project is a
continuation of a long time research cooperation between the Cenozoic Research
Group of the University of Antananarivo and the Duke University Primate Center.