* 9630058
* Extent and Effects of Error Propagation and Recovery        Mechanisms in Cache Memory Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Arun Somani, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1999
* USD 186,615.00

Commercial microprocessor systems are being operated at higher and higher clock
rates. Faster clocks impact the time that is available to fetch data from cache
memory, and increases the probability of transient error occurrence in cache
memory systems. Besides data reading error, an error may also occur in the
processor subsystem, and it may write erroneous data into the cache memory.
Error-correcting codes allow detection and recovery from some of these errors
within the code word limits. Fast error detection allows damage containment and
reduces the recovery time, which otherwise could be very expensive in time. The
goals of this project are: (1) to study the extent of error propagation due to
transient faults in computer system when a fault originates either in a
processor register or a cache location; and (2) to develop techniques and
hardware support needed for early detection and recovery from such errors in
computation tasks with low overhead and low performance loss. The proposed
techniques will cover a broad spectrum from only detection to full error
recovery. This research will identify architectural features which, when
provided in commercial microprocessors, will make them suitable for use in
fault-tolerant applications. The intent is to keep the performance impact in the
normal operation to a minimal.