* 9630867
* Peptide and Monoamine Modulation of Olivo-Cerbellar Circuits
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Georgia Bishop, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Sonya K. Sobrian
* 07/31/2000
* USD 255,615.00

9630867 Bishop The cerebellum is a part of the brain that controls and
coordinates movement. Along with the cerebellum, there are several brainstem
centers which receive information regarding the status of a movement. The
information is initially processed in these centers and then relayed to the
cerebellum where it is used in circuitry that ultimately fine tunes motor
control. One of these brainstem centers that provides information to the
cerebellum is a nuclear group called the inferior olivary complex. Any changes
in the message sent out by the olivary complex will have a direct impact on
cerebellar circuits which control movement. The intent of this study is to use
anatomical and physiological techniques to better understand how two distinct
classes of neuroactive chemicals, namely neuropeptides and monoamines, modulate
the activity of neurons in the inferior olive. The anatomical studies will
define the distribution of the peptide calcitonin gene related peptide, and the
monoamine serotonin, both of which are known to be present and active in
cerebellar circuits. In addition, we will use techniques to determine the
brainstem source of these two neuroactive chemicals. The physiological studies
are designed to determine how this neuropeptide and monoamine change the
responsiveness of neurons in the olivary complex. In addition, we will analyze
how these two distinct classes of neuroactive chemicals interact with each other
to modify the way in which olivary neurons respond to inputs derived from other
regions of the brain and spinal cord. An understanding of how olivary output is
modulated by chemically defined inputs is critical for our understanding of how
the olivocerebellar system functions in coordinating motor activity.