* 9630227
* Chicken CR1 Elements:  Prototypes of a Novel and Ancient    Superfamily of Vertebrates Non-LTR Retrotransposons
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* John Burch, Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/2000
* USD 284,000.00

Burch MCB-96-3022 Eukaryotic genomes contain interspersed repetitive sequence
elements that derive from the reverse flow of genetic information. These
retrotransposons can be of two classes based upon whether they contain or lack
long terminal repeat (LTR) sequences similar to those found in retroviruses. The
chicken repeat 1 (CR1) elements are non-LTR retrotransposons and encodes its own
reverse transcriptase. Sequence homology to elements found in fish, frogs,
reptiles and, perhaps, mammals suggest that these elements are the prototype for
a superfamily of non-LTR retrotransposons that exist in multiple vertebrate
classes. Full-length elements for two distinct subfamilies of CR1 elements will
be isolated and characterized. It will be determined if the CR1 reverse
transcriptase is functional and avian and non-avian cell cultures will be
assayed for CR1 retrotransposition events. %%% Retrotransposons are a major
source of mutations in lower eukaryotes such as yeast and Drosophila and are
implicated in several human genetic disorders. They also contribute to genome
instability in other ways, for example, as targets for non-reciprocal homologous
recombination events. This work will contribute to insight into the mechanisms
and sequences required for the transposition of an evolutionary successful non-
LTR element, CR1.