* 9630952
* Analysis of mes-1, a C. elegans Gene Involved in            Asymmetric Embryonic Divisions
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Susan Strome, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/2000
* USD 241,832.00

Strome 9630952 Asymmetric cell divisions generate daughter cells with different
developmental fates. This proposal investigates how maternally-supplied factors
control asymmetric divisions in the early C. elegans embryo. The maternal-effect
gene, mes- 1, plays a crucial role in promoting the unequal divisions that
generate somatic founder cells and the germ lineage. The progeny of mes-1
mothers are sterile, due to a transformation of the primordial germ cell, P4,
into a muscle precursor, like its somatic sister cell, D. The underlying cause
of this cell fate transformation is loss of spindle asymmetry and defective
cytoplasmic partitioning in the cells that generate P4 and D. Dr. Strome's
studies of the mutant phenotype have suggested several models for how MES-1
participates in promoting unequal divisions and unequal partitioning in
embryonic cells. MES-1 contains a putative transmembrane domain and shows
sequence similarity to receptor protein-tyrosine kinases, which suggests a
mechanism for the various models proposed. A second C. elegans gene, whose
mutant phenotype is unknown, shows striking sequence similarity to mes-l. This
proposal is to test where and how MES-1 functions in the early embryo, to
determine whether the MES-1-related protein participates with MES-1 in
controlling unequal divisions in the embryo, and to identify other proteins that
interact with MES-1 and which may be ligands or target molecules for MES-1. Aim
1: Molecular analysis and localization of the MES-1 protein. Aim 2: Molecular
and phenotype analysis of the mes-1-like gene, msl-1. Aim 3: Identification of
other proteins that function with MES-1 In controlling unequal divisions.