* 9630788
* Assembly of Coplex III of the Yeast Respiratory Chain
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Mary Crivellone, SUNY, Upstate Medical University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 09/30/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9630788 Crivellone The aim of the proposed research is to define the mechanism
of action of two enzyme-specific chaperones during the assembly of a
multisubunit enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, ubiquinol-cytochrome
c reductase (complex III). A testable model for the role of the two enzyme-
specific chaperones, CBP3 and CBP4 proteins, in the assembly of the yeast enzyme
has been outlined in the proposal. Preliminary studies show that the CBP4
protein physically interacts with one of the enzyme subunits (core 5) and that
the two assembly proteins interact. The model suggests that the CBP3 protein may
interact with one (or more) subunits of complex III. Subsequent interaction
between the two assembly proteins would bring together two (or more) subunits of
the enzyme, forming an assembly nucleus. This protein nucleus would be
recognized by other enzyme subunits, and promote continued assembly of the
complex. The model will be tested using a collection of cbp3 and cbp4 mutants
available in the laboratory. Specific questions to be asked include whether the
association between the CBP3 and CBP4 chaperones is a requirement for complex
III assembly, which enzyme subunits are essential for this interaction, and
whether the CBP3 and CBP4 proteins play a role in stabilizing assembled enzyme
in vivo. Interactions between the CBP3 protein and complex III subunits will be
determined. A possible role of the assembly proteins in insertion of the heme
group into the cytochrome b subunit during the assembly process will be
examined. The results of the proposed studies wiIl provide valuable insight into
the assembly of complex III and into chaperone-assisted assembly of multisubunit
complexes in general. %%% Assembly of protein complexes is a fundamental yet
essential process for cell survival. Relatively little is known is known about
the assembly processes, although in many cases it has been firmly established
that chaperone proteins are essential components. The proposed research will be
invaluable towards defining the mechanism of action of two chaperones which are
specific for the assembly of an enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain.
The enzyme, ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase (or complex III), is an essential
part of a biochemical pathway which is responsible for the synthesis of the
majority of the energy utilized by the cell. Complex III is an ideal enzyme for
assembly studies since it is remarkably well conserved in fungi, plants and
animals. Information gained on the mechanism of assembly of complex III in a
lower, more easily manipulated organism, such as fungi, will likely be
applicable to similar studies in higher organisms. Moreover, since complex III
is a multisubunit enzyme whose subunits originate in two separate compartments
of the cell, information acquired through our investigations on the mechanism of
assembly of this enzyme will be important towards better understanding
intracellular communication. *** ??