* 9630179
* Genetic Regulation of Developmental Fate
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Susan Brown, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1999
* USD 487,091.00

9630179 Denell Studies of Drosophila melanogaster have shown that embryonic
developmental commitments along most of the anterior-posterior axis are
controlled by homeotic genes in two clusters: the Antennapedia complex (ANTC)
and bithorax complex. The homeotic genes encode transcription factors and share
a motif, the homeobox which encodes homeodomains important to the sequence-
specific DNA binding activity of their proteins. Early studies of the homeotic
genes of the red flour beetle, Tribolium castaneum, showed that it has a single
homeotic complex (Hox)representing the fly clusters in juxtaposition.
Comparative molecular studies suggest that such a single Hox complex arose very
early in animal evolution, and that the genes in such complexes play important
roles in regulating developmental commitments throughout the kingdom. This study
is focused on the ANTC-like portion of the Tribolium homeotic complex.
Differences in mutant phenotypes between Antennapedia orthologs of Drosophila
and Tribolium suggest that the regulation of thoracic developmental decisions is
altered as well as those regulating commitments in the larval head. A deficiency
spanning the region covering the labial, deformed and sex combs reduced ortholog
will serve as the basis for extensive mutagenesis in this region. The molecular
organization and sequence of those orthologs will be determined as will the
molecular nature of a group of interesting gain-of-function mutations of the
proboscipedia ortholog. The cloned regions will also be used as the basis for a
walk across this portion of the complex and the generation of a physical map. A
critical assessment of whether the Tribolium complex includes an ortholog of the
Drosophila maternal effect gene bicoid will also be possible. %%% In general,
insects share a common body plan but its components have evolved incredible
morphological diversity. Drosophila melanogaster is a experimental organism
about which much is known on the moleculap and genetic level. The development o
f Tribolium as a second insect genetic system has been a major effort but
because beetles and flies share a common body plan but are diverged from each
other to a degree that allows reasonable morphological and molecular
comparisons, the results of this study will significantly add to our
understanding of how evolution occurs at the molecular level. ***