* 9630236
* Responses of Terrestrial Invertebrates to Variation in      Thermal and Hydric Environment: Molecular, Organismal, and  Evolutionary Approaches (Albuquerque, NM, Dec. 27-30, 1996)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Jon Harrison, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 08/31/1997
* USD 5,985.00

9630236 Harrison Throughout terrestrial habitats, variations in temperature and
water availability are the dominant environmental parameters which determine
species distributions. The physiological effects of thermal and water
variability are interactive, because temperature strongly affects water loss,
and evaporative water loss is often a critical mechanism for preventing
overheating. Terrestrial invertebrates provide particularly valuable models for
the study of the biological effects of thermal and hydric variability, due to
their ecological importance, species diversity, ease of rearing, and short
generation times. However, use of terrestrial invertebrates as model organisms
for evolutionary and environmental studies ultimately depends on a solid
understanding of their molecular, cellular and organismal physiology.
Traditionally our understanding of many aspects of the cellular and organismal
physiology of invertebrates has lagged well behind our knowledge of vertebrates,
partly due to the focus of research on biomedicine, and partly due to technical
limitations imposed by small body sizes. Recent advances in molecular biology,
computer, and micro-analytical technologies have overcome many of these
technical limitations to the study of invertebrates. We are now entering an era
where rapid advances in our understanding of the genetics, cell biology, and
physiology of terrestrial invertebrates are occurring. These advances are
providing information of basic importance to agriculture, ecology, and
evolutionary biology. This symposium will be held at the Society for Integrative
and Comparative Biology 1996 meeting, December 27-30, in Albuquerque, New
Mexico. This symposium will bring together 16 scientists from a diversity of
fields ranging from molecular biology/biochemistry, organismal physiology, and
evolutionary genetics who are addressing issues related to the temperature and
water relations of terrestrial invertebrates. This symposium will promote
communication and collaboration among these disciplines, with the goal of
providing a more integrated understanding of this fundamental area of
environmental physiology. Proceedings will be published in American Zoologist.