* 9630656
* Analysis of a MAP kinase in Yeast that is Required for Spore Development
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1996,10/31/2000
* Edward Winter, Thomas Jefferson University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/2000
* USD 308,000.00

Winter 9630656 A large amount of signal transduction in eukaryotic cells depends
on conserved kinase cascades that activate a family of enzymes called mitogen
activated protein (MAP) kinases. MAP kinases are required for adaptive responses
to changes in the environment, proliferative responses to mitogens, and
differentiative responses to signals that occur during development. SMKI,
encodes a developmentally regulated MAP kinase that is required for sporulation
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Sporulation in yeast represents an excellent model
system with which to study developmental processes. Similar to differentiation
programs in higher eukaryotic cells, induction is controlled by a combination of
cell-type and environmental signals. Once initiated, a precisely controlled,
transient expression pattern is observed for sporulation-specific genes that
ultimately leads to a cell (or spore) that is both genetically and biochemically
distinct from its precursor. Molecular and cytological analysis show that the
early sporulation program (including meiosis I and II) occurs normally in
homozygous smk1 diploids. However, both microscopic and functional assays show
that smk1 asci are defective for executing spore wall morphogenesis and
subsequent developmental events. A collection of conditional and partial-
function smk1 alleles have already been isolated that display a variety of
distinct developmental defects. We will characterize the developmental and
morphogenetic defects of different smk1 alleles. The biochemical defects of the
corresponding mutant Smk1 pathway using dosage suppression approaches in
selected smk1 genetic backgrounds. The high degree of evolutionary conservation
in MAP kinase signaling pathways make it likely that this study will provide
fundamental insights into the role of these signaling pathways in coordinating
developmental processes in a wide variety of organisms.