* 9630047
* (ESH) Collaborative Research: Relationships Between Global  Climate Change and Lake Bonneville Fluctuations: Analysis   of Sediment Cores from the Great Salt Lake, Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Charles Oviatt, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1998
* USD 27,768.00

9630047 Oviatt An important aspect of global climate change studies, that is
lagging behind studies of marine environments, is the study of climate change in
continental interiors. Such studies are clearly necessary in order to understand
the effects of changes in atmospheric dynamics on the climate system. Large
inland lakes provide an excellent source for such studies because they
sensitively record significant changes in inflow which are usually controlled by
changes in atmospheric dynamics. Preliminary data strongly suggest that global
climate change phenomena are responsible for lake-level fluctuations in the
Great Salt Lake in the period between about 21 and 10 ka. Less is known about
the Holocene history, although there are some suggestions that the Great Salt
Lake also responded to global-scale climate changes during this interval. We
propose to produce a complete and well-dated reconstruction of lake-level
changes for the last 40 ka in the Bonneville basin through study of sediment
cores from Great Sale Lake and by integrating the new results with previous work
in the basin. This work will test the hypothesis that late Pleistocene lake
sediments in the Bonneville basin provide a regional response record of
atmospheric dynamics associated with global climate change. This work will also
provide the basis for paleoenvironmental reconstructions in future studies of
older, less well-known, Bonneville basin lake cycles. This project represents a
multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional collaboration between Jack Oviatt
(Kansas State University - Physical stratigraphy), Andrew Roberts (University of
Minnesota - Stable isotope stratigraphy, and U.S.G.S. personnel (including Bob
Thompson - pollen; Blair Jones - clay mineralogy; Rick Forrester - ostracodes).
??