* 9630241
* Biogeographic Adaptation to Temperature, Photoperiod and    CO2 in Boreal Conifers
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Peter Reich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 08/31/2001
* USD 324,174.00

9630241 Reich The coniferous forests of boreal regions may be particularly
affected by global environmental change. Temperature, photoperiod and CO2 levels
may interact to profoundly influence the phenology (seasonal timing of
development), net carbon exchange and growth of tree species. However, for any
given tree species, populations from different regions may respond differently
to global change. This possibility has been largely overlooked to date in
scientific studies of vegetation response to global change. Thus, we do not
understand how populations originating from diverse environments have adapted to
climate, or whether diverse populations will respond similarly to altered
temperature or CO2 concentrations. We will explore these issues in both
laboratory and field experiments, using diverse seed sources of major boreal
conifers: pine and spruce. We will test whether populations that are adapted to
colder environments respond differently to altered temperature and CO2 levels
than those from warmer environments. It is possible that trees originating in
cold, stressed environments may be less responsive to global change, which could
alter our attempts to globally model boreal ecosystems under global change. In
controlled-environment studies, tree seedlings will be grown at present ambient
(360 ppm) and future elevated (580 ppm) concentrations of CO2 in combination
with a range of temperatures and two boreal photoperiods. Growth, phenology, and
plant chemistry and physiology will be assessed. Field studies will involve
plantations of older, mature jack pine and black spruce populations of broad
biogeographic origin at several sites across a broad climate gradient in central
North America. Field measures will include assessment of growth (from tree
rings) and rates of photosynthesis and respiration. Development of models of
shoot-growth phenology and of respiration as a function of tissue nitrogen and
temperature will enable comparisons of seedling and mature tree responses . This
research will examine the generality of patterns and mechanisms among boreal
trees, improve models of carbon exchange, and increase our understanding of the
role of biogeographic variation in vegetation response to potential global
change.