* 9630617
* Analysis of Avian Primordial Germ Cell Emergence In Vivo and In Vitro
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1996,04/30/2000
* James Petitte, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Proposal: 9630617 PI: J. N. Petitte Primordial germ cells (PGCS) are cells that
give rise to eggs or sperm and segregate from somatic lineages early in embryo
development. As such, germ cells are responsible for the continuation of a
species and are the genetic link between generations. Recent work on the origin
of PGCs in the early avian embryo indicates that definitive germ cells begin to
appear prior to gastrulation with the expression of immunological markers such
as Stage-Specific Embryonic Antigen-1 (SSEA-1). Similar immunological markers
are also expressed by mammalian primordial germ cells. In the chick embryo,
SSEA-1 first detects PGCs at the time of oviposition prior to incubation (Stage
X) and at later stages marks cells in the hypoblast (Stage Xill). SSEA-1 also
identifies germ cells after gastrulation during their period of migration and
following settlement in the gonad. Although the origin of the avian germ line
has been studied for several decades, several questions remain concerning the
time of germ cell restriction and the cellular and molecular mechanisms of avian
PGCs emergence. Therefore, the objectives of this study are to determined the
developmental potential of SSEA-1 positive cells of the hypoblast in vivo and to
analyze the function of candidate growth factors/cytokines involved in the
emergence of avian PGCS. The first goal will be assessed using the classical
quail/chick embryo transplant model. SSEA-1 positive and negative quail
hypoblast cells will be injected into the subgerminal cavity of stage X chicken
embryos and the fate of the quail cells will be traced using a quail specific
antibody. The role of cyotkines/growth factors such as stem cell factor,
leukemia inhibitory factor and fibroblast growth factor-2 will be analyzed using
a culture system developed in our laboratory that allows the normal processes of
germ cell development to occur in vitro. Does-response effects of candidate
peptide growth factors on emergence and proliferation will be assessed. As
confirmation of growth factor responses , attempts will be made to inhibit the
in vitro and in vivo emergence of PGCs using neutralizing antibodies,
inhibitors, or anti-sense oligonucleotides to active growth factors or their
receptors. This study should provide significant insights towards our
understanding of germ cell development in the avian embryo and vertebrate in
general.