* 9630910
* In vitro Reconstruction of Fungal Chromosomes
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2001
* Mary Case, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 11/30/2001
* USD 512,490.00

Arnold 9630910 Physical maps of whole chromosomes have played an essential role
in a number of fundamental breakthroughs in genetics. Completion of a high
resolution physical map of the model genetic system. Neurospora crassa, is
likely to open up new avenues of research on the molecular and evolutionary
genetics of fungi. In completing a preliminary 29 kilobase (kb) resolution
physical map of the 31 megabase Aspergillus nidulans genome, a striking
observation was made. There is an alternating banding pattern in the
distribution of repeated sequences along each chromosome. This observation has
implications for development, functional organization of genomes, chromosome
structure and function, recombination, and genome evolution. In this project the
biological question is whether or not this banding pattern in repeated sequences
is found in another filamentous fungus, N.crassa genome will be completed using
an NSF-funded robotics workstation. The distribution of cDNAs will be correlated
with the distribution of repeated sequences in collaboration with an NSF-funded
cDNA sequencing project. A number of important discoveries about the structure
and function of DNA have been made in the filamentous fungi, Aspergillus
nidulans and Neurospora crassa. Their fungal relatives are a daily part of our
lives as causes of plant and animal disease, food spoilage, and the manufacture
of industrial enzymes and chemicals. Relatives of these fungi are involved in
everything from the making of soy sauce, cheeses, and other dairy products to
the manufacturing of penicillin and various textiles. In this project new genome
technologies will be introduced into the fungal genetics community to transform
how genetics is done. The new genome technologies will chart the entire genetic
blueprint of these organisms, and allow this genetic blueprint to be understood
and manipulated. The applications of this project are likely to have an impact
on genetics in general as well as applications in agriculture, and industry.