* 9630558
* SBIR Phase II:  An Inexpensive Educational Scanning         Tunneling Microscope and Related Courseware
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Philip Lippel, L3 Consulting
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/1999
* USD 302,450.00

*** 9630558 Lippel The Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM) is a revolutionary
new instrument that is being widely used in studying surfaces at the nanometer
level (atomic scale). This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
from L3 Consulting will introduce low cost Scanning Tunneling Microscopes (STMs)
into the first-year college curriculum in Physics and Chemistry. Phase I SBIR
research at L3 Consulting resulted in a design which uses advanced
electroceramic actuators, audio-quality data converters, and a digital signal
processor to produce a very inexpensive microscope. L3 Consulting also
demonstrated how this microscope would enable students to image atomic steps at
the surface of metals and semiconductors, examine integrated circuits or compact
discs with resolution below the diffraction limit of optical microscopes, and
otherwise explore physical phenomena at the nanometer scale. Continuing efforts
in Phase II will develop prototypes of the instrument and of accompanying
laboratory exercises, test these prototypes with college students in regular
classes, and evaluate the impact of these new tools on students' interest in and
understanding of the physical sciences. The courseware will emphasize the
relationship between microscopic features of materials and their macroscopic
properties. It will encourage students to inquire how the abstract fundamental
concepts stressed in introductory courses can be applied to explain the behavior
of real-world materials and devices. Students will gain valuable skill's by
learning how to operate these microscopes, how to interpret the images obtained,
and how to extrapolate from those images. College and university faculty can
present STMs as examples of modern research instruments and can use STM-based
labs to expand their coverage of contemporary physics and chemistry. Successful
Phase II research will lead to a refined design for a microscope/ courseware
package suitable for commercial production and distribution. The primary target
market for the product is formed by large introductory classes in physics and
chemistry which are taken by students of engineering, medicine and the allied
health professions, and architecture, as well as by future scientists.
Derivative products might be suitable at other educational levels or for
industrial use. ***