* 9630102
* Interoperable Query Processing with Networked Heterogeneous Information Servers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Louiqa Raschid, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2000
* USD 252,003.00

This research investigates interoperable query processing with heterogeneous
networked information servers. Servers may be databases, image servers, WAIS
servers, or Internet search engines. The sources may support OLE (Object Linking
and Embedding) DB or ODMG/OQL (Object Data Management Group/Object Query
Language)-like interfaces. Architectures are based on mediators (based on some
common data model), and wrappers (that provide answers from sources in the
common model and format). This research defines WHOL, a High Order Wrapper
Language, to extend wrapper technology and support mediator queries that cannot
be directly evaluated against the sources. Techniques for evaluating WHOL
queries are developed. WHOL supports scalability, as new (dissimilar) sources
are incorporated, and extends wrappers into active brokers of information.
Techniques for flexible mediator query processing are developed, for wrappers
whose capability ranges from simple parameterized functions, to support complex
optimization and evaluation engines. Cost models for mediator query processing,
and semantics for query evaluation in wrappers with unavailable sources, are
also developed. Algorithms are developed for wrapper query processing with time-
varying descriptions, and other meta-data, on sources. Solutions will be
incorporated within the Disco architecture being developed in INRIA, France.
This research will extend the capability and scalability of wrappers and
mediators in heterogeneous networked architectures