* 9630610
* The Structural Basis of RNA Function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Craig Kundrot, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1999
* USD 285,000.00

9630610 Kundrot Ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecules play a myriad of roles in the
life cycles of cells and viruses that require RNA to adopt well-defined three
dimensional structures. The long term goal of this project is to understand how
the structure of an RNA allows it to perform its biological function. The
immediate goal is to understand how the structures of two types of RNA molecules
dictate their functional properties. The first molecule is called a pseudoknot
and it is closely related to pseudoknots that cause ribosomes to shift reading
frames when making proteins from messenger RNA. Professor Kundrot and his
colleagues will determine the x-ray crystal structure of this pseudoknot. The
second type of RNA molecule studies in this proposal contains unusual, or non-
canonical UU base-pairs within a duplex. These types of base-pairs are very
common in RNAs. This work will explore the conformational flexibility of a
dodecamer containing tandem non-canonical UU base-pairs by high resolution X-ray
crystallography and will also conduct crystallographic studies of other non-
canonical base pairs in the context of dodecamer sequences. %%% RNA is a
molecule found in cells and viruses that carries genetic information and that
catalyzes biochemical reactions. The goal is to determine the three dimensional
structure of RNAs from diverse systems and connect their functional properties
to the underlying structure. While thousands of high resolution, three
dimensional protein structures are known, less than twenty RNA structures have
been determined. This work will examine the structure of two different types of
RNA molecules. The results will be helpful in understanding protein-RNA
interactions, ribosomal frame-shifting, non-canonical base pairing and ribozyme
catalysis. It will provide insights into how two types of RNA molecules function
in cells and viruses. ***