* 9630963
* RUI:  Acid Stress Genes in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Joan Slonczewski, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 324,000.00

Slonczewski 9630963 Escherichia coli experiences various kinds of acid stress.
Its internal pH may be depressed by extreme external acidification (pH 2.5-3.0)
or by membrane-permeant weak acids in moderately acid media (pH 5-7). Which
genes enable E. coli to survive in extreme acid? Which proteins help E. coli
maintain internal pH during acid stress? How is the expression of acid-stress
genes regulated? Acid-stress genes will be identified by isolating several
classes of acid-sensitive mutants using TnlO insertion and Tn5-lac fusion pools.
(1) Acid resistance is the ability to survive at extreme external pH. Acid
resistance appears to be mediated by several redundant pathways, which makes it
a challenge to obtain defective mutants. The best characterized locus required
for acid resistance is rpoS; but rpoS mutants regain acid resistance when grown
anaerobically in mild acid (pH 5-6). Transposon insertion pools in an rpoS host
will be screened for extreme-acid sensitivity (xas) in cultures grown
anaerobically at pH 6. Preliminary screening has revealed one locus, xasB, which
eliminates the rpoS-independent pathway for acid resistance. (2) Membrane-
permeant weak acids can depress internal pH to a similar degree as extreme acid
exposure. Insertion and lac fusion pools will be screened for sensitivity to the
weak acid benzoate, and for lac fusion expression induced by benzoate.
Expression will be compared between benzoate in moderate acid (pH 6) and in
moderate base (pH 8), where internal acidification cannot occur. Mutants
obtained will be characterized physiologically with respect to lac induction as
a function of pH, benzoate, the uncoupler dinitrophenol (DNP), and anaerobiosis;
for internal pH maintenance; and for acid resistance, under both aerobic and
anaerobic conditions. The transposon insertion points will be mapped to the
Kohara phage collection using inverse PCR to obtain flanking sequence for
probes. Newly identified loci will be sequenced. For lac fusion loci, regulatory
loci will be sought by isolation of constitutive papillae resulting from
unlinked secondary mutations. Induction of acid-stress proteins will be observed
on 2D-SDS gels, with the assistance of established facilities in the
laboratories of F. Neidhardt and E. Olson. The global protein response to the
weak acid benzoate at pH 6.5 has been characterized. Several new proteins
appeared which did not appear with benzoate at high pH. These are good
candidates for internal pH dependence. The benzoate-induced proteins will be
isolated and sequenced by Edman degradation, and reverse genetics will be
performed to identify the genes. If these proteins are in fact dependent on
internal pH, then induction may be expected in cultures incubated at the
borderline of the pH range for growth (pH 4.5). Gels will be run on cultures
grown at pH 4.5, and the proteins induced will be compared with those induced by
benzoate. Since many responses to low pH are enhanced by anaerobic growth, the
benzoate and borderline-pH experiments will be repeated on anaerobic cultures,
to see if additional proteins appear. Overall, the approaches of this project
will yield much new information on genes and proteins involved in acid stress
response this will help explain how bacteria can adapt to, and survive in,
extreme environments. ??