* 9630159
* Group Decision-Making
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Thomas Seeley, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2000
* USD 92,000.00

PI: Seeley Proposal Number: 9630159 The goal of this project is to elucidate
the mechanisms underlying one of the most impressive examples of group decision
making in animals: the selection of a new nest site by swarms of honey bees. The
bees' methods of choice enable the several hundred scout bees in a swarm to
reach a consensus about a future dwelling place with both speed and accuracy.
Understanding how the members of a honey bee colony form an effective decision-
making unit may well have practical applications, for we humans also often
function as members of a group responsible for making decisions with important
consequences. Prior studies of nest-site selection by honey bee swarms have
concentrated on determining the bees' criteria of choice (what they base their
decision on). This study will focus on the bees' methods of choice (how they
form their decision). In particular, the bees' process of consensus building
will be analyzed. Among other things, this will involve following the actions of
scout bees labeled for individual identification and noting how each scout bee
adjusts her behavior as a function of the quality of the nest site that she has
found. Somehow, the bees that have located sites that are less than the best
must become aware of this and then switch their "allegiance" to the best site.
This investigation is likely to reveal that none of the scout bees possesses a
synoptic knowledge of the various alternatives under consideration in the
decision-making process. Instead, what seems most likely is that each bee
functions merely as one small part of a group-level unit in which the tasks of
generating, evaluating, and choosing among alternatives are accomplished
collectively. Thus this study will provide a strong example of an important idea
in sociobiology: that the members of a group, by working together cooperatively,
can form a group-level