* 9630475
* Models of Conduction Through Ion Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Mark Schumaker, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2001
* USD 81,999.00

9630475 Schumaker The objective of this research is to develop a class of
theories (called "synchronous diffusions") of ion permeation through membrane
channels. The idea of a synchronous diffusion is that, due to packing or other
constraints, several molecules together may undergo a coordinated diffusive
motion with only one important degree of freedom. Like discrete state (rate
theory) models, synchronous diffusions are constructed to incorporate
constraints on ion occupation needed for theories of multi-ion permeation. In
contrast to discrete state models, however, they provide a truly diffusive
description of transport. A synchronous diffusion describing single-ion
conductance has already been developed, and this project now considers four more
complicated cases: (1) permeation of a single ion species through a two-site
single-vacancy channel, (2) permeation through a two-site single-vacancy channel
under bi-ionic conditions, (3) permeation of a single ion species through a
three- barrier-two-site double-occupancy channel, and (4) permeation through a
single-ion channel with waters explicitly represented. %%% The goal is to
develop theories of the motion of biomolecular systems that can serve as a
bridge between the results of computer simulations and experiment. In
particular, these theories will be developed to describe how ions can pass
through certain protein molecules, known as "membrane channels", which are found
in cell membranes. The need for bridging theories arises from two important
developments in molecular biophysics. The first of these is that information
about the detailed 3D structure of molecules makes it possible to simulate
molecular motions on a computer. The second development is that experimental
techniques are able to explore how things move on the molecular level. However,
due to limited computer power, the simulated times are much shorter than those
required to make direct comparisons with experiment. The bridging theories
descried in this proposal wi ll be able to use the results of the computer
simulations to compute quantities which can be compared with experiment. ***