* 9630860
* Functional and Molecular Regulation of Actomyosin by        Microtubules
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* William Bement, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1999
* USD 278,920.00

9630860 Bement Directed cortical movement is a fundamental feature of a broad
variety of biological phenomena, including cytokinesis, cell migration, and
movement of developmental information in early embryos. Cortical flow is one of
the most common mechanisms by which directed cortical movement is achieved.
Cortical flow is manifest as movement of actin filaments, cell surface proteins
and, in some cases, cortical organelles toward a particular site. It is well
known that cortical flow is actin filament-dependent, but what regulates the
magnitude and direction of the flow is unknown. Microtubules have been
hypothesized to somehow regulate cortical flow, but uhether they stimulate or
inhibit flow is contentious, largely because of technical difficulties entailed
by study of cortical flow in most systems. The oocyte of the frog, Xenopus
laevis, has been developed as a model for cortical flow. Xenopus oocytes treated
with the phorbol ester, PMA, undergo rapid, synchronous cortical flow which is
easily quantified. This cortical flow exhibits all of the hallmarks typical of
cortical flow in other systems, including dependence on actomyosin, directed
movement of cortical organelles and filamentous actin, and a requirement for
free movement of cell surface proteins. The features of this system have
permitted the parallel analysis of cortical flow and microtubule levels
following treatments that promote polymerization or depolymerization of
microtubules. Rates of cortical flow are inversely correlated with levels of
microtubules, and this effect is mediated by the microtubules themselves rather
than by microtubule dynamics or free tubulin. Microtubule levels are inversely
correlated with levels of myosin-II filaments, the functional form of myosin II.
Preliminary results have narrowed the possible mechanisms by which microtubules
exert their inhibitory effect on cortical flow to three: 1, a transport-based
mechanism, wherein microtubule motors transport factors that modulate myosin-II
biochemistry to or from the cortex; 2, a competition-based mechanism wherein
microtubules compete with actomyosin for binding sites in the cortex; or 3, a
microtubule-associated protein (MAP)-based mechanism, wherein microtubules bind
to and sequester a factor that promotes cortical flow and myosin-II filament
formation. A combined microscopic, biochemical, and molecular approach will be
used to distinguish between these three hypotheses. These will rely heavily both
on the attributes of the intact Xenopus oocyte and the approaches possible using
oocyte lysates . This model system permits analyses that are essentially
impossible in most other models of cortical flow that are currently studied. The
work will provide insights applicable to a number of distinct cellular and
developmental phenomena, including cytokinesis, cell locomotion, and transport
of developmental information during embryogenesis. ***