* 9630447
* Initiation of Transcription by T7 RNA Polymerase
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Craig Martin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 01/31/2001
* USD 272,503.00

9630447 Martin These studies address a detailed characterization of the
mechanisms of promoter binding and transcription initiation on wild type and
modified promoters of T7 RNA polymerase. Stopped-flow fluorescence studies using
nucleotide analog reporters within the promoter, combined with the direct
measurement of RNA synthesis in single or limited turnover quench-flow studies
will provide quantitative kinetic analyses. An initial goal will be the
elucidation of the rate limiting step(s) along the initiation pathway. The use
of ordered-addition kinetic experiments, the temperature dependence of
individual steps in initiation, and the introduction of specific structural
perturbations in the promoter will provide insight into the individual steps
leading to the synthesis of the first phosphodiester bonds. In parallel with
these studies, various approaches will be taken to characterize the structure
and dynamics of the open complex. Footprinting will be combined with
spectroscopic probes to characterize the extent of the open complex and the
nature of the interactions between the polymerase and the individual template
and nontemplate strands of the promoter. The time course of these interactions
will be compared with the time course of RNA synthesis to complete the
mechanistic picture. In order to more completely map the complex mechanism of
transcription initiation, temperature, limiting components, and template
perturbations will be exploited to alter the rate limiting step. The new rate
determining step will be characterized as before, to provide mechanistic detail
on key elements of the initiation pathway. A map of recognition contacts along
the promoter has been previously prepared via functional group mutagenesis and
steady state kinetic analyses. Following the preliminary identification of
individual steps along the initiation pathway, the contributions of some of the
previously identified promoter contacts to each of these steps will be assessed.
This will provide the first de tailed correlations between structure and
mechanism in this or any other RNA polymerase. Near the start site for
transcription, the roles of specific DNA functional groups in the positioning of
the DNA template at the active site will be explored by the incorporation into
the promoter DNA of simple base analogs, abasic sites, and vicarious linkers.
The fidelity of start site selection will be analyzed as substitutions become
increasingly more perturbing. Modifications which decrease the start site
fidelity may also be expected to perturb kinetic steps in initiation. These will
be characterized kinetically in order to tie template positioning to specific
mechanisms for initiation. Tools will be developed to follow the binding of
substrate ribonucleotides to the DNA template during initiation. This approach
will be used to characterize the binding of the initiating ribonucleoside
triphosphates, but later may prove useful in monitoring substrate binding in
subsequent stages of transcription. %%% Biomolecular mechanistic studies of the
enzyme that replicates the genome of a bacterial virus, T7 RNA polymerase, are
proposed involving the association of a multisubunit enzymatic complex
associating with polymeric DNA sequences. These studies will reveal the
molecular interactions involved in the early stages of the replication process
of the viral genome. Genetic and biochemical manipulation of the DNA sequences
recognized by the enzyme will be studied by sophisticated methods to yield a
detailed series of molecular snapshots of the components of the complex
associating with particular sequences on DNA and producing polymeric RNA
sequences. These studies will contribute to a detailed understanding of how the
process of RNA synthesis is achieved by this simple enzyme complex for
application to the study of more complicated RNA polymerases. ***