* 9630928
* The Most Severe Glaciations in Earth History:               Presaged by Greenhouse Conditions?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Paul Hoffman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1998
* USD 99,835.00

9630928 Hoffman The most extreme glaciations in Earth history occurred near the
end of the Proterozoic eon, when ice margins extended at sea level to within 10
o of the equator. Glaciogenic sediments in many regions are sandwiched between
typical warm-water carbonates, implying very abrupt climatic oscillations.
Carbonates preceding the glacial deposits are extraordinarily enriched in 13C
13C-4% PDB). The highly positive 13C values coupled with low seawater 87 Sr/ 86
Sr suggests that a drawdown of atmospheric CO2 (plausibly related to high
organic productivity and enhanced storage of carbon on a deep anoxic ocean) was
the cause of glaciation. In contrast to the state of continental emergence (and
hence high weathering rates) that presaged Cenozoic and late Paleozoic glacial
epochs, stratigraphic and radiogenic isotopic evidence suggest that
Neoproterozoic glaciations occurred in response to continental inundation.
Accordingly, the Neoproterozoic glaciations may have had more in common with the
short-lived Ashgill (late Ordovician) glacial event. These ancient occurrences
illustrate the importance of considering the entire geological record, which
reveals events and processes not predicted by current models, nor expressed in
the 1.4% of Earth history represented by the Cenozoic. Renewed funding is
requested to continue integrated stratigraphic investigations. Highly successful
results from the first year of funding showed that secular variations in 13C
values of carbonates in the pre-Vendian Otavi Group of Namibia are regionally
consistent, and are not influenced by meteoric diagenesis, nor do they correlate
with changes in primary lithofacies. Large isotopic shifts are noted across the
two major sequence boundaries, but across other minor boundaries 13C values show
no apparent change. The Otavi Group was initially selected because of the close
association of thick carbonates and a glacial diamictite. A second pre-Vendian
glacial event--newly recognized in the Otavi Group- -was first indicated by
preliminary carbon isotope data. And, subsequent field work confirmed the
existence of two stratigraphically distinct glacial deposits, which required
wholesale revision of the regional stratigraphy. These observations were
subsequently corroborated by U-Pb zircon dating of an ash layer within the Otavi
carbonates. These early results demonstrate the efficacy ofthe three-pronged
approach involving physical sequence stratigraphy, isotope chemostratigraphy,
and U-Pb chronostratigraphy. Carbon and strontium isotopic studies will continue
to be undertaken by Alan J. Kauf man at Harvard University, while single-grain
U-Pb zircon analyses will be continued at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology under the direction of Samuel A. Bowring. Additional funding is
requested to support the C- and Sr-isotopic zircon analyses, as well as a part-
time salary for Kaufman and a laboratory technician. The cost of most field
operations for Hoffman in Namibia will be borne elsewhere. ??