* 9630316
* Database Tools for Analyzing Forest Canopy Information
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,02/28/2001
* David Maier, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2001
* USD 234,855.00

The forest canopy is increasingly regarded as a region of great ecological
importance. Canopy communities are poorly understood, partly due to access
problems and partly due to a lack of expertise and software tools to analyze
complex three-dimensional tree crown data. The PIs propose an interdisciplinary
effort to develop database systems to manage, analyze, and disseminate shared
data pertaining to complex ecological questions using forest canopy data. The
demonstration project will be carried about among seven cooperating but
independent researchers at a forest canopy research site, the Wind River Canopy
Research Facility in Washington State. Data from existing projects that focus at
different spatial and temporal scales will be linked to allow efficient use of
site data and to solve novel questions that could not be addressed by a single
researcher's data sets. The resulting database management tools will allow
researchers to easily gain access to site- specific data and each others' data,
which will enhance the productivity both of the individual scientists and of the
site as a whole. The initial research focus will be on the development of data
models and prototype data structures and data sets for one concurrent study of
forest canopy structure and hydrology. That research examines the role of forest
canopies in intercepting, modifying, retaining, and conducting water from
atmospheric sources (rain, mist, snow) to the forest floor. Forest canopy
structure has obvious implications in these processes, but the complexity and
three-dimensional nature of forest canopies (especially those of old-growth,
structurally complex forests) has prevented ecologists from gaining a quantified
understanding of the patterns and processes underlying these interactions. The
PI will also continue refining the two database browsers for the Wind River Site
data and will extend the data model for those browsers to show the connection
with the canopy structure and hydro logy model. Development of a sound data
model will allow forest canopy scientists to organize, visualize, and analyze
their data in powerful ways. It will also provide the means to link forest
canopy structural data with relevant environmental data sets (such as
meteorological data) and with other forest functional data sets (e.g.,
photosynthesis of canopy organisms).