* 9630285
* Biogeochemical Cycling of Redox-Sensitive Metals During     Surface-Subsurface Water Exchange in a Shallow              Alluvial Aquifer
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Laura Crossey, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/1999
* USD 340,000.00

9630285 Crossey Understanding the linkage between dissolved redox-sensitive
species and solid reactive phases in an aquifer matrix is crucial to the
prediction of nutrient pathways, biogeochemical cycling of carbon, and
contaminant transport in ground water systems. In many alluvial aquifers redox-
sensitive metals play an important role in terminal electron-accepting
processes. Because these metals are critical to aquifer energetics and
biogeochemistry, this research focuses on the temporal and spatial controls and
redox-sensitive metal mobility in a shallow alluvial aquifer influenced by
surface-subsurface water exchange. The study comprises two Research Elements.
Research Element I will examine temporal/seasonal controls on redox-sensitive
metal mobility. Through systematic surface-subsurface water and sediment
sampling and analysis; aquifer characteristics, aqueous geochemistry, and
biological functioning will be identified at Rio Calaveras (a heavily-
instrumented, unperturbed site in the Jemez Mountains of New Mexico). The
shallow alluvial fill will be characterized with respect to fine-scale aquifer
structure (stratigraphic elements), sediment geochemistry (e.g., extractable
metals, organic matter content, and extractable carbon), and aqueous
biogeochemistry (dissolved gases, organic and inorganic solutes). Bi-monthly
sampling of an extensive well network will permit measurement of dynamic
geochemically, and biologically to seasonal and precipitation event
perturbations. Observation of several complete cycles are assured over the time
period of the study. Multi-level water sampling instrumentation will allow the
high vertical resolution necessary to quantify links among sediment
characteristics (bioavailable carbon and metals), aqueous geochemistry, and
microbial functioning. Research Element 2 focuses on spatial heterogeneity
within the alluvial aquifer, and poses a series of hypotheses and tests to
assess the control on metal mobility exerted by (a) position along gro undwater
flow paths, (b) chelation by dissolved organic carbon species, and (c)
microbially-mediated iron reduction reactions. Hydrologic controls will be
assessed through sampling geochemical parameters along flow paths (defined by an
existing site-specific hydrologic model) and through application of geochemical
models (for aqueous speciation and reaction path modeling). Controlled
laboratory experiments will be conducted using sediment incubations to
distinguish abiotic (chelation) and biotic (microbial reduction) mechanisms of
iron mobilization. Aquifer heterogeneity will be a primary organizing factor in
the experimental design. This proposal was submitted in response to the
Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation, and the project is
being jointly supported by the Divisions of Earth Sciences and Divisions of
Ocean Sciences (Geosciences).