* 9630108
* A Plant Protein Kinase and A Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase  Involved in Vacuolar Protein Transport and Development
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Daryll Dewald, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 03/31/1999
* USD 54,500.00

96-30108 DeWald The plant cell vacuole is functionally similar to fungi vacuoles
and to lysosome of mammalian cells. In addition, plant cell vacuoles have other
functions; they function in regulating cytosolic pH, osmotic shock, and in the
storage of proteins. Plant vacuole can occupy up to 90% of the total cellular
volume. The maintenance of vacuoles requires the specific sorting of proteins
and lipids from their sites of synthesis to the vacuoles. The process of
recognition, sorting, and transport of proteins to the vacuole is complex. More
than 30 genes have been implicated in vacuolar protein sorting. The goal of the
proposed research is to determine the role of a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI 3- kinase) and that of a serine/threonine protein kinase in protein sorting
to plant cell vacuole. The specific objectives are to study 1) the role of Vps
34p PI 3-kinase activity in protein sorting to plant vacuoles in Arabidopsis
thaliana; 2) the role of Vsp 15p, a protein kinase, in protein sorting to plant
vacuole in A. thaliana. The gene for Vps 15p will be cloned and sequence.
Cloning of the gene will be done by functional complementation of a Vps 15p
yeast mutant by transforming with an A. thaliana cDNA library, or by PCR-based
amplification of gene fragments that will be used to probe the cDNA library to
identify the gene. The role of Vps 15p and of Vps 34p will be assessed in A.
thaliana by examining tissue and temporal gene expression patterns in wild type
plants, and by documenting the effects of overexpressing the gene in transgenic
plants. It is expected that this data will provide new insights into how protein
transport is regulated in plants. %%% The plant cell vacuole is functionally
similar to fungi vacuoles and to lysosome of mammalian cells. In addition, plant
cell vacuoles have other functions; they function in regulating cytosolic pH,
osmotic shock, and in the storage of proteins. Plant vacuole can occupy up to
90% of the total cellular vo lume. The maintenance of vacuoles requires the
specific sorting of proteins and lipids from their sites of synthesis to the
vacuoles. The process of recognition, sorting, and transport of proteins to the
vacuole is complex. More than 30 genes have been implicated in vacuolar protein
sorting. The goal of the proposed research is to determine the role of a
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3- kinase) and that of a serine/threonine
protein kinase in protein sorting to plant cell vacuole. The specific objectives
are to study 1) the role of Vps 34p PI 3-kinase activity in protein sorting to
plant vacuoles in Arabidopsis thaliana; 2) the role of Vsp 15p, a protein
kinase, in protein sorting to plant vacuole in A. thaliana. The gene for Vps 15p
will be cloned and sequence. Cloning of the gene will be done by functional
complementation of a Vps 15p yeast mutant by transforming with an A. thaliana
cDNA library, or by PCR-based amplification of gene fragments that will be used
to probe the cDNA library to identify the gene. The role of Vps 15p and of Vps
34p will be assessed in A. thaliana by examining tissue and temporal gene
expression patterns in wild type plants, and by documenting the effects of
overexpressing the gene in transgenic plants. It is expected that this data will
provide new insights into how protein transport is regulated in plants. ***