* 9630064
* Topics in Statistical Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Daniel Fisher, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 375,000.00

9630064 Fisher This grant continues the support of this well respected PI in
several aspects of statistical physics. The PI has made significant
contributions to the class of problems involving interplay between quenched
randomness and thermal and quantum fluctuations. The current focus is on random
quantum magnets, topological vortices in dirty type II superconductors and spin
glasses. Another aspect of this grant explores nonlinearly driven systems which
have threshold effects and respond at many spatial and temporal scales. The
examples are dynamics of fracture in solids, friction, motion of geological
faults, dielectric breakdown and critical currents in superconductors. Finally
there is one project involving the recently developed dynamic mean field
theories (the infinite dimension limit) and their applications to the problem of
strongly interacting electrons. %%% This grant continues the work on a broad
range of problems, related by certain underlying mathematical similarities. One
class of problems include the motion of geological faults, dynamics of fracture
in solids, dielectric breakdown and properties of distribution of intense
current in a superconductor. In another class of problems, there are random
quantum magnets, propagation of magnetic vortices in a superconductor etc. These
problems are noted for their complexity, novelty and a broad range of
applications. ***