* 9630362
* Altered Apoptotic Responses in Chemically-Resistant         Mammalian Cell Variants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* James Wyche, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1999
* USD 300,021.00

96-30362 Wyche Programmed cell death is a normal part of animal development, is
actively controlled by specific gene products, and is an event that occurs in
various cells in the embryo and in adults. Programmed cell death, or apoptosis,
can be induced in various cultured cell types by chemical and by physical
treatment. Yet little is known about the molecular mechanism of apoptosis. This
is partly caused by the fact that the positive and negative regulators of
apoptosis are as yet unknown and partly to the lack of suitable mutants in the
apoptotic signaling pathway. The objectives of this proposal are: a) isolation
of chemically-resistant apoptosis cell variants from a human cell line (HL-60)
and classification of the variants into complementation groups; b)
identification of sequential cellular changes, structurally and biochemically,
that are specifically associated with early progression of chemically-induced
cell apoptosis; d) characterization of specific events leading to the activation
of proteases as well as alterations in protein and DNA target sites in apoptotic
cells and their variants. These studies should lead to the construction of the
apoptotic signaling pathway and to insights into the relationship between
apoptosis regulatory gene products and to specific events in the apoptotic
signaling pathway. %%% Programmed cell death is a normal part of animal
development, is actively controlled by specific gene products, and is an event
that occurs in various cells in the embryo and in adults. Programmed cell death,
or apoptosis, can be induced in various cultured cell types by chemical and by
physical treatment. Yet little is known about the molecular mechanism of
apoptosis. ***