* 9630498
* Development of Coordinated Behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Anne Bekoff, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sonya K. Sobrian
* 07/31/2000
* USD 250,000.00

9630498 Bekoff The long-term goal of the project is to understand the mechanisms
underlying the ontogeny of coordinated motor behavior. The studies will focus on
the role of sensory experience in the development of behaviors involving leg
movements in embryonic and early postnatal life. Both electromyogram (EMG) and
kinematic recordings will be quantitatively analyzed to identify effects of
altered sensory input or later behavior. Specifically the goal of the research
is to explore the issue of whether, in what way, and to what extent alterations
in sensory input produce changes in the development of walking. There are four
objectives. The first is to examine the role of sensory experience in the
postnatal development of walking. The effect of removing or altering input due
to load (resistance) or joint proprioception, will be analyzed. This set of
experiments will also look at recovery from deficits are limited to walking or
whether they generalize to other locomotor or non-locomotor behaviors. A second
objective is to further examine the role of sensory input in mature locomotion.
The third objective is to examine similar issues in embryos. This will help
determine when the mature responses to sensory stimuli develop and will also
examine how sensory input is involved in the embryonic development of motor
patterns. Finally, the fourth objective is to look at the effects of skipping a
step in a developmental sequence. The effects of eliminating particular
embryonic behaviors on the subsequent development of walking will be evaluated.
Overall the data generated in these studies will significantly increase our
understanding of the role of sensory experience in the development of motor
behaviors.