* 9631049
* Quasi-Equivalence:  Motion and Adaptability in Living       Molecules Conference being held second week of January 1997  in Tallahassee, Florida
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Lee Makowski, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/1997
* USD 8,000.00

9631049 Makowski This grant requests funding for a conference to explore the
principles underlying our understanding of the structure and activity of
macromolecular assemblies. The conference will take place in the second week of
January, 1997, in Tallahassee, Florida. There will be two full days of
scientific sessions with talks from approximately 25 speakers. We expect an
attendance of 100-150 scientists. In 1962, Caspar and Klug introduced the
concept of quasi-equivalence to explain the arrangement of proteins on the
surface of icosahedral virus particles. The concept has played an important part
in shaping our study and understanding of viruses and other macromolecular
assemblies for the past 30 years. In those 30 years the amount of information
that we have obtained about proteins has exploded, and the original concept,
based on electron microscope studies, has been refined to take into account the
remarkable results on the structure of crystalline viruses and other protein-
protein interactions. Nevertheless, it survives as a philosophical basis for
much of how we think about macromolecular assemblies. By organizing this
conference, we seek to bring together the individuals who were involved in the
development of the concept from its origins, and those who have generated high
resolution information about macromolecular assemblies and viruses over the past
30 years. Most of the principal speakers have already agreed t participate in
this conference. This may be one of the last chances we have to bring together
the originators of the concepts with so many scientists who have contributed to
its development. It is an opportunity to summarize the principles underlying our
understanding of macromolecular assemblies, and to define the questions we need
to continue asking about the movement and adaptability of macromolecules. %%%