* 9631572
* The Importance of Halogen Atom Chemistry in the             Arctic Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Wen-yih Sun, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2001
* USD 663,817.00

9631572 Shepson Recent observations in the Arctic indicate that there is a
poorly understood process occurring in which ozone is rapidly destroyed in the
lower troposphere near the surface of the Arctic Ocean. A number of field
measurement studies have resulted in the hypothesis that ozone is being
destroyed by a catalytic cycle involving Br atoms. If this were important in the
marine environments in general, it would have substantial implications for our
understanding and modeling of the global budget of tropospheric ozone. However,
there are several areas of the chemistry and dynamics of the process that are
poorly understood, for example: What is the source of bromine atoms? What is the
fate of the BrO radicals produced? What are the important removal mechanisms for
reactive bromine radicals? What is the mechanism for recycling HBr? What are the
spatial and temporal characteristics of ozone destruction in the Arctic
troposphere? Purdue University has brought together four groups of researchers
with complementary capabilities to enable them to uniquely pursue the answers to
these questions. The specific objectives, and associated approaches, of this
research effort are: (1) Measurement of the kinetics of the operative reactions,
presumably occurring on the surface of or within sea salt or acidic sulfate
aerosol, whereby bromide ions are oxidized to molecular bromine or other
photolytically active bromine compounds, under conditions relevant to the
Arctic. These measurements will be conducted using stopped-flow and pulsed
accelerated flow spectroscopic techniques. (2) Investigation of the competitive
reaction paths for Br and Cl atom reactions with aldehydes and ketones, the
reactions between BrO and ClO radicals, and the role of anions in catalyzing
aqueous phase oxidation of the bromide ion. This work will be conducted using ab
initio computational methods. (3) Development and application of highly
sensitive and selective methods for the mea surement of carbonyl compounds. This
instrument will be used in future field projects in the Arctic. The results of
the laboratory, field and computational studies will be integrated into a box
model of the detailed chemistry occurring in the Arctic marine boundary layer.
(4) The Purdue Mesoscale Model will be refined for application to the Arctic.
The modified and optimized model will then be tested against observational data
from the Arctic, followed by incorporation of the box-model chemistry. ***