* 9631794
* Molecular Beam Mass Spectrometry Studies of the Kinetics    and Mechanism of the Thermal and Plasma-Enhanced Chemical   Vapor Deposition of Transition and Main Group Nitrides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Carmela Amato-Wierda, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

9631794 Amato-Weirda This Research Planning Grant addresses gas-phase chemistry
of thermal and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition(CVD) of several metal
nitrides. Molecular beam mass spectrometry (MBMS) is being coupled to a fast-
flow reactor in order to monitor in situ and in real time gas-phase species and
the kinetics of CVD reactions. Various precursor systems will be investigated
including homoleptic dialkylamido complexes of transition and main group metals
M(NR2)n and ammonia, and more traditional systems such as metal halides(MX4) and
ammonia. Thermal CVD studies will also investigate single-source precursors
including Ti(NMe2)4 and Ti(NMe2)3(t-Bu) in the absence of ammonia, and
TiCl2(NHt-Bu)2(NHt-Bu)2 n. Gas-phase species and the kinetics of their formation
will be determined as a function of reaction conditions: temperature, total and
partial pressures of reactants, and residence time. Additionally, films will be
deposited simultaneously and gas-phase species correlated to film properties
such as, growth rate, stoichiometry, and composition. %%% The understanding of
gas-phase chemistry at the molecular level is crucial for future rational and
significant improvement in materials synthesis by chemical vapor
deposition(CVD). More importantly the exploration of CVD gas-phase chemistry and
kinetics is necessary for the development of general reaction modeling, as well
as understanding the relationships among precursor systems, reactivity patterns,
and final film properties. While this project will focus primarily on the study
of kinetics and mechanisms of reactions, it will also contribute to a greater
general understanding of nitrides materials synthesis and processing issues. The
planning grant will aid the PI in accomplishing enough preliminary work to show
the promise of ideas or to modify them based on the data acquired. Thus, support
during the planning period will aid the PI in preparing a more competitive full
proposal. ***