* 9631030
* Role of Nitrogen in Compensatory Response of Hybrid Poplar  to Ozone-Induced Accelerated Foliar Senescence
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Eva Pell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 372,569.00

9631030 Pell When plants are grow in an environment with elevated ground levels
of the air pollutant, ozone, a common response is accelerated aging of foliage.
During the normal aging process, foliage exhibits a gradual decline in rate of
net photosynthesis accompanied by a decrease in a key enzyme known as Rubisco.
This enzyme is responsible for fixation of carbon dioxide; Rubisco is also the
most ubiquitous protein in the leaf accounting for up to 70% of soluble leaf
protein. As leaves at the base of a plant age and eventually abscise, protein
breakdown products are transported elsewhere in the plant for synthesis of new
protein. One result is that in some species, including poplar, young tissue of
ozone-stressed plants may actually exhibit a transitory, relative increase in
Rubisco concentration and associated net photosynthesis. This response is
thought to provide some compensation to the air pollution injury. Plants grow in
a complex environment, often with other limitations. Since Rubisco, as a
protein, provides an internal source of nitrogen, the investigators are
interested in determining whether nitrogen limitation in the soil might enhance
these ozone responses. The question has relevance since many plants growing in
the natural ecosystem are found in nutrient limited soils. Models are being
developed to try and predict plant responses to multiple stresses. Inherent in
these models is an understanding of how plants minimize stress and what
conditions will influence the way plants respond. The results of these studies
will aid in the refinement of these models. In these studies hybrid poplar
plants will be treated with chronic doses of ozone. We will follow the
development and aging of leaves at the base and crown of the canopy. We will
focus on the changing status of Rubisco and relate synthesis and degradation of
the protein to availability of nitrogen.