* 9631213
* Research in the Foundations and Practice of Social          Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* A. Kimball Romney, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2000
* USD 329,999.00

The aim of this research is to contribute scientific methods to improve the
quality of social measurement. Social concepts such as cultural beliefs and
social norms are defined by social conventions, and unlike much physical and
psychophysical measurement, have no direct outside criteria for comparison and
validation. Measurements necessarily must be inferred from the pattern of
responses among informants. One major focus of the research is on repeated
measures of the cognitive representations of semantic structure for a single
individual. This would make it possible to measure the extent to which
representations in the mind of one person correspond to representations in the
mind of another person. Such measurement facilitates the development of
quantitative models of culture as shared cognitive representations. It allows
the precise measurement of the overall degree of sharing among members of a
culture as well as the extent to which each individual, or subset of
individuals, exhibits cultural differences due to individual variables such as
gender, first spoken language, or occupation. Breakdown in sharing in individual
performance such as in the case of dyslexia or Alzheimer's disease might also be
measured. Another major area of the research is in the area of `information
pooling.` Information pooling occurs when several informants each provide their
answers to the same set of questions; e.g., `will candidate A win the election`
or `how much money can be saved by adopting policy B.` When the informants'
answers differ, it is important to be able to pool their answers to reach a
`consensus.` Over the last decade, the investigators have developed an approach
to information pooling called `consensus analysis.` Consensus analysis consists
of a collection of statistical information pooling models for a variety of
questionnaire formats. In each format, it provides a process model for the
measurement of the knowledge of the informants where, unlike the typical
psychometric test-theory case, the answers to the questions posed to the
informants are not known in advance. The unknown answers can be estimated in the
model to provide a `consensus answer key.` The current research will develop the
linkage of consensus analysis to the extensive literature on consensus
algorithms in the area of classification research. Typically consensus
algorithms are non-statistical deterministic pooling procedures, and one
objective of the research will be to develop statistical versions of the
algorithms to deal with such problems as differential competence among
informants or questionnaire reliability. This will provide ways to factor error
variance and response bias out of the pooling process by using standard
statistical estimation theory. The overall significance of the research is that
it will provide new methods of social measurement comparable in quality to those
used in areas such as perception and psychophysics, where direct comparisons
with objective physical stimuli are utilized.