* 9631319
* GOALI: Measurement &amp; Modeling of Heterogeneous Nanoscale    Deformation of Copper-Polyimide High Density Interconnect   Structures Subjected to Thermal Cycling
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Todd Gross, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 07/31/2001
* USD 245,176.00

9631319 Gross High density interconnect (HDI) structures based on the Cu-
polyimide system have exhibited improvements in signal propagation rate relative
to the Al-SiO2 system. However, the large mismatch in out-of-plane thermal
expansion coefficients generates high interfacial stresses during processing
that may adversely affect the reliability of the structure. This problem will
become more severe as the number of wiring levels increases. Recent experimental
evidence has shown that the elastic properties and thermal expansion of the
polyimides are a function of structure size for 1 (m widths and below.
Additional experimental evidence suggests that the inelastic deformation of the
Cu in these structures is localized on grain boundaries and at the interface
between the Cu and the polyimide. Furthermore, plastic deformation by
dislocation glide has been shown to be negligible for the relevant temperature
range. Since the feature size is on the order of the Cu grain size, finite
element models based on continuum models of inelastic deformation will not
accurately describe the stresses in these HDI structures. The goal of the
proposed analytical and experimental program is to develop and evaluate
strategies to model heterogeneous, inelastic deformation based on diffusive
transport in these structures. Specifically, inelastic deformation will be
confined to the grain boundaries and bimaterial interfaces. The interface and
grain boundary constitutive models will be based on the mechanisms of Coble
creep and grain boundary sliding. Deformation in the grain interiors and in the
polyimide will be modeled as linearly elastic (with temperature dependent
elastic constants and coefficients of thermal expansion). A hot stage scanning
probe microscope will be used to measure the amount and rate of interface and
grain boundary sliding as a function of temperature. Measurement of the buildup
of material at grain boundaries and interfaces will be used to quantify rates of
material transport for the Coble creep mechanism. A second, related goal is to
develop strategies to measure the extent and change of properties of the
polyimides caused by damage from the etch used to define the pattern for the
conductor lines. The trend toward reducing the size of features in HDI
structures requires the development of strategies to model thermomechanical
deformation that take into account the heterogeneous nature of deformation and
recognize that deformation by diffusive transport will be of first order
significance for nanostructures. Understanding these effects and documenting
their magnitude will have broad significance to the entire microelectronics
industry. ***