* 9631333
* Numic Comparative Lexicon
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* John McLaughlin, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2000
* USD 215,744.00

The Numic Comparative Lexicon is a cooperative effort among four specialists to
build a computerized data base for the seven languages of the Numic branch of
the Uto-Aztecan language family and to make a new and definitive reconstruction
of Proto-Numic. Bands speaking Numic languages lived in every western state in
the United States, except for Washington, and in early postcontact times ranged
as far north as Alberta and Saskatchewan. One band also occupied a large area in
the South Plains. A complete reconstruction of these languages is therefore an
important link in the understanding of the prehistory of the western United
States. In addition to internal relationships, the Numic languages also had
extensive contact with neighboring groups speaking unrelated languages. A
complete data base of the Numic languages will aid in the identification of
borrowings in other languages and further clarify the history of the region
surrounding the Great Basin. The project brings together all known lexicons and
vocabularies using commercially available software on a Power Macintosh 7100
computer. This makes possible not only detailed cross-linguistic comparisons,
but also comprehensive historical analyses and wide-ranging dialect studies. The
data base is designed for efficiency and flexibility of data handling. After
gathering all the data in a single location, a larger and more reliable body of
reconstructed Proto-Numic forms and cognate sets will be ready for incorporation
into Uto-Aztecan cognate sets than has heretofore been available. The use of
commercially available software with compatible Macintosh and IBM versions will
make the computerized data base readily available to as broad a spectrum of
scholars as possible. In addition, the data base will be available for use to
supplement tribal literacy courses throughout the Numic area. The number of
speakers of Numic languages ranges from fewer than 10 (for Kawaiisu and
Panamint) to more than 500 (for Southern Paiute). The vast majority of the
speakers listed above are over 50 years of age. This state of affairs makes the
compilation of a thorough comparative dictionary of the Numic languages quite
pressing while there are still speakers who command their languages and can
provide information where data are lacking in currently available sources.