* 9631289
* Dissertation Research:  Configurations of Self              Concept in Adolescent Suicide
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Aaron Brower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/1999
* USD 7,500.00

9631289 Brower The incidence of completed suicide in adolescents and young
adults, age 15-24 more than tripled between 1957 and 1989. Suicide ideation is
common with as many as 60 percent of adolescents reporting they have thought
about suicide. Suicide attempts by adolescents are reliably associated with
depression, mood variability and impulsivity. Research on "self concept"
explains mood variability and impulsive behavior and links them to suicide
ideation and attempts. In this Dissertation Improvement research, adolescent
suicide ideators (SI) and suicide attempters (SA) are hypothesized to be two
distinct groups with different cognitive structures of self concept. Assessing
the different aspects of self concept will not only enable us to distinguish SI
adolescents from SA adolescents but also help identify youth most at risk for
suicide attempts. The convenience sample for this study consists of 120
adolescents, age 14-16, recruited voluntary from a pool of inpatients and
outpatients who receive mental health services through a number of mental health
providers in Dane County and the City of Milwaukee. Demographic data will be
collected as well as information from several tests given to participants to
measure levels of impulsivity, suicide ideation and threats, and depression. ***
??