* 9631416
* Regulation of Calcium Entry in Cerebral Arteries
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Joseph Patlak, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 06/30/2000
* USD 199,720.00

9631416 Nelson Calcium ions within cells regulate muscle contraction, cell
motility, cell proliferation and growth, and the secretion of hormones. The
("smooth") muscle cells that line the hollow organs of the body (e.g. blood
vessels, airways, stomach, colon, bladder, uterus) contract when intracellular
calcium raises, and relax when calcium falls. A decrease in the calcium within
smooth muscle cells that comprise the wall of the arteries in the brain would
lead to a dilation of the blood vessel, and increase in blood flow in the brain.
The level of calcium in smooth muscle cells in arteries in the brain is
regulated by the amount of calcium that enters these cells through specialized
proteins in the cell membrane, called voltage-dependent calcium channels.
Pharmacological agents such as the "calcium channel blockers" inhibit calcium
entry through voltage-dependent calcium channels, and thus ultimately lead to
vasodilation. One focus of Dr. Nelson's project is to understand how the cell's
membrane potential (or "voltage") controls voltage-dependent calcium channels in
smooth muscle cells from small brain arteries, under physiological conditions.
The cell's membrane potential is key regulator of calcium entry, and thus exerts
a profound control over blood vessel diameter. Dr. Nelson has recently
discovered the calcium within these muscle cells is not uniform, and that rapid
and high increases in intracellular calcium ("Calcium sparks") occur within
about 1% of the cell's volume. These calcium sparks arise from the release of
calcium through specialized proteins ("ryanodine-sensitive calcium release
channel") in the membranes of compartments ("sarcoplasmic reticulum") within the
cell. These calcium sparks appear to regulate indirectly calcium entry through
alterations in the cell's membrane potential. Another goal of the project is to
understand how voltage dependent calcium channels in the surface membrane
regulate calcium sparks, and how calcium sparks in turn regulate calci um entry
through voltage-dependent calcium channels. This work suggests a new paradigm
for understanding the control of calcium entry in smooth muscle cells of
arteries. Specifically, calcium entry through voltage-dependent calcium channels
increases average calcium throughout a smooth muscle cell which leads to muscle
contraction, and calcium entry also stimulates local increases in calcium
("calcium sparks"), which, through the membrane potential, acts as a negative
feedback mechanism to decrease calcium entry. It would be the balance of these
processes that would determine calcium entry, and ultimately blood vessel
diameter. Dr. Nelson expects that these results would find parallels in other
types of smooth muscle cells, in motile cells and in secretory cells, and should
provide new insights in the control of cell function.