* 9631969
* Neural Receptors as a Problem in Surface Chemistry
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,10/31/1997
* Janice Hicks, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9631969 Hicks Advanced techniques in neuroscience and spectroscopy will be
utilized to study the n-methyl d-aspartate (NMDA) neuronal receptor. This
receptor is involved in the long-term potentiation, memory and developmental
structuring; its central role in long-term changes in the brain make its study
of particular value. It binds several agonists including NMDA, glutamate and the
drug PCP. The receptor is known to be a ligand-gated ion channel, and to consist
of two protein subunits, both of which have been cloned. The NR1 subunit has a
predicted mass of 103 kDa, and is thought to consist of a large extracellular
N-terminus, three trans-membrane-spanning domains, a hairpin domain within the
membrane and an intracellular carboxy terminus. The exact structure of the
protein and the agonist binding sites are not yet known. The objectives of this
proposal are to use site-directed mutagenesis to identify residues that control
glutamate and PCP binding. Mutationally altered receptors will be expressed in
Xenopus oocytes and analyzed functionally by the two electrode voltage clamp
technique. In addition, surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy will be used to
study the binding of glutamate, PCP and PCP analogs to the mutant receptors,
providing additional kinetic information about adsorption and desorption
processes. The long term goal is to design experiments utilizing spectroscopic
laser methods that will address questions regarding the structures of native and
mutant receptors and bound ligand/receptor complexes. Previously, the PI has
developed sensitive methods for measuring circular-dichroism spectra at
interfaces (SHG-CD). Circular dichroism spectroscopy is a well known method for
the analysis of protein secondary structures; the laser method SHG-CD has the
added advantage of surface sensitivity. The PI proposes to spend one year
working with Dr. Suzanne Zukin, Professor, and Dr. Michael Bennett, Professor
and Chair, in the Department of Neuroscience at the Albert Einstein Colle ge of
Medicine. The PI is a physical chemist who has 12 years of experience developing
laser methods that probe molecular interfaces in situ. She has studied small
molecule surface chemistry and the adsorption of polypeptides at crystalline
surfaces. Dr. Zukin has been actively engaged in research in the area of
neuroreceptors for twenty years, focusing on the molecular biology and
physiology of the excitatory amino acid and opiate receptor systems of the
central nervous system. Dr. Bennett's work in neuroscience research spans 40
years, with current interests in ligand-gated channels mediating excitatory
postsynaptic potentials, studies using electrophysiological methods. The
sabbatical research will allow the PI to learn manipulation of cloned genes in,
handling and microelectrophysiological measurement of Xenopus oocytes, cells
which are large and possibly amendable for direct laser study. Specific
techniques here include engineering of mutant receptor constructs, expression
and functional analysis of receptors by electrical recording of cells and by
surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy. %%% The passing of information from one
brain cell to the next allows for all of brain activity, such as a memory,
thought and responses to our senses like vision, hearing, feeling, etc. This
transmission of information is accomplished by the transport of molecules called
neurotransmitters from one cell surface to the next. A cell's surface is
composed of fatty acids (lipids) and many other components including proteins
called receptors. Receptors receive the incoming neurotransmitter molecules in
what is usually envisioned as a "lock and key" mechanism. That is, the shape of
the neurotransmitter allows it (the key) to "fit" into the receptor (the lock).
The details of the geometry and the forces around the lock and the key hold the
secret of the transmission of signals in the brain. Drug design for brain
disorders relies heavily on this knowledge. Dr. Hicks will apply advanced laser
methods to study one particular neural receptor called the NMDA receptor, which
is responsible for memory and long-term changes in the brain. The laser based
methods (second harmonic generation (SHG) and surface plasmon resonance (SPR)
spectroscopy) will allow details of the transmitter/receptor interaction to be
measured. These laser methods have proven to be surface sensitive, but are new
in the field of biophysics. For example, SHG has not yet been applied to a
working cell membrane. This award supports a novel interdisciplinary approach to
an important issue in brain chemistry. ***