* 9631927
* Collaborative Research:  The Development of Spatial Coding
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Janellen Huttenlocher, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 12/31/1999
* USD 218,554.00

9631927 HUTTENLOCHER Spatial competence is a fundamental adaptive capability for
all mobile organisms. Human adults can use distance and direction information to
code location, both with respect to the self and with respect to external
landmarks. Their spatial coding is hierarchical, i.e., existing at various
nested levels of resolution. In addition, they can use symbolic spatial
representations, most notably maps. This research will advance our understanding
of how these aspects of spatial competence develop in human infancy and
childhood. Previous studies have already shown that, by 16 months, children show
hierarchical metric coding of spatial location, but that, at about 21 months,
there is an abrupt increase in the use of external landmarks distant from the
viewer in such coding, and that, over middle childhood, there are changes in the
nature of the categories used in higher-level coding. Studies with infants will
determine whether metric coding is present early in life, and if so, what
referents are used in such coding, and what the resolution of the system is.
Studies with toddlers will define whether the developmental changes in the use
of distal landmarks are due to hippocampal maturation or to growing control of
upright walking, and whether children of this age can remember the location of
particular objects in particular locations when more than one is hidden at a
time. Studies with school-age children will determine whether developmental
changes in the nature of categories used in hierarchical coding underlie real-
world changes in accuracy of spatial localization. Other studies with preschool
and school-aged children will delineate how children use distance and direction
information in map representations. Overall, this research program will develop
further a model of the emergence of spatial competence. Understanding spatial
development is an important theoretical goal in itself, but also has
implications for such important societal issues as affording mobility to
visually-impaired children and furthering the education of all children in
spatial subjects such as geometry and geography. ***