* 9631654
* Society for Developmental Biology Annual Symposium:         May 30-June 4, 1996; Nashville, TN
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1997
* William Jeffery, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/1997
* USD 20,000.00

9631654 Jeffery Funds are requested for partial support of the expenses for
invited plenary and minisymposium speakers, including junior scientists, and
graduate and post-doctoral student speakers and poster presenters, for the 55th
annual symposium of the Society for Developmental Biology. The meeting,
entitled, "Patterning Mechanisms in Development", will be held May 30-June 4,
1996 at Vanderbilt University. The meeting is organized by William Jeffery,
President of the SDB, and will be attended by a national group of researchers
and teachers interested in the study of development, including graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows. The organizers expect that, as during the past eight
years, the meeting will be of medium size (300-400 registrants), and they
encourage junior level participation by providing financial support and the
opportunity to present platform talks and poster presentations. The meeting will
include a broad range of topics, considered to be new frontiers in pattern
formation, continuing and building on the format that has evolved in the past
four year. Plant and animal systems as well as different contemporary approaches
will be represented. Particular emphasis will be on early developmental
mechanisms, localization, cell signaling, morphogenesis, regeneration, organ
formation, and the evolution of these developmental processes. They plan 53
invited scientific talks in seven plenary sessions and 4 minisymposia, the
latter arranged in two sessions(two minisymposia running concurrently), and a
keynote lecture. The plenary sessions and minisymposia will be chaired by
experts in the area, and some talks will be given by junior scientists, thus
providing them with an opportunity to speak a the national level. Contributed
platform and poster sessions will also provide opportunities for graduate and
postdoctoral students to present their work. The posters will be available for
viewing during most of the meeting, providing ample time for discussion.
Reflecting the growing role of the SDB in the affairs and concerns of its
membership, this symposium will continue to feature issue oriented workshops on
education and minority interests. ***