* 9631785
* Information Processing in the Electrosensory System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Masashi Kawasaki, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Avijit Chaudhuri
* 08/31/1999
* USD 271,200.00

Processing of complex sensory information to generate behavior is a major
function of the brain, and one very useful model system for studying this
integration has been the brain of weakly electric fish. These fish generate a
repetitive weak electrical signal from special organs, and detect the electric
field around them by specialized electroreceptors all over the body. The signal
is used for social communication and for spatial "electrolocation" in much the
way bats or dolphins use echolocation to identify and locate objects. A
population of electric fish has the same problem as a city with multiple radio
stations: if the signals used by two separate individuals are too close together
in frequency, each one effectively "jams" the signal reception of the other.
Some electric fish that use highly regular signals have overcome this problem by
a behavior called the "jamming-avoidance response" (JAR); the fish with the
slightly higher frequency moves its emission frequency up just a bit, and the
fish with the slightly lower frequency moves its frequency down just a bit, to
widen the separation and so help each fish to identify of its own signal against
the background environment of other fish. This behavior requires the fish to
recognize not only that the jamming signal is present, but whether its own
signal is higher or lower in frequency than the jamming signal. Recently it has
been found that some species of electric fish in Africa, not at all closely
related to the better-studied South African electric fish species, have the same
JAR behavior, but apparently produce it by a different circuit in the brain.
This project uses physiological and anatomical techniques of recording and
tracing the connections of single nerve cells in the brain to clarify how this
response is controlled by the brain in the African fish. Particular emphasis
will be on the spatial and temporal patterns of two sensory cues, known as
amplitude modulation and differential phase modulation, which both are essen
tial for the behavior. The results will be important for understanding
mechanisms for the independent evolution of similar adaptive behaviors, and also
will be important to understanding general principles of brain organization
related to sensory behavior in such systems as vision and hearing.