* 9631371
* Curation of the Florida Museum of Natural History           Paleobotanical Collection
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* David Dilcher, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/2000
* USD 219,000.00

9631371 Dilcher A collection of over 100,000 fossil plants is housed at the
Florida Museum of Natural History. This collection was originally organized by
the PI, David Dilcher, and his students and colleagues. It was added to by
regular collections made from the Eocene plant-bearing areas in western
Tennessee and Kentucky, the coal mines in Indiana and Cretaceous clays in Kansas
and Nebraska. Major contributions were made by co-PI Steven Manchester for his
research on the Eocene and Paleocene fossil plants from western states. In
addition to its areas of concentration, the collection now includes fossil
plants from all over the world and many sites in the USA. This collection has
become a major resource in the world and is visited regularly by people studying
fossil plants from USA and other countries. Currently, there is no collection
manager, and the collection is not well organized. This project is a three year
program to fund a Collection Manager position and provide some student
assistance to catalogue and organize the specimens. When this collection is
properly curated, it will be a national resource accessible and useful to the
scientific community. The University of Florida is partnering with NSF to
support this collection by maintaining the Collection Manager as a permanent
position after the expiration of the grant.