* 9631767
* Dissertation Research:  Radiation, Evolution, and           Interaction of Two Sulawesi Macaque Species
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Don Melnick, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/1998
* USD 11,350.00

Speciation, a process whereby a new evolutionarily independent entity arises,
underlies much of the biological diversity seen today. For this reason, it has
been the focus of much theoretical work leading to many models of how new
species arise and many, often controversial definitions of what a species is.
Despite this work, few empirical studies of primates have shed light on the
dynamics of speciation. The researchers propose to examine in detail two
putative species of cercopithecine monkey and their hybrids, in order to gain a
clearer understanding of the genetic consequences of geographic separation and
subsequent intergradation. The two species are members of the macaque complex,
Macaca maurus and M. tonkeana, on the Indonesian island of Sulawesi. Genetic
material will be collected from several hundred individuals within the range of
each species and across the intervening hybrid zone. Using automated DNA
sequencing technology, the mitochondrial and nuclear genomes will be surveyed
for informative markers that reveal the direction and rate of gene flow across
the hybrid zone, the relative contribution of males and females of each species
to this hybridization process, and the genetic effects of hybridization on the
long term evolutionary integrity of each species. Female contributions will be
tracked using mtDNA markers, while male mediated gene flow will be reconstructed
using nDNA microsatellites. This study will shed light on the process of species
formation among higher primates, factors leading to its subsequent breakdown,
and possibly why there are so many species of macaque monkeys on Sulawesi.