* 9631066
* Translational Regulation in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Ernest Hannig, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9631066 Hannig Initiation of protein synthesis appears to be the rate-limiting
step in the translation of many, if not most, eukaryotic messenger RNAs. Our
current understanding of the initiation pathway is derived largely from in vitro
biochemical studies of partial reactions using mammalian systems. The
biochemical data suggest an intricate set of protein-protein and protein-RNA
interactions involving messenger RNA, initiator tRNA, ribosomes, and protein
initiation factors (eIFs). One of the key initiation factors is eIF-2, and is
the primary focus of this proposal. eIF-2 is a heterotrimeric guanine
nucleotide-binding protein that delivers the charged initiator tRNA to the small
ribosomal subunit. eIF-2 executes this function in the GTP-bound state and once
executed, is released in an inactive GDP-bound form. Recycling of eIF-2 to the
active state requires eIF-2B, a hetero-pentameric guanine nucleotide exchange
factor for eIF-2 that is present at substoichiometric levels relative to its
substrate. The recycling reaction is regulated in vivo, and can be inhibited in
yeast and mammals through protein kinases that specifically phosphorylate the a
subunit of eIF-2. This effectively down-regulates global protein synthesis. PKR,
a mammalian eIF-2a kinase, may also function as a tumor suppressor in vivo.
Protein synthesis in mammals and in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae appears
to be highly similar. Genetic studies in yeast have identified structural genes
encoding the three and five subunits of eIF2 and eIF-2B, respectively. Where
known, the corresponding mammalian cDNAs predict polypeptides that are highly
similar to the yeast proteins, and some of these can substitute for the yeast
gene in vivo. Analysis of mutant phenotypes in yeast has provided clues to the
function of individual subunits. Combined with biochemical studies in mammalian
systems, the genetic studies in yeast have begun to elucidate the complex
macromolecular interactions that occur during the initiation process. However,
the full potential of the genetic studies in yeast has not been realized due to
the lack of a suitable purification for yeast eIF-2 and eIF-2B that would
facilitate biochemical analysis of the wide array of available mutants. This
proposal describes the development of novel and rapid procedures for purifying
both eIF-2 and eIF-2B from yeast. In the former case, this has lead to the first
quantitative biochemical analysis of both wild-type and mutant yeast eIF-2
proteins. The proposed experiments combine these newly available biochemical
tools with the genetic analysis of mutants to form a powerful approach to
studying eIF-2 and eIF-2B function at the molecular level. Specifically, the r
subunit of yeast eIF-2 will be used as a model to test this combined approach to
determine the role of the y subunit in eIF-2 function. eIF-2r is an excellent
model for this approach because of its predicted structural and functional
similarities to the well-studied eubacterial elongation factor Tu. These
similarities predict a major and direct role for eIF-2g in ligand binding by
eIF-2 and interactions between eIF-2 and the eIF-2B exchange factor. Genetic
screens will be used to identify mutations in eIF-2g that may affect one or more
of these functions. Biochemical analysis of eIF-2 purified from mutant strains
will identify activities of eIF-2, for which the g subunit is critical, that are
important for that function. These studies will also establish a
structure/function map for the g protein, and lead to further studies that will
provide a more complete understanding of the function of two critical factors
involved in initiation of eukaryotic protein synthesis. %%% The "decoding" of
genetic information into proteins is a critical process shared by all organisms.
In eukaryotic organisms the expression of a number of important genes, including
a subset of those encoding tumor suppressors, may either regulate or be
regulated by this decoding step. This step, referred to as "translation" or
"protein synthesis ", is an intricate (but precise) process that requires
cooperation among multiple complex molecules. Unfortunately, little detail is
available concerning the precise mechanism for normal protein synthesis, much
less its regulation. We have identified mutations in genes encoding these
complex molecules involved in translation that have given us clues to their
functions. We are now developing procedures to facilitate the purification of
these complexes, in order that we may examine the function of normal and mutant
proteins under controlled conditions. These experiments will give us a more
complete understanding of this basic but essential biochemical process, and
mechanisms whereby this process can be altered to enhance gene expression. These
studies can ultimately allow us to devise means to correct defects in, or
otherwise alter, the translational mechanism itself or the expression of
translationally regulated genes. ***