* 9631604
* From the Rights Revolution to Reengineering:  The           Construction of Corporate Departments
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Frank Dobbin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1999
* USD 128,651.00

This is a study of emergence and diffusion of new kinds of departments in
corporations. Prevailing theories of corporate structure, whether they address
the presence of particular departments or the level of internal differentiation,
point to functional causes such as size, economic performance, and technical
complexity. These theories predict cross-sectional variation well, however they
do not predict longitudinal variation at all well. Over the past three decades,
many new kinds of departments emerged and diffused among American corporations,
from environmental protection to total quality management. Established
departments, such as personnel and accounts payable, have been replaced or
eliminated entirely. Institutionalists suggest that these changes were brought
about by two kinds environmental forces: the federal employment rights
revolution and efficiency-oriented management movements. The employment rights
revolution of the early 1970s coincided with the civil rights, women's, and
environmental movements. In contrast, the Occupational Safety and Health Act and
the Pension Reform Act were not associated with social movements. Thus one key
question is the significance of new federally established rights versus social
movements in leading firms to create equal employment and environmental
protection departments. A series of efficiency-oriented management movements
between 1965 and 1996 prescribed the creation of new internal departments; chief
among them were strategic planning, quality management, and human resource
management. Many corporations responded by establishing new departments. Other
movements, such as the reengineering and core competence movements, prescribed
large-scale elimination of internal departments. A second question, therefore,
concerns the significance of these movements in causing change. The answers to
these and related questions lie in analysis of where and when particular
departments appeared and where and when the wholesale elimination of departments
oc curred. For the period 1965-1996, annual data on the vice presidential-level
offices of 500 large corporations will be collected from Standard and Poor's
directories. These data will be merged with annual financial data and data on
corporate networks and analyzed using dynamic methods. Event-history analyses of
the adoption, and elimination, of particular departments will be used to
evaluate political, economic, and institutional theories of how new structures
emerge and diffuse across corporations. Pooled time-series analyses of the level
of internal departmental differentiation will be used to evaluate competing
theories of how broad structural changes come about. The goal of this project is
to improve understanding of the processes by which changes in the corporate
environment affect the composition of departments within firms. Thus the
findings will contribute to increased organizational effectiveness and better
use of human capital resources by American corporations.