* 9631530
* Involvement of Pseudomonas syringae harpins, Avr Proteins, and the Type III (Hrp) Secretion Pathway in Plant Interactions
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Alan Collmer, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 434,000.00

9631530 Collmer The hypersensitive response (HR) of higher plants is a rapid
cellular suicide associated with defense against incompatible pathogens,
including plant pathogenic bacteria. The hrp genes of Pseudomonas syringae are
necessary for the bacterium to elicit the HR in nonhost plants or pathogenesis
in host plants. hrp genes are known to be widespread (perhaps universal) in
necrogenic, gram-negative plant pathogens, to be clustered in the bacterial
genome or on megaplasmids, and to encode components of a type III secretion
pathway that is used by both plant and animal pathogens to secrete virulence
proteins, and which appears dedicated to bacterial pathogenesis of higher
eucaryotes. Thus, an understanding of this pathway and the proteins that traffic
it appear key to understanding bacterial plant pathogenicity. The functional
cluster of hrp genes from P. syringae pv. syringae 61, which was cloned to
produce cosmid pHIR11, has provided a particularly useful tool for exploring the
type III pathway, in general, and the Hrp system, in particular. Cosmid pHIR11
enables saprophytic bacteria, like Pseudomonas fluorescens and Escherichia coli,
to elicit the HR in the leaves of tobacco and many other plants, and it thereby
demonstrates that a 25 kb region of the P. fluorescens(pHIR11), but not P.s.
syringae 61 and other model P. syringae stains, to elicit the HR. Mutations
affecting the four hrp operons containing type III components that are highly
conserved in plant and animal pathogens produced different patterns of
immunoblot-detected HrpZ subcellular localization and suggest that the four
operons differentially control translocation across the inner and outer
membranes of the bacterium. avr genes, which interact in a gene-for-gene manner
with corresponding resistance genes in plants, control host specificity at the
race-cultivars level in P. syringae. P. fluorescens(pHIR11) does not elicit the
HR in soybean, but when cultivars carrying the RPG1 resistance gene are
inoculated with P. fluorescens(pHIR11) expressing avrB (which interacts with
RPG1) in trans, the HR is elicited. However, no HR is elicited if either hrpZ or
a hrp gene encoding a type III pathway component is mutated. The hrmA gene is
located next to the hrp cluster in P.s. syringae 61 and is required for P.
fluorescens(pHIR11), but not P.s. syringae 61, to elicit the HR in tobacco.
Surprisingly, P. fluorescens(pHIR11) hrmA mutants were found to secrete wild-
type levels of HrpZ. Like a typical avr gene, hrmA is missing from many P.
syringae strains, including the tobacco pathogen P.s. tabaci, and it conferred
incompatibility and HR activity when heterologously expressed in that bacterium.
The HrmA protein does not elicit the HR when infiltrated into tobacco leaves,
but when hrmA is transiently expressed in biolistically-transformed tobacco
suspension-cultured cells, it produced apparent cell death. These observations
and the known ability of the type III pathway in Yersinia spp. To deliver anti-
host proteins directly into animal cells leads t the following model upon which
this proposal is founded. Harpin-like proteins are secreted "promiscuously" into
the apoplast, while Avr-like proteins are delivered directly into plant cells
upon receipt of some signal. Thus, there are two classes of proteins that differ
with respect to the control of their secretion and the site of their action, and
the type III pathway holds the keys to the coordinated delivery of these
proteins. The specific objectives of the proposed work are: 1. Determine if
HrmA, AvrB, and/or AVRPto can elicit cell death and active oxygen generation or
other readily assayed responses when heterologously expressed in appropriate
plant leaves, if the proteins are secreted into plant cells by bacteria in a hrp
dependent manner, and if their secretion can be observed in culture with
appropriate hrp mutants or plant signals. 2. Determine the basis for the
apparent need for both HrpZ and an Avr protein in bacterial elicitation of the
HR, and further define the function of hrpZ in pathogenesis. 3. Identify
additional proteins traveling the Hrp pathway. 4. Construct nonpoplar mutations
in hrpJ, hrpA, and hrcU in the pHIR11 hrp cluster and determine the role of each
in the deployment of Avr signals, the secretion of HrpZ across the inner and
outer membranes, and other Hrp related phenotypes. ***