* 9631520
* How Women Won the Vote:  The Political Successes of the     State Suffrage Movements, 1866-1920
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Holly McCammon, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/1998
* USD 94,801.00

This is a study of the conditions under which a social movement is able to
overcome powerful opposition to bring about significant political change. It
will examine the state-level women's suffrage movements in the decades before
and after the turn of the century to understand the circumstances in which
movements are successful. In 1869 Wyoming was the first state (then a territory)
to grant women suffrage. By 1920 when the l9th amendment was ratified, 33 states
had enacted laws giving women one or more forms of partial suffrage, such as the
right to vote in presidential or municipal elections, and 15 states (some of
which had already enacted partial suffrage) had granted women full suffrage. The
primary goal in studying the state suffrage movements is to develop and
empirically test a theoretical model of social movement success. Rarely have
researchers examined the conditions that lead to movement success defined in
terms of political outcomes (as opposed to mobilization or cultural outcomes).
For the state suffrage campaigns, political success was the expansion of the
vote to women. The theoretical framework combines theories of movement
mobilization with theories of the state, hypothesizing that the ability of the
suffragists to bring about political change was shaped both by the movements'
abilities to mobilize resources and by the social structural opportunities they
confronted. Resource mobilization theory suggests that movement success stems
from the ability of movement participants to mobilize key resources, including
organizations and types of ideologies and strategies. The political process
model of movement mobilization suggests that political opportunity structures
influence movement effectiveness. Researchers, however, have typically
interpreted political opportunity structures to encompass only the effect of
actual political structures and processes (e.g., the openness of the polity or
electoral instability) on the decisions of state actors to grant the demands of
move ments. This research draws from various strands of theories of the state to
expand the notion of opportunity structures, theorizing that gendered, economic,
and racial opportunity structures also importantly influence the ability of
movements to bring about political change. It combines social movement theory
and theories of the state to explain social movement success. This study employs
quantitative methods to test the empirical validity of the theoretical model.
Event history analysis permits comparison of the state movements and the state
contexts in which they operated to explain why some movements failed and others
succeeded. Other methods, such as qualitative comparative analysis and recursive
regressions, will also be employed to explore the complexities and robustness of
the results. The state movements exhibit theoretically important variation
(e.g., in terms of organization, strategies, and ideologies), and the contexts
in which they operated also vary (e.g., concerning party politics and cultural
and economic opposition), thus offering the opportunity for comparative analysis
of multiple movements working toward the same general goal, women's suffrage.
This historical study will contribute to our understanding of the development of
American democracy, and thus will be of value to teachers and students,
especially to those who are interested in women's history. However, the
scientific results will have much broader value, improving formal models of the
success and failure of political movements in general, including modern ones.