* 9631352
* GOALI:  Structure of Pulsed Vortex Generator Jets
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Hamid Johari, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Roger E.A. Arndt
* 05/31/1997
* USD 16,994.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS-9631352 Principal Investigator: Johari This is
grant to support a collaborative effort between Worcester Polytechnic Institute
and Physical Sciences Inc. to investigate the concept of vortex generator jets
for turbulent boundary layer control. Detailed flow visualization experiments
will be performed to probe the near field of a pulsed vortex generator jet
embedded in a turbulent boundary layer. Studies will be made in both a water
tunnel and a wind tunnel. Data obtained from this study will be used to model
the interaction of the pulsing jet and the boundary layer flow. Information of
this type will be useful in developing improved boundary layer control systems
with a variety of applications including flow control on airliner wings. The
project will utilize experimental facilities at Physical Sciences and WPI. This
research has the potential to significantly enhance the performance of jet
injection vortex generators in comparison to conventional vane generators that
have inherently higher parasite drag. The concept is quite important to the
success of MEMS technology. The blending of the academic and industrial research
facilities greatly enhances the overall capability for carrying out the proposed
research. This project will be cost shared with Physical Sciences Inc. under the
GOALI program.