* 9631573
* Roles of Attention in Motion Processing
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Takeo Watanabe, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 07/31/1999
* USD 159,498.00

9631573 WATANABE Visual perception is often considered a passive and simple
event. This view derives partly from the general assumption that visual
information goes only from the retina to higher-level areas in the brain, and
not in the other direction. However, recent anatomical and physiological
findings indicate that there are massive feedback pathways in the brain along
which information is carried from these higher-level brain areas back to low-
level areas, including those processing visual information. It is not yet well
known what role these feedback projections play in visual information processing
in the brain. This research is concerned with the role of attention, one of the
most important cognitive functions originating in higher brain areas. It will
examine what level of visual processing is the lowest that can be influenced by
attention. Answering this question will lead to a better understanding of the
role of feedback projections from high-level brain areas, where cognitive
functions likely originate, to lower level visual processing. In a series of
experiments, people will watch a moving object on a computer display and will be
instructed to pay attention only to a local contour of the object. One minute
after the onset of the moving object, each person's sensitivity to motion in
several directions, such as upward and rightward, will be measured. Motion
processing is known to have at least two stages: In the first stage, the
direction of motion of the whole object is not detected by the visual system.
Only the many local motion components perpendicular to the local contours of a
moving object are detected. This stage begins in the primary visual cortex in
which very low-level visual processing occurs. In the second stage, the signals
from detection of the directions of these local motion components are
integrated, so that the true direction of motion of the entire object can be
calculated. In these experiments, if attention influences the first stage of
motion processing, sensitivity to the originally attended local motion should
decrease. On the other hand, if attention does not influence such a low-level
stage of processing, sensitivity to the direction of motion should not be
influenced by the allocation of attention. A preliminary experimental result
using only two people indicated that the former is the case. If this result is
confirmed with additional people, it will indicate that attention can influence
even very primitive stages of visual information processing, leading to the
conclusion that feedback projections play a very important role in making visual
perception active and influenced by high-level cognitive functions, rather than
entirely passive and automatic. These results should have important implications
for the design of computer vision systems, a very difficult computer problem.
***