* 9631935
* Bioluminescence:  Molecular Mechanisms and Biochemical      Control in Microorganisms
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Therese Wilson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 03/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9631935 Hastings This project is concerned with the fundamental biochemical
mechanisms of light emitting systems in bacteria and dinoflagellates, two major
and evolutionarily independent groups of bioluminescent organisms. Studies of
model chemical systems will be carried out in parallel. In the bacterium Vibrio
fischeri strain Y-l, experiments are designed to determine the mechanism by
which an accessory yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) causes not only a shift from
blue to yellow luminescence and an increase in the rate of the light-emitting
reaction, but also confers a negative temperature coefficient to the reaction,
such that the intensity is greater at lower temperatures over the range of 4 to
20 C. YFP acts by interacting with a reaction intermediate, and recombinant
proteins will be used to determine if YFP turns over, i.e., acts catalytically.
A goal will be to pinpoint the peroxidic luciferase intermediate(s) with which
YFP reacts; dim V. fischeri luciferase mutants in which the reaction rate is
very slow will be constructed by site directed mutagenesis in order to test the
effect of YFP on the rate of altered kinetic mutants. In the dinoflagellate
system, the luciferase gene has recently been found to possess three regions
with similar sequences. We will characterize the catalytic properties of the
individual active peptides expressed by these repeat sequences, and determine
the structural features required for activity, as well as a mechanistic role for
the tandem catalytic sites. We will complete the determination of the sequence
and structure of full length luciferase genomic and cDNAs and look for the
promoter and for introns. We will search for a regulatory mRNA binding protein
involved in the translational control of luciferase. In the efficient
chemiluminescence of oxalate ester, experiments are planned to identify the
reactive, energy-rich intermediate(s) and the role of electron or charge
transfer in chemiexcitation. %%% The flash of fireflies at dusk and the brillia
nt "phosphorescence" of the ocean at night are two examples of bioluminescence,
present also in a few members of each of many different groups of organisms. The
functions of bioluminescence are also very different; some animals use it to
avoid or escape predators while others use it to attract prey. Still others,
like fireflies, use flashing for communication, in courtship for example. An
understanding of the basic mechanisms in bio- and chemiluminescence can be
expected to advance our knowledge in several fundamental areas, for example
energy metabolism and cellular damage caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS),
including the possible roles of ROS as cellular messengers. There are also many
applied uses of luminescent systems in medicine, particularly in clinical
analysis for measurements of drugs and metabolites, and in genetic research for
the sensitive and unambiguous visualization of gene expression. The systems to
be studied in this laboratory are largely unexplored, and the problems addressed
are novel in many respects; it is thus expected that the results will contribute
significantly to both basic knowledge and its applications. ***