* 9631155
* Phosphotyrosine Protein Phosphatases in Streptomycetes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* William Strohl, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2000
* USD 281,000.00

9631155 Strohl A gene (ptpA) from Streptomyces coelicolor was isolated that
encodes a protein having high deduced sequence similarity with mammalian small,
acidic phosphotyrosine protein phosphatases (PTPPs). The protein encoded by ptpA
was purified and was found to have strong in vitro phosphotyrosine phosphatase
activity that is competitively inhibited by dephostatin, a highly specific
phosphotyrosine protein phosphatase inhibitor. ptpA was found to be expressed
only under minimal medium growth conditions, the same conditions under which
growth of S. coelicolor was inhibited by dephostatin, a potent inhibitor of PtpA
in vitro. The working hypothesis is that PtpA and(or) other unknown PTPPs
dephosphorylate target protein (or proteins), the action of which is (are)
required for growth in minimal medium. These and other supportive data strongly
suggest that protein tyrosine phosphorylation plays an important, but as yet
undefined, role in the regulation of S. coelicolor metabolism. Very little is
currently known about the role of protein-tyrosine phosphorylation in bacteria.
Thus, the long term goals of this research are to elucidate the function(s) for
protein tyrosine phosphorylation in S. coelicolor. The problem will be
approached through the discovery of ptpA and the finding that specific PTPP and
protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors conditionally inhibit S. coelicolor growth.
The specific aims of this project are: (1) To determine precisely under what
conditions ptpA is expressed in S. coelicolor; (2) To determine if ptpA mutation
or overexpression result in observable, expected phenotypic changes. If not,
then the PTPP(s) responsible for dephostatin inhibition of growth in minimal
medium will be identified and isolated; (3) To study PtpA activity in vivo and
to determine and isolate PtpA substrate(s); and (4) As a lead-in to future
studies, mutants of S. coelicolor resistant to PTPP and protein-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors will be isolated and used to initiate the isolation of other gen es
associated with PTPP-related metabolism. This study will advance the knowledge
of a poorly understood biochemical mechanism in bacteria, i.e., protein-tyrosine
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, and its role in regulation of bacterial
metabolism. %%% Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of proteins are involved
in the relay of biochemical information from one type of metabolism to another.
An unusual protein tyrosine phosphatase, an enzyme that catalyzes the removal of
a phosphate group from the tyrosyl residues of other proteins, was discovered in
the antibiotic-producing bacterium, Streptomyces coelicolor. Preliminary
evidence suggests that this protein phosphatase may be involved in regulation of
the central metabolism of this organism and perhaps also morphogenesis and
antibiotic production. Thus, the goal of this research is to determine the
specific function of this protein phosphatase. This research also will explore
additional similar protein phosphatases to determine their potential roles in
regulation of metabolism or morphogenesis in this interesting bacterium. ***