* 9631952
* Data Warehousing and Decision Support
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Jeffrey Ullman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2000
* USD 424,561.00

In business, government, and all aspects of life where planning is important,
there is a need for database management systems that can handle `decision-
support queries.` These complex queries involve the aggregation of very large
amounts of data. Often, special `data warehouses,` or copies of information from
a variety of sources, are created for the purpose of asking decision-support
queries, while the original databases are used for transaction processing. Some
new database products implement `data cubes,` special organizations of data that
facilitate common forms of decision-support queries. One important new research
problem is data-cube design, where it is feasible to materialize a selected set
of views to optimize average query time, for a given amount of storage.
Selection of materialized views for data cubes is a major research challenge.
More generally, when views in a warehouse are maintained as the underlying
databases change, it is desirable to have at the warehouse a selection of views
so that they can all be updated without having to issue queries at the
underlying databases (so-called `self-maintainability` of views). Self-
maintainable warehouses present another research challenge. Finally, decision-
support queries themselves can often be optimized by techniques recently
discovered and, it appears, some new techniques that need investigation.