* 9631019
* Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Chemistry to be   Held at Colby-Sawyer College, New London, New Hampshire,    July 14 - July 19, 1996
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Carlyle Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/1997
* USD 5,000.00

9631019 Storm Interest in Solid State Chemistry has grown dramatically in recent
years, encouraged by both the recognition of the technological importance and
scientific challenges in the study of new materials and the interest of students
in what they feel as a `relevant' area of science. The advent of initiatives
such as the Advanced Materials Processing Program as a national thrust in the
synthesis and processing of new materials has put Solid State Chemistry in the
spotlight. Funding is provided for partial support of the 1996 Gordon Conference
on Solid State Chemistry to be held at Colby-Sawyer College, New London, NH
during July 14-19, 1996. Invited speakers have been drawn from research groups
in academia and industry. %%% Solid-State Chemistry is a growing and dynamic
field of study. In addition to leading scientists from the U.S., world class
scientists from Britain and France have been included to make contact with the
broad international research effort in this area. The Gordon Research Conference
Special Fund has provided $15,000 towards the cost of speakers and discussion
leaders for the Solid State Chemistry Gordon Conference. The NSF funds are
intended for the support of ten graduate students and young faculty to give them
the opportunity to meet and participate in scientific discussions with the
leaders in the field of Solid State Chemistry. ***