* 9631560
* Electronic Facilitation of Functional Recovery Following    CNS Trauma
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Richard Borgens, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/1999
* USD 251,018.00

Borgens 9631560 Spinal cord injuries are devastating to those that survive them,
producing lifelong losses in important bodily functions. The loss of function is
in part due to a break in the nerve fibers from the spinal cord to the brain,
and those that carry impulses from the brain to various parts of the body. One
possible means to restore this "two-way" impulse conduction is to induce and
guide the regeneration of nerve fibers around or through the area of injury.
Such regeneration does not normally happen in mammals, but occurs naturally in
other vertebrates, usually leading to functional recovery after spinal cord
injury. A novel means to accomplish this task is to impose a weak voltage across
the injury site. This approach arises from very clear evidence that the
application of this electrical field can both initiate and direct the growth of
fibers; this has been shown in studies of nerve cells grown in culture, as well
as in various "whole animal" studies (for example in the spinal cord of
primitive fish and guinea pigs). Nerve processes grow towards the negative pole,
and degenerate away from the positive pole of the applied voltage. Weak applied
voltages may also induce a predictable orientation of other cells important to
the injury process such as astrocytes, that form scar tissue in the spinal cord,
and macrophages, which also play a prominent role in acute injury. To be
clinically useful, an applied voltage must influence nerve processes projecting
in both directions within the spinal cord. Since growth response towards the
negative pole are immediate, and degenerative responses occurring at the
positive pole occur much later, the direction of the applied voltage can be
reversed every 15 to 30 minutes to produce nerve growth in both directions. This
is called oscillating field stimulation (OFS). OFS has produced significant
levels of functional recovery in naturally injured paraplegic dogs in veterinary
clinical trials. An implantab le OFS unit is now in development for the first
trial in human patients; however, before human clinical trials may begin, more
information must be gathered on the effects of OFS in other mammals. Up to this
point, experiments involving laboratory rats and guinea pigs have been limited
due to the large size of the prototype OFS device. In this study, the
investigators will use a recently developed miniaturized OFS device, combined
with a hand-held sensor to test the function of the unit from outside the body,
to determine the mechanisms of action, target cells and critical aspects of this
new technology.