* 9631496
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Autoregressive Moving Average ModelSelection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Kathryn Prewitt, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 01/31/1998
* USD 17,996.00

One goal of this research is to study model selection in ARMA models by
utilizing parametric and non-parametric fits of the spectral density function. A
measure of discrepancy is to be developed which compares directly the parametric
estimate in the ARMA model with a kernel non-parametric estimator of the
spectral density, as opposed to fitting the model and then looking at spectrum
estimates involving the residuals. The particular nonparametric estimator to be
used is a Gasser-Muller estimator which applies kernel weights to the
periodogram and utilizes a local bandwidth choice. Optimal bandwidth choices for
this estimator will be addressed. Theoretical properties will be obtained for
the selection method, and performance of this criteria will be assessed by
comparisons with current methods as well as extensive simulation studies.
Another goal is the collaboration with a colleague, Jeping He, in the
Bioengineering Department at Arizona State University. He has a significant
amount of data on a project entitled: "Adaptation in Posture and Muscle Tone in
Anticipation of Perturbation" which appears to be nonstationary time series data
but shows segments of stationarity. We then have the opportunity to use standard
techniques in analyzing the segments including those developed in the previous
paragraph. In addition we hope to develop new techniques for analyzing similar
nonstationary data using, for example, the evolutionary spectrum.