* 9631392
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Center for Applied Probability:  Infrastructure Support for an Interdisciplinary Research    Center
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* David Yao, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2002
* USD 1,000,000.00

Heyde 9631392 The Center for Applied Probability (CAP) at Columbia University
was established in late 1993 as an interdisciplinary center concerned with the
study of uncertainty in all areas of human endeavor. Its creation reflected the
substantial interest and expertise in applied probability of many faculty
members at Columbia, who, collectively, represent a broad range of disciplines,
span-spanning major research and educational activities of the Graduate School
of Arts and Sciences, the Graduate School of Business, and the School of
Engineering and Applied Science. CAP's unique strength lies in its integration
of probability with a spectrum of applications in science, engineering, and
industry. With its location in metropolitan New York, CAP also has unique
opportunities for significant impact on the research and educational needs in
industry sectors as diverse as telecommunications, computing, financial services
and insurance, retail and distribution, and engineering and management
consulting. Each of these sectors faces vital issues of risk, reliability, and
quality that mesh with CAP's strengths in theory and modeling. Four application
areas (mathematical and computational finance, stochastic networks, logistics
and distribution, and population dynamics), and four methodological areas
(control and optimization, stochastic analysis, numerical methods, and
statistical inference), with extensive cross linkage, form CAP's focal areas for
building research and educational programs. Infrastructure support is needed for
three specific objectives: (a) to support doctoral research in the focal areas,
with an emphasis on the integration of mathematics, computing, and applications;
(b) to facilitate bringing several key visiting scientists to CAP for
collaborative research; and (c) to build a computer laboratory to support
computation, which is central to all the focal areas. Ten key players of CAP
form the team of investigators. This group includes several nationally and
internationally r enowned leaders in applied probability and operations
research. This Group Infrastructure Grant will permit expansion of this
activity.