* 9632457
* Experimental and Analytical Investigation of Hybrid/        Composite Structural Walls - Steel Frame Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* John Wallace, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 08/31/2001
* USD 190,000.00

The use of reinforced concrete or composite core walls and steel gravity or
moment frames offers an economical alternative to RC wall/core and concrete
frame systems. Successful performance of these systems depends on the adequate
performance of walls/cores, steel frames, and frame-core connections.
Fundamental issues related to cyclic performance of composite walls/cores have
yet to be addressed. A coordinated research program, combining experimental and
analytical studies is formulated to investigate the performance of composite
wall - hybrid systems. The primary objectives of this project are to: (1)
conduct and document experimental studies of composite walls, (2) investigate
force transfer mechanisms between concrete and encased steel sections under
cyclic tension and compression, (3) evaluate the experimental results with
respect to wall strength stiffness, and ductility, (4) assess existing code
requirements and (5) provide essential data so that complete building systems
can be investigated analytically to assess the economics of using
hybrid/composite systems. Five approximately 1/3-scale composite walls and
approximately ten, large-scale isolated boundary columns will be tested. A
prototype structure will be used to derive general parameters of the test
specimens and to relate experimental data to overall structural response. In
addition, cyclic load tests of isolated boundary columns will be done to provide
detailed data on force transfer mechanisms and confinement requirements. General
analytical studies of specimen behavior will be performed to evaluate the
ability of simplified code equations to predict the strength and stiffness of
the composite walls. Modeling techniques appropriate for analytical studies of
complete structural systems will also be investigated. This is an award under
the 2nd year Initiative (NSF 94-154) on `Composite and Hybrid Structures.`