* 9632468
* Cell Division in a Filamentous, Sporulating Bacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Kathleen Kendrick, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

Kendrick 9632468 Cell division is an essential property of all organisms. To
reproduce, each cell must divide to generate viable daughter cells. Bacterial
cell division is a logical system to use to study fundamental molecular events
involved in the temporal and spatial regulation of cellular reproductive
mechanisms. The recent discovery of bacterial counterparts of eucaryotic cell
cycle machinery points to the immense value of the analysis of bacterial cell
division as a paradigm of cell cycle events in higher organisms. To deposit new
peptidoglycan at the correct time in the cell cycle and at the correct location,
a unicellular bacterium must be able to monitor the completion of DNA
replication and the segregation of the newly replicated DNA, locate the center
of the cell, and initiate the centripetal growth of new cell wall and
cytoplasmic membrane. Because binary fission is the only means by which most
bacteria reproduce, many of the genes required for cell division are essential
and thus cannot be readily dissected by mutation analysis. Unlike other
bacteria, Streptomyces is unique in its growth as branched, filamentous,
multinucleoidal cells that, in response to nutrient limitation, undergo multiple
septation events to form chains of uninucleoidal spores. As a reproductive
process, sporulation of streptomycetes offers an exceptional opportunity to
investigate proteins required for division of unicellular bacteria for four
reasons. First, the septa formed during Streptomyces sporulation closely
resemble the cell division septa of unicellular bacteria. Second, sporulation is
a non-essential process in streptomycetes, so proteins involved in sporulation
are not expected a priori to participate also in vegetative growth. Third, the
viability of an ftsZ null mutant Streptomyces indicates that at least one of the
genes required for cell division in other bacteria is not essential for
vegetative growth of Streptomyces. There are likely to be other such genes.
Fourth, the abundant se ptation that is required only for streptomycete
sporulation implicates regulatory processes that ensure the absence of these
septa during growth and the correct timing of synthesis and placement of these
septa during differentiation. Some of these regulatory factors may be homologues
of proteins that control cell division in unicellular bacteria. To continue the
analysis of cell division in Steptomyces griseus, we will use random and site-
directed mutagenesis and promoter-probe studies to identify cis-active sites
required for developmental regulation of ftsZ. Because some bald mutants of S.
griseus undergo premature septation and spore wall synthesis, we anticipate that
these mutants are defective in an important regulatory system that governs the
timing of key events of sporulation. We will therefore identify the gene that is
defective in these mutants by using standard complementation techniques. The
analysis of cell division in Streptomyces will reveal valuable information not
only about the roles of cell division genes that have been identified in other
bacteria, but also about the determinants of cell shape, the nature of branch
formation during hyphal growth and at the onset of sporulation,and the molecular
details of a reproductive differentiation process. New genes involved in cell
division are also likely to emerge from the characterization of sporulation in
Streptomyces because of the non-essential nature of these genes. Moreover, since
streptomycete sporulation is a consequence of nutrient limitation, these studies
will contribute to our understanding of developmental responses to environmental
stress.