* 9632597
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Prehispanic Change in the Mesitas   Community:  Documenting the Development of a Chiefdom's     Central Place in San Agustin, Colombia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1998
* USD 7,350.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Victor Gonzalez will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork and
analysis of materials collected at the site of Mesitas, located in the San
Agustin region of Columbia. This area is archaeological famous because of the
ornate prehistoric tombs and monumental stone carvings which it contains.
However relatively little was known about the societies which produced these
works. In recent years Dr. Drennan has conducted large scale archaeological
surveys and excavations around San Agustin and as a result of this work the
dates of these constructions are now known. Drennan's work has also produced an
anomalous result. While the tombs and monuments are indicative of a
hierarchically organized stratified society, preliminary work at living sites
does not disclose the material culture differences which are the likely
correlates of such social organization. Instead is indicates a high degree of
egalitarianism. In his research Mr. Gonzalez will examine this question further.
Mesitas is the largest site in the San Agustin region and it spans the time
period both prior to and during the construction period. Work already conducted
at the site indicates the presence of numerous and widely scattered family
dwellings. Mr. Gonzalez will carry out a series of shovel probes in a systematic
program that will encompass the core of the settlement concentration. It will
document the sizes and internal arrangements of all the households spread
through an area of some 150 hectares. It will also yield a sample of artifacts
from each household and thus permit a detailed study of inter-household
variation. Analysis of the changes in size and spatial relations of the
households, together with comparison of their artifact assemblages will document
how relationships between these units changed as the community grew larger and
as the complex of monumental sculpture and burial mounds was created within it.
This research is important for several reasons. It will examine an unusual case
which does not conform to standard archaeological expectations about how social
complexity develops. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and
assist in the training of a promising young scientist.