* 9632029
* Heinrich-Scale Climate Events in Western North America and  the Northeastern Pacific?  Testing Possible Mechanisms
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,02/28/2001
* Alan Mix, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 02/28/2001
* USD 719,552.00

9632029 Pisias This award supports a collaborative effort that will test
hypotheses regarding the occurrence of millennial-scale climate fluctuations now
recognized in western North America and the northeastern Pacific Ocean.
Preliminary data from marine sediments off California and Oregon, pollen records
from Pacific Northwest lakes, and glacial records from western North America
reveal climate events that appear to be related to the Heinrich events of the
North Atlantic. This study will test two hypotheses: 1) that climate events
originating in the North Atlantic are transmitted to the North Pacific ocean and
western North America via thermohaline circulation and its influence on
properties of the surface ocean and circulation of the atmosphere, and 2) that
climates of the North Atlantic, North America, and the northeast Pacific depend
jointly on the elevation of the Laurentide Ice Sheet and its influence on
atmospheric circulation. These hypotheses will be constrained by analyzing the
paleoclimate record in a geographic array of sites in the northeastern Pacific
Ocean and in western North America, including constraints on oceanic upwelling
and near- surface advection, deep ocean properties and vegetation on land, and
comparing these data with model output. A significant advance will come from
linking the records from land and sea with a well- constrained chronology, and
with stratigraphic links of pollen and terrigenous sediment in marine cores.