* 9632526
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on        Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Chia-Ling Chien, Johns Hopkins University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ulrich Strom
* 04/30/2001
* USD 3,030,000.00

9632526 Chien The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at
Johns Hopkins University supports research on nanostructured materials, with a
focus on the development of novel low dimensional nanostructures with unique
physical properties and diverse technological applications. The research
combines experimental and theoretical studies to develop an understanding of the
interrelationship between the properties of nanostructures and the degrees of
freedom available for their design and fabrication. Materials to be studied
include multilayers of functionally dissimilar materials, e.g. metals and
insulators, arrays of nanowires, and ultrafine granular materials. The MRSEC
also supports shared experimental facilities for materials research, exploratory
research through seed funding, and collaborations with industry and other
academic institutions. The Center's educational outreach program includes summer
internships for talented high school students in collaboration with the Johns
Hopkins Institute for the Advancement of Youth. The Center supports 7 senior
investigators, 3 post-doctoral research associates, 5 graduate students, 1
administrative assistant, and 4 undergraduate students. The MRSEC is directed by
Professor C-L. Chien. %%% The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
(MRSEC) at Johns Hopkins University supports interdisciplinary research on
materials whose structure is modulated on a nanometer scale. As a result of the
microstructure, these materials display unique physical properties which have
potential technological applications. The research combines experimental and
theoretical studies to develop an understanding of the interrelationship between
the properties of nanostructures and the degrees of freedom available for their
design and fabrication. Materials to be studied include multilayers of
functionally dissimilar materials, e.g. metals and insulators, arrays of
nanowires, and ultrafine granular materials. The MR SEC also supports shared
experimental facilities for materials research, exploratory research through
seed funding, and collaborations with industry and other academic institutions.
The Center's educational outreach program includes summer internships for
talented high school students in collaboration with the Johns Hopkins Institute
for the Advancement of Youth. The Center supports 7 senior investigators, 3
post-doctoral research associates, 5 graduate students, 1 administrative
assistant, and 4 undergraduate students. The MRSEC is directed by Professor C-L.
Chien. ***