* 9632274
* MPWG:  Family Tools and Technology (FT2) Leadership         Development
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Arlene Chasek, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1998
* USD 214,463.00

The Rutgers Consortium for Educational Equity, an affiliate of the Rutgers
Center for Mathematics, Science and Computer Education (CMSCE) and the
designated New Jersey Family Math and Family Science training site, has
developed Family Tools &amp; Technology (FT2), an after-school program targeting
girls and their parents. They collaborate in problem-solving activities (using
tools and building models) that illustrate the importance of science,
engineering and mathematics in the world beyond the classroom. This project
supports the development and assessment of a cost- effective, pedagogically
sound, replicable training model, including a leadership component that will be
piloted in NJ prior to national dissemination. The effort was inspired by
Project 2061, Science for All Americans, The AAUW Report: How Schools
Shortchange Girls, the NCTM Standards, and the USDOE's Goals 200. FT2 was
created: to increase the number of girls who are excited about science and
technology; to encourage their continuing interest; to stimulate parents to
become advocates for their daughters' endeavors in science and technology; and
to train teachers to promote girls' continued participation and confidence in a
critical period in their educational development (pre- adolescence). The first
phase of this project (1995-96), focused on a year-long assessment funded by NSF
to evaluate the effectiveness of the 14 FT2 activities and accompanying
materials and strategies. It looked at the program's impact on reducing the
gender gap in terms of girls' experiences and aspirations in 12 elementary
schools with approximately 240 families, 70% of which had participating
daughters. It included an 11-day training model in which teachers were trained
in FT2 techniques, to equip them to present and facilitate these activities in
two series of six after school sessions for girls and their families. Based on
the positive results of the field-testing and assessment, the second phase of
the project will be refined and streamlined into a cost-effective, pedagogically
sound, five-day training that can be easily disseminated and replicated. A
leadership component will prepare experienced FT2 teachers to train others to
conduct the program. This revised model will be piloted and assessed, as well as
institutionalized, in selected NJ schools during 1996-97 in preparation for
national dissemination.