* 9632580
* Mesoscale Structures and Dynamics of Mid-Latitude Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Peter Hobbs, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2000
* USD 906,919.00

9632580 Hobbs Cyclones in middle latitudes affect large regions of the world.
Consequently, improvements in understanding and forecasting of weather
associated with middle-latitude cyclones has been one of the major goals of 20th
century meteorology. Although very significant advances have been made in the
basic understanding and ability to forecast extratropical cyclones on the large
(synoptic) scale, progress in forecasting local precipitation and severe weather
associated with these systems has been much slower. This is attributed to
insufficient understanding of processes and phenomena on the convective scale
(~0.1-10 km) and mesoscale (~10-1000 km). For the past twenty years or so, the
cloud physics research group at the University of Washington has studied
extratropical cyclones, with emphasis on the microphysics and mesoscale aspects
of precipitation. These studies led to a classification and study of rainbands
on the west coast of the United States, and studies of cyclones on the US east
coast and in the central US. The latter two studies led to a proposal for a new
conceptual model for cyclones that are generated in the lee of the Rocky
Mountains, as well as to the identification of two large-scale rainbands that
can produce severe weather in the central United States. The present research is
an extension of these studies. Three main areas of research will be pursued. The
first is to carry out further evaluations of the new conceptual model for
cyclones in the central United States in order to improve its observational and
theoretical foundation, and to increase its utility as a weather forecasting
aid. The second task is to investigate the mechanisms responsible for the
formation of narrow cold frontal rainbands, which are a ubiquitous feature of
extratropical cyclones and can produce severe local weather. The formation of
wide cold-frontal rainbands, another common feature of cyclones, will also be
investigated. These studies will be carried out through detailed analyses of
special data sets collected in three already completed field projects, and
through numerical modeling studies of these cases using an advanced mesoscale
model. ***