* 9632897
* Kinetic and Mechanistic Studies of Highly Reactive Species  Containing Electron-Deficient Main Group Atoms, and the     Synthesis of Novel Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Peter Gaspar, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2000
* USD 452,467.00

With funding from the Organic Dynamics Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Peter P. Gaspar of Washington University (St. Louis) will study highly
reactive species containing electron-deficient main group atoms. This is a
renewal of Award CHE-9108130. Recent past work led to discovery of ways to make
the novel electron deficient carbene analogs, phosphinidenes (RP), representing
formally monovalent phosphorus, and Gaspar's group has been involved in silylene
chemistry for many years. This project will involve attempts to generate highly
reactive species with electron deficiency on diverse atoms: silylenes,
germylenes, stannylenes, borylenes, and aluminylidenes. The project will extend
the mechanistic ideas of organic chemistry to the prediction and rationalization
of bond-making and bond-breaking processes across the periodic table. Other new
species such as germenes and phosphinidene chalcogenides will provide
mechanistic insight and, potentially, synthetic utility. Organic chemistry has a
rich history of detailed study of highly reactive species, which are
intermediates in many chemical reactions, and of using such studies to predict
new and useful chemistry. This project will examine a series of related highly
energetic and reactive species involving atoms not traditionally considered part
of the organic chemist's repertoire. It will use the rationales of organic
chemistry to extend our understanding of details of chemical behavior into many
other regions of the periodic table.