* 9632051
* Best Practices Forum: Skills and Knowledge Assessment in    Industry
* ENG,EFMA
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1997
* Peter Wiesner, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Paul Herer
* 02/28/1997
* USD 15,900.00

Peter Wiesner Best Practices Forum: Skills and Knowledge Assessment in Industry
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) ENG-9632051 This
proposal from the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE),
requests support to conduct a workshop entitled Best Practices Forum: Skills and
Knowledge Assessment in Industry. The goal of this project is to shed light on
skills assessment by bringing together business organizations, government
entities, university and test-development organizations to share their
experiences. The forum will be a two day program in April 1996, implementing one
of the major recommendations made by the participants of Industry 2000 Workshop,
which was funded by NSF and other institutions. The results of Industry 2000,
documented in a report and video, have defined the involvement of the IEEE in
lifelong education and influence its constituents in industry and higher
education. The participants of the proposed Best Practices Forum will grapple
with practical issues based on the experience of fellow participants and their
organizations. The forum will focus on reviewing existing projects and on
identifying a meaningful, practical way to assess engineering skills. By
focusing on skills assessment practices in industry, the forum will serve as a
resource for those charged with planning and developing relevant undergraduate
and graduate curricula as well as industry-related research, In addition to
providing a forum where ideas and resources can be shared, Best Practices Forum
will provide IEEE with an opportunity to learn about industry needs first hand.