* 9632095
* Activation of Phospholipase A2
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Rodney Biltonen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1999
* USD 315,000.00

9632095 Biltonen The long term objective of this proposal is to provide a
comprehensive framework within which to formulate a precise definition of
phospholipase A2 activation in thermodynamic, kinetic, and structural terms. The
proposed work will focus on developing an understanding of the putative
structural changes leading to full activation. This work will include definition
of the enzyme-substrate interaction locus and putative dimer interfacial region
and the evaluation of specific sites of interaction in thermodynamic, kinetic
and structural terms. An important aspect of the proposed work will be
thermodynamic characterization of protein-protein interactions and calcium
binding in aqueous solution and on the membrane surface. Recent work has
suggested that domain formation on the lipid surface could lead to protein
clustering which may be related to activation. Whether this potential clustering
is related to protein dimerization is still an open question, however, and will
be pursued. Such characterization is necessary to design and interpret kinetic
experiments aimed at defining the temporal sequence of events of the activation
process. Finally, a structural description of these enzyme systems will be
provided by multidimension nuclear magnetic resonance studies. Specifically,
changes in the dynamics and structure of the enzyme upon binding to lipid
surfaces will be investigated. This project will focus on the properties of two
naturally occurring enzymes, phospholipase A2 from porcine pancreas and the
monomeric form from the water moccasin. Particular attention will be given to
the latter enzyme since it has been expressed in E. coli and specific mutations
can be engineered. %%% A detailed investigation of the structural and energetic
changes associated with the binding to and activation of the enzyme
phospholipase A2 on lipid membranes will be undertaken. Specific questions to be
addressed include what protein sites are involved in the interaction, does
protein-protein interaction play a role in activation and what structural
changes in the enzyme occur upon binding. A variety of spectroscopic and
calorimetric techniques will be used. In addition protein engineering will be
used to produce interesting variants of the wild type enzyme. This information
will prove useful in developing an understanding of the functioning and
regulation of this enzyme specifically and the nature of catalysis on membrane
surfaces, generally. ***