* 9632801
* GOALI: Modeling, Sensing and Algorithm Design for Color     Xerographic Process Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Pramod Khargonekar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2000
* USD 221,385.00

9632801 Koditschek This proposal describes an approach to the control of
xerographic printing that, if successful, promises to advance the state of the
art in the industry, help lead Xerox Corporation into a $80B new market, and
considerably enlarge the academic community's experience with application of
robust, nonlinear, and intelligent controls techniques in competitive, fast
moving consumer markets. The chief technical objective is a dramatic improvement
in the process stability of dry powder color xerography. The long term goal is
to demonstrate this level of stability in all relevant environmental zones
(temperature, relative humidity), a variety of paper types and colors, and over
a number of machines. A second contribution will be the development of a new
controls oriented design support methodology. The approach to this problem will
be driven by a "problem solving" focus (rather than a "theory driven focus") to
creatively combine the strengths of the researchers at the Wilson Research
Center with the academic researchers at the University of Michigan. Preliminary
discussions suggest a hierarchical controller whose lower level specifies
process parameters using robust (nonadaptive) nonlinear controller techniques
with a higher level specification of the product parameters using model driven
adaptive or possibly learning techniques. The control algorithms and
architectures developed in this project will be assessed for product-worthiness
with respect to the standard Xerox Field Readiness Determination Testing
procedures. ***