* 9632719
* Chemical Vapor Deposition of Early Transition Metal and     Metal Nitride Films
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Toivo Kodas, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 05/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9632719 Hampden-Smith/Kodas U. New Mexico This Small Grant for Exploratory
Research is made in the Office of Special Projects of the Chemistry Division in
support of the collaborative research of Drs. Mark Hampden-Smith and Toivo Kodas
at the University of New Mexico. The goal of the research is the development of
a general strategy for the Chemical Vapor Deposition of early transition metal
and metal nitride films for largely microelectronic applications. The generality
of the approach will be determined over a range of metals, metal alloys and
binary and ternary nitrides which can be formed. A range of reductants will be
evaluated experimentally, assisted by thermodynamic calculations. Films will be
deposited under UHV conditions and analyzed by SIMS for purity, SEM for
thickness and microstructure, XRD for phase identification and four point
resistivity probe for morphology and purity. The ability to deposit high purity
Group IV-VI metals and metal nitrides under mild conditions is of great
potential significance for microelectronic applications. These materials are
currently used as adhesion layers and diffusion barriers in integrated circuits
and are deposited by high temperature methods such as sputtering or plasma
deposition. A low temperature deposition method will provide films of purity and
conformality which cannot be achieved by thermal methods.