* 9632519
* Photodissociation Dynamics of Small Molecules: Collisionless and Collisional Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Hanna Reisler, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 07/31/1999
* USD 402,000.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Reisler will examine fundamental state-to-state processes in
unimolecular and bimolecular interactions, particularly systems undergoing
unimolecular decomposition. The ultimate goal is to understand how to manipulate
and direct chemical reactivity. The decomposition of the prototype molecule HNCO
will be examined using sequential excitation and imaging techniques. When
dissociation is too rapid to compete effectively with internal vibrational
energy redistribution (IVR), signatures in NCO, NH, and CO product state
distributions (PSDs) will reveal the presence of dynamical biases. Experiments
are also proposed which are aimed at inducing selectivity and examining control
of reactivity by several kinds of potential energy surfaces (PESs). Collisional
studies will be extended to systems that involve two pathways, especially where
spin-forbidden pathways are induced by collisions. Several sophisticated
experimental techniques will be used, such as multiple resonance excitation and
crossed pulsed molecular beams. Theoretical work will continue with Prof.
Reinhard Schinke from Goettingen. In this project Prof. Reisler will study the
influence of the stretching and bending motions of a molecule on the final
outcome of the light-initiated dissociation of the molecule into fragments. The
issues explored in this study include the identity of products formed and the
final distribution of the various forms of internal energy into the fragment
particles. Such fundamental examinations of the dynamics of chemical bond
breaking have applications in many areas, such as an understanding of
atmospheric chemistry and combustion processes.