* 9632823
* Processing, Structure and Property Interrelationships for   Laminated Matrix Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* W. Jack Lackey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2001
* USD 619,972.00

9632823 Lackey The objective of the proposed research is to study the
interrelationships between the processing, structure, and properties of a new
class of ceramic matrix composites. These new composites consist of a
reinforcement phase plus a matrix composed of alternate thin layers of two
different materials. Layered structures are known to enhance mechanical
toughness, and thus, their use as the matrix, along with the reinforcement
phase, should enhance the toughness of the overall composite. The 3 year project
consists of composite processing, characterization, and mechanics modeling. The
process-structure-property interrelationships for several laminated matrix
composite systems will be studied. Fibers of interest are carbon, SiC, and
Al2O3. Matrix materials will be selected from carbon, SiC, Si3N4, Al2O3,
mullite, B13C2, Nb, and Re. Based on the results from the first two years, a
preferred system will be selected for detailed study and optimization in the
third year. We propose to identify the layer thicknesses and material properties
(thermal expansion, elastic modulus, and strength) required to optimize the
mechanical performance, particularly fracture toughness and strength, of this
new class of composites. %%% The objective of the proposed research is to study
the interrelationships between the processing, structure, and properties of a
new class of ceramic matrix composites. These new composites consist of a
reinforcement phase plus a matrix composed of alternate thin layers of two
different materials. Layered structures are known to enhance mechanical
toughness, and thus, their use as the matrix, along with the reinforcement
phase, should enhance the toughness of the overall composite. Improvement of the
properties of ceramic matrix composites will have a large impact on many
commercial and defense systems. ***