* 9632677
* "Virtual Supercomputing":  High Speed Wide-Area Networks    for Computational Applications
* O/D,EPS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Doyle Friskney, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James Hoehn
* 06/30/1999
* USD 862,200.00

9632677 Williams Computational researchers in the states of Alabama, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina and West Virginia (a.k.a. the 6-PAC) have
formed the South East Partnership to Share Computational Resources (SEPSCoR).
The supercomputers located in each of these states will be linked by high speed
wide-area networks to form a more powerful "virtual supercomputer", which will
be focused on the solution of highly intractable computational problems, such as
the modeling and molecular dynamics of complex materials. This shared resource
will be available to all researchers who are approved by the consortium. The
high-speed networks which will make this possible will be managed by a
partnership with the Southeastern Universities Research Association (SURA) and
the networking Corporation, Bolt, Beranek and Newman (BBN). This award will fund
the start-up costs of this networking partnership in its first year, after
which, a full maintenance proposal will be submitted to the Division of
Networking and Communications Research and Infrastructure. The net result of
this project will be the demonstration of how computational science can be
advanced through the utilization of an advanced networking infrastructure. The
initial projects using this interstate facility will be in the area of
computational materials research, but in the long term, other numerically-
intensive areas will benefit as well.