* 9632281
* STTR PHASE I:  High Faraday Rotation Optical Waveguides for Application in Optical Circulators for Telecommunications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,10/31/1997
* Joel Roark, NOMADICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 10/31/1997
* USD 99,927.00

*** 9632281 Roark This STTR Phase I project will demonstrate a novel approach
for the fabrication of highly efficient Faraday-active optical waveguide
structures. Faraday-active waveguides are presently of great interest as their
development is the critical enabling technology associated with the
demonstration of all-fiber optical circulators. Such devices, which may be
characterized as multiport nonreciprocal polarization rotators, provide a means
by which the telecommunications rate may be immediately doubled on the existing
optical fiber carrier infrastructure. Successful implementation will lead to
full-duplex operation over "long haul" fiber carriers. The suggested circulator
approach is passive, and does not therefore require external clocking controls.
Separation of the signals is based only upon propagation direction; no
additional losses are imposed on transmitted signals, as in the case of
conventional directional couplers. The investigators propose the use of advanced
thin film techniques in the development of optical fiber segments. These
processes have been previously shown to promote the introduction of
photonically-active dopant species at dopant levels which are orders of
magnitude greater than may be produced by conventional means. The proposed
technology will replace conventional bulk optics technologies, as waveguide
structures with dramatically improved figures of merit will be developed
characterized during the initial Phase 1 period. The Phase 1 program also
includes analysis of integrated permanent magnet structures, and a design
assessment for optical circulator prototype development. The development of high
Verdet constant materials offers the potential for achieving optical elements
which double the throughput of fiber communications links. In addition, numerous
other commercial uses exist for these materials. ***