* 9632937
* Nanostructure Technology for Making Photonic Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Axel Scherer, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 08/31/2000
* USD 191,078.00

9632937 Scherer The analogy between electromagnetic wave propagation in multi-
dimensional periodic structures, and electron wave propagation in real crystals,
have proven to be a very fruitful one. Initial efforts were motivated by the
prospect, of a "photonic bandgap"; a frequency band in 3-dimensional dielectric
structures, in which electromagnetic waves are forbidden, irrespective of
propagation direction in space. These 3-dimensionally periodic dielectric
structures are frequently called "photonic crystals". These can be useful in
opto-electronics as electromagnetic microcavities for so-called "zero-thresold
lasers" and single-mode light emitting diodes. Such structures would exhibit
inhibited spontaneous emission, which could lower the power requirements and
increase reliability, particularly of optical arrays. Alternately, such
structures can show enhanced spontaneous emission which would allow faster
modulation speeds for optical interconnects. This renewal grant is funded in
parallel with a substantially identical one by Prof. Ely Yablonovich at UCLA.
Funding allows continuation of the joint Caltech/UCLA effort to develop the
technology for making 3-dimensional photonic crystal structures at the scale of
optical wavelengths, and to improve the structural precision and midgap
reflectivity of these structures. Such refined photonic crystal structures
shculd lend themselves to opto-electronic technology, and they be generically
useful in optical science. ***