* 9632874
* Near Field Diffractive Optical Elements with                Multifunctionality and Programmability
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2000
* USD 280,000.00

9632874 Fainman The coming decade will see a revolution in computing and
communications technology. Existing telecommunication switching networks are
inadequate for the emerging integrated services digital network which will use
the tremendous point-to-point bandwidth of optical fiber. New technologies are
necessary to provide ultra-high bandwidth switching capability to keep pace with
the rapid advances in data transmission rates. The current trend in developing
high performance computing and communication systems is towards increasing
parallelism in addition to speed. Free space optical technology, being
inherently three-dimensional, is attractive for interconnecting these highly
parallel systems. Conventional diffractive optical elements (DOEs) use a phase
profile to deflect and shape an incident optical wavefront. These elements are
beginning to be incorporated as low cost beam splitters and aberration
correctors in previously all-refractive optical products. The second generation
of DOEs are elements that discriminate among the incident light by polarization
or wavelength. Our group has done pioneering research into these optical
elements, having fabricated the first planar DOE which reconstruct a different
pattern depending on the incident polarization, and another which vanishes at a
specified wavelength. With these elements packaging size and cost of complex
optical and optoelectronic systems can be significantly reduced. Here, we
propose to begin an investigation of the third generation of DOE to produce
electrically programmable response as well as continue the investigation of
novel DOE devices with multifunctionality in polarization and color. These DOEs
are useful for construction of transparent switching fabrics allowing the
routing of data between input and output ports at bandwidths independent of the
switching speed of the individual switching element. In addition, such
programmable DOEs will play an important role for packaging of manufacturable
optoelectronic systems be cause they combine the functionality of several
optical components with built-in relative alignment. Such elements can serve as
active alignment components for packaging large scale optoelectronic systems.
Programmable DOEs that allow fast, efficient, high-resolution, random-access
optical beam steering and dynamic focusing are required by numerous
optoelectronic system applications including 2-D and 3-D displays, 3-D optical
memories, programmable optical interconnects, optical routers, and 3-D optical
imaging. The goal of this proposal is to conduct basic research towards
development of DOEs with multifunctionality and DOEs with programmability for
construction of transparent switching fabric and for packaging of manufacturable
optoelectronic systems. The proposed approach is based on developing near-field
diffractive optical devices that utilize subwavelength nanostructures to create
artificial dielectrics with optical properties that enable multifunctionality
and electrical programmability. Furthermore, by employing the computer generated
hologram design approaches, an array of such near-field optical devices can be
used to create DOEs that possess electrical programmability of their far field
spatial impulse response. The fabrication of these elements will leverage from
the advances in microelectronics technology using E-beam lithography,
photolithography, ion beam etching, ion implantation, etc. The specific
objectives of this proposal include rigorous modeling, design, fabrication and
testing of near-field diffractive optical devices that utilize composite passive
and electrooptic subwavelength nanostructures to create artificial dielectrics
with multifunctionality and electrical programmability. Our ultimate objective
is to construct an array of such devices to realize DOEs with electrically
programmable far field impulse response. ***