* 9632453
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disputes, Deformalization,  and Discourse: Small Claims Court Reform in Brazil
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1997
* Laura Nader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/1997
* USD 14,712.00

9632453 Nader Following Brazil's transition to democracy in 1984, the state's
emphasis on citizenship and universalistic rights has led to policies seeking to
modernize courtroom procedure and access. One result of these policies has been
a federal mandate ordering the establishment of special small claims courts.
States have established small claims courts which vary dramatically in their
constitution and procedure. This research is a comparative ethnographic
investigation of two urban Brazilian small claims courts that explores the
relationship among civic discussions of rights and citizenship, adjudication,
and judicial reform in Brazil. Specifically, the study examines the linkages
between judicial deformalization in small claims court procedure and Brazilian
conceptions of citizenship and rights. The two small claims courts chosen for
the project differ considerably. One as not undergone procedural deformalization
whereas the other has. The first phase of the project will begin with archival
research specifically focusing on case records, political speeches, newspaper
and journal articles, and the publications of local legal organizations. The
goal of this phase of the research is to look for trends in litigation and
establish the social domain of rights and citizenship discourse. The second
phase will consist of courtroom observation and interviews with litigants, state
officials, courtroom staff, administrators, and local legal agencies. This phase
of the research is designed to document instances of citizenship and rights in
practice and elicit ethnographic accounts of these social ideals. %%%%