* 9632275
* MRSEC: Materials Science and Engineering Research Center
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Neil Ashcroft, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ulrich Strom
* 02/28/2001
* USD 16,088,345.00

9632275 Silcox The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at
Cornell University supports interactive research in four interdisciplinary
groups. The theme of the MRSEC is the understanding and control of materials at
the nanostructural level. The Center supports an extensive program of research
experience for undergraduates and a new program of outreach to pre-college
students in upstate New York, including collaborative efforts with a local
science museum. The Center will also support seed funding for exploratory
research and emerging areas of materials science. The MRSEC supports enhanced
collaboration with industry and extensive shared experimental facilities that
also support research not directly funded by the MRSEC. As part of the Center's
search for new materials, the molecular inorganic- organic composites group will
focus on innovative approaches for preparing and characterizing novel nanoscale
inorganic-organic molecular composites. The group studying thin films on glass
proposes systematic studies of disordered surfaces and thin film deposition on
glass. The research addresses a rich array of phenomena that are not currently
understood, and has potential application for large area electronics, a growing
segment of the communications and display industry. Thin film deposition by
energetic ion and atom beams can alter thin film growth substantially, leading
to new structures, new compositions, and smooth ultra-thin films with improved
properties. This group seeks to understand the microscopic processes underlying
these effects. Uniquely structured nanoscale materials that isolate a few
defects (or even a single one) will be used by the metallic nanostructure group
to elucidate fundamental issues arising from defects and impurities. Magnetic
interactions, defects and impurities can produce dramatic effects in quantum
systems. The Center currently supports about 35 senior investigators, 8
postdoctoral research associates, 12 t echnicians or other professionals, 36
graduate students, and 25 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor
John Silcox. %%% The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC)
at Cornell University supports interactive research in four interdisciplinary
groups. The theme of the MRSEC is the understanding and control of materials at
the nanostructural level. The Center supports an extensive program of research
experience for undergraduates and a new program of outreach to pre-college
students in upstate New York, including collaborative efforts with a local
science museum. The Center will also support seed funding for exploratory
research and emerging areas of materials science. The MRSEC supports enhanced
collaboration with industry and extensive shared experimental facilities that
also support research not directly funded by the MRSEC. As part of the Center's
search for new materials, the molecular inorganic- organic composites group will
focus on innovative approaches for preparing and characterizing novel nanoscale
inorganic-organic molecular composites. The group studying thin films on glass
proposes systematic studies of disordered surfaces and thin film deposition on
glass. The research addresses a rich array of phenomena that are not currently
understood, and has potential application for large area electronics, a growing
segment of the communications and display industry. Thin film deposition by
energetic ion and atom beams can alter thin film growth substantially, leading
to new structures, new compositions, and smooth ultra-thin films with improved
properties. This group seeks to understand the microscopic processes underlying
these effects. Uniquely structured nanoscale materials that isolate a few
defects (or even a single one) will be used by the metallic nanostructure group
to elucidate fundamental issues arising from defects and impurities. Magnetic
interactions, defects and impurities can produce dramatic effects in q uantum
systems. The Center currently supports about 35 senior investigators, 8
postdoctoral research associates, 12 technicians or other professionals, 36
graduate students, and 25 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor
John Silcox. ***