* 9632496
* RC/Composite Wall - Steel Frame Hybrid Buildings:Connectionsand System
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2002
* Bahram Shahrooz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 07/31/2002
* USD 144,939.00

Structural systems consisting of reinforced concrete walls/cores and concrete
gravity frames are a very common structural system for moderate rise
construction in regions of high seismic risk. Use of reinforced concrete or
composite core walls and a steel gravity or moment frame offers an economical
alternative to RC wall/core and concrete frame systems. Limited studies have
been conducted to examine bearing force transfer mechanism between steel and
concrete. However, fundamental issues related to cyclic performance of composite
walls/cores (those with steel boundary columns) and frame-core connections are
yet to be addressed. An integrated experimental and analytical program will be
carried out to investigate the performance of systems with walls/cores
(conventionally reinforced or with steel boundary elements) and steel gravity or
moment frames. The primary objectives of this project are to: (1) conduct
experimental studies of steel beam/floor system-to-core connections, (2) develop
analytical modeling techniques for such connections, (3) incorporate these
models into widely used inelastic structural analysis computer programs, (4)
provide tools to investigate analytically complete building systems to assess
the economics of using hybrid/composite systems, and (5) develop design
guidelines. The research will revolve around a prototype structure which will be
used to derive the test specimens, and to relate experimental data to overall
structural response. The proposed research involves experimental testing of
seven 1/3 -scale wall-to steel boundary columns (which may be a small erection
column or a larger one), (2) amount of transverse reinforcement around the
connection region, (3) contribution of composite metal decks to the stiffness
and strength of the connections, particularly `shear-only` connections, and (4)
the influence of beam axial load (tension or compression due to composite metal
deck diaphragm action) on the performance of shear and moment connections.
General analytical studies of specimen behavior will be conducted to evaluate
the ability of simplified code equations to predict the strength of the
subassemblages. Detailed analytical studies will also be conducted by using
simplified mechanical models constructed based on equilibrium and compatibility
requirements, and finite element models. These studies will assist in
understanding observed specimen behavior, as well as to study additional
specimen configurations not considered in the experimental phase of the
research. Specific recommendations for connection design will be developed.