* 9632713
* Developing New Molecular Architectures for Devices for      Photoinitiated Electron Collection
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Karen Brewer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 11/30/2000
* USD 360,694.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research on development of supramolecular inorganic complexes by Dr.
Karen J. Brewer of the Chemistry Department, Virginia Polytechnic University.
Transition metal systems containing extended light-absorbing organic moieties
will be synthesized and tested for their ability to facilitate photoinitiated
multielectron transfer. The basic molecular design will involve the coupling of
two light absorbers to a central, catalytically active metal center that will
serve as the site of collection of the electrons. The light absorber systems
will be multimetallic and designed to have metal-based highest occupied
molecular orbitals that are localized on the periphery of the molecules, well
separated from the central site of localization of the lowest unoccupied
molecular orbital. The remote metal centers will then function as electron
donors for the central electron collecting core. Details of the spectroscopic
and electrochemical properties of these systems will be determined and used to
optimize the design. Materials that convert light energy to chemical energy are
necessary for development of solar energy devices. Storage and delivery of many
electrons under desired conditions is an important goal. Many natural processes
such as the reduction of carbon dioxide and nitrogen fixation require many
electrons. In this fundamental research project, some new multi-metal compounds
will be synthesized and tested for their efficiency in absorbing light energy
and in releasing many electrons for use in chemical reactions.