* 9632861
* Studies on the Physiological Ecology of Hydrothermal Vent Chemoautotrophic Symbioses
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* James Childress, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2001
* USD 399,999.00

9632861 CHILDRESS The vent fauna is an ancient fauna of global distribution in
the deep-sea. It has limited taxonomic affinities to other deep sea communities,
and yet it has affinities to the faunas of deep-sea hydrocarbon seeps and other
seep environments. This deep-sea vent environment may have been a refuge
protecting vent taxa from the extinction events which had great impacts on other
communities. Thus, deep-sea hydrothermal vents are one of the major ecosystem
types on the earth, but probably the least known. The existence of these
communities depends upon the ability of a few invertebrate/ bacteria symbioses
to oxidize reduced chemical species (sulfide or methane) from the vents using
oxidants (oxygen or nitrate) from the surrounding deep-sea water to power
primary production. Thus the capacities for interaction of the symbioses with
the chemical properties of vent environments is fundamental to the primary
production which supports these ecosystems. The central objective of this
project is to describe and quantify the chemical interactions of the tubeworm
Riftia pachyptila with the vent fluids which flow over it so that these
interactions can be modeled for entire assemblages of animals. This project
includes development of indices of growth rate, primary production, condition,
and environmental conditions based on measurements made on freshly collected
worms. The project has 3 components: 1) Survey of diverse vent and seep
environments to determine the responses of chemoautotrophic symbioses to widely
differing conditions. The objective is to quantify a broad range of parameters
on samples from freshly captured worms and to correlate these with environmental
characteristics so that the in situ interactions of the worms with the vent
fluids can be estimated. 2) Shipboard studies of the physiology supporting
autotrophy in symbiotic vent animals. The objective of these studies is to
measure the interactions of Riftia with the various chemical parameters, a s
well as the effects of temperature on these interactions, to develop an
understanding of the functioning of the worms. Long term maintenance of worms in
pressure aquaria for growth studies is part of these projected studies. 3) The
observation and measurement of temporal changes at 13 N. This includes
deployment of temperature recorders to measure the variation in conditions and
selected observations of the biota to describe the changes over time. The
objective is to describe the niche of the tubeworm on longer time scales so that
primary production and interactions with vent fluids can be estimated over
longer time periods. This project will greatly increase our understanding of the
nature of the interactions between the vent animals and their chemical
environments, contributing to our understanding of the functioning of the vent
and other chemoautotrophically supported ecosystems.