* 9632340
* The Effects of Gender Stratification Among Adults on        Medical Treatment Choices for Boys and Girls, A Case Study  on Minia, Egypt
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Kathryn Yount, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1998
* USD 48,300.00

This is a study of the effects of gender stratification in Egypt upon medical
treatment of boys and girls. Mortality of children in Egypt has declined rapidly
in recent years, but a female disadvantage in post-neonatal and early childhood
mortality persists, probably the result of the differential amount and type of
medical care that boys and girls receive. Previous research has identified
women's status as an important determinant of demographic outcomes and gender
differentials in medical treatment; however, the conceptualization and
measurement of women's status vary widely. This study adapts a bargaining
approach to explain the probability that boys and girls receive medical
treatment at the onset of an illness episode. Bargaining theory, based on the
assumption that men and women within a household have different gender
preferences, posits that the inability of adult women to implement their
preferences prevents sick daughters from receiving equitable medical treatment.
Of interest in this study are the intra-household and community-level aspects of
gender stratification that determine a woman's realized autonomy (actual
mobility and decision-making authority), gender preferences (long-term and
short-term costs and benefits of sons and daughters), and beliefs regarding the
health risks of boys and girls. The objectives of this study are, therefore: 1)
to identify the extent to which a gender bias in the allocation of medical care
to boys and girls exists, 2) to measure exogenous aspects of gender
stratification among adults within the household and community, 3) to examine
the ways in which gender stratification among adults influences treatment
choices for sick boys and girls, and 4) to assess the degree to which child
survival interventions can offset unequal allocations of medical care to boys
and girls. Data sources will include: 1) in-depth interviews and case histories
of child illness episodes collected over seven months from men and women in a
random sample of two rural vi llages and two urban neighborhoods in Minia,
Egypt, 2) a population-based survey, and 3) community-level data sources such as
area maps of the distribution of health facilities. Indices of women's autonomy,
gender preferences, and health beliefs will be developed from the responses to
survey questions. Ordinary least squares regression will be used to assess the
effects of the exogenous intra-household and community-level indicators on the
intermediate indices. Logit regression based on maximum likelihood will be used
to assess the effects of service availability on treatment choices of parents in
the presence of the other determinants. The potential endogeneity of the
intermediate dimensions of women's autonomy, gender preferences, and health
beliefs will be tested. Evidence of endogeneity will require the use of
instrumental variables and two stage regression to derive unbiased estimates of
coefficients in the final model. Because treatment outcomes of children in the
same household and community are likely to be correlated, generalized estimation
techniques will be used to correct for correlated errors and group-wise
heteroskedasticity. The direct and indirect effects of selected underlying
individual-level and community-level variables on the outcome will be assessed
using path analysis. Clarification of the mechanisms by which gender inequality
is transferred from one generation to the next will enhance the development of
policies that benefit adult women and young girls directly. The results of this
study will also clarify the degree to which public health interventions can be
tailored to diminish persistent inequalities in health care provision to
children.