* 9632456
* Investigation of the Chemical Physics of Light Enhanced     Epitaxy on II-VI Semiconductor Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Richard Osgood, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/1999
* USD 252,020.00

9632456 Osgood This research project aims for greater fundamental understanding
of non-equilibrium chemistries at semiconductor surfaces appropriate for
advanced approaches to epitaxial growth of II-VI thin films, including new
surface cleaning/preparation techniques, and routes to sequential reactions
which are applicable to the technique of atomic layer epitaxy. The overall
objective is to understand fundamental microscopic mechanisms in two classes of
model molecular systems for light-assisted epitaxies(MOCVD, MOMBE, and ALE);
metal alkyls(di-methyl zinc and di-ethyl cadmium) and Group VI halides(H2S and
H2Se) on CdTe and ZnSe surfaces will be studied. Auger and photoelectron
spectroscopies along with thermal desorption and time of flight mass
spectroscopy will be used to assess reaction products and binding sites, ejected
fragment translational energy, and reaction cross sections. %%% The project is
multidisciplinary combining fundamental materials chemistry and materials
science synthesis and processing studies with advanced characterization tools
and analysis methods to address forefront issues in a topical area of
technological relevance and high potential payoff. The research will contribute
basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to several aspects of
advanced electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry. The knowledge and
understanding gained from this research project is expected to contribute in a
general way to improving the performance of advanced devices and circuits by
providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing
improved materials, and materials combinations. An important feature of the
program is the integration of research and education through the training of
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***