* 9632217
* Collaborative Research:  Genetic Analysis and Metabolic     Engineering of Solventogenic Clostridia
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,11/30/1999
* Eleftherios Papoutsakis, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 11/30/1999
* USD 531,065.00

9632217 Papoutsakis This proposal is on research to genetically alter the
metabolism of anaerobic solventogenic clostridia (Clostridium acetobutylicum and
related species) to determine their potential applications for producing
solvents (butanol and acetone) and other oxychemicals. This requires further
understanding of the applied molecular genetics and associated methods needed to
redirect the cellular metabolism. This research is aiming to (1) establish the
techniques needed for the generation of stable overproducing strains (such
strains are necessary for batch or continuous processes without using any
antibiotics to maintain genetic stability), (2) develop a more detailed
molecular understanding of the regulation of a cluster of genes known as the so/
locus, (3) develop the means which would allow one to express clostridia genes
in other hosts or heterologous genes in clostridia in order to form products not
normally produced by the respective cells, and (4) develop additional tools for
flexible carbon-flux control. Specifically, this research will develop methods
need for: desirable gene expression (in terms of strength and timing), single or
multiple chromosomal gene inactivations in order to inactivate or eliminate
undesirable pathways or traits, and stable chromosomal integration (of one or
more copies) of genes in order to increase the protein activities (and
presumably carbon fluxes) of desirable pathways. ***