* 9632675
* Starter Grant:  A Survey of Nuclear - and Plastid - Encoded Thylakoid Genes in the Scrophulariaceae/Orobanchaceae
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1998
* Andrea Wolfe, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/1998
* USD 35,000.00

9632675 Wolfe A detailed and strongly supported phylogeny of a group of
organisms provides a framework or road map for critical studies of growth,
development, and life history. Dr. Andrea Wolfe at Ohio State University is
taking advantage of just such phylogenetic knowledge to explore molecular
evolutionary changes in photosynthesis in plants that have become parasitic. The
Scrophulariaceae/Orobanchaceae group of plants includes autotrophic, fully
photosynthetic species (the snapdragons for example), so-called hemiparasites
that form root attachments to other plants, and heterotrophic, non-
photosynthetic parasites like beechdrops (genus Epifagus) and others. The
parasites must attach themselves to host plants to absorb carbon nutrients for
survival; the phylogenetic tree for this group demonstrates that parasites have
evolved from photosynthetic forms in several lineages. Dr. Wolfe is analyzing
genes for the light-harvesting thylakoid apparatus of the chloroplast, to
determine changes in nuclear and plastid genes involved in photosynthetic energy
transfer. Questions she is addressing include: are there "key innovations" at
the molecular level that channel a plant toward parasitism; what are the
patterns and sequence of mutations in nuclear and plastid genes as
photosynthetic function is lost; are there backup or complementary gene systems
to chloroplast activities, as mutations damage or destroy critical enzymes of
photosynthesis? Modern tools of molecular biology make possible the fine-scale
genetic dissection of enzymatic processes of light-harvesting and energy-capture
during photosynthesis in plants. Taking advantage of phylogenetic knowledge of
plant groups that include parasitic species, Dr. Wolfe has designed an
imaginative program of study that looks closely at the decay of photosynthetic
function in a series of plant species that have evolved an increasingly
parasitic mode of life. In so doing, she is analyzing critical stages in the
evolution of biochemical pathways and also help ing to understand shifts in life
history in plant evolution.