* 9632301
* STTR PHASE I:  Tunable ZBLAN Fiber Fabry-Perot Filters and  Single-Frequency Lasers for 1.3 micron Optical Communication Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Kevin Hsu, MICRON OPTICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 99,100.00

*** 9632301 Hsu This Phase I STTR project will research and develop novel fiber
Fabry-Perot tunable filters (FFP-TFs) based on fluoride fibers (specifically
ZBLAN fibers), and the application of FFP-TFs in the generation of high-power,
narrow-linewidth, and wavelength-tunable Pr-doped ZBLAN fiber lasers in the 1.3
um wavelength region. Recent major advances in Praseodymium (Pr)-doped fluoride
glass fibers have made them the most desirable medium for fiber amplifiers and
lasers at 1.3~1m wavelength. The availability of prototype Pr-doped fiber
amplifiers for 1.3 um wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM) has heightened the
need for 1.3~m lasers. Commercially available widely-tunable laser sources are
typically based on grating-tuned external-cavity semiconductor lasers suitable
only for laboratory environment. The requirement for 1.3 um tunable lasers that
are fiber-compatible, robust, and cost-effective makes an all-fiber based
tunable laser structure the best candidate. These lasers will allow
telecommunication systems to access an additional 100nm of frequency spectrum
using standard 1.3~m single-mode fibers which have been widely installed
throughout the world. In addition, the resultant work will enable broad-based
ZBLAN fiber device technology development that can be extended to other
wavelength regions, e.g., to tunable upconverted blue-green lasers and mid-IR
lasers using appropriate dopants in ZBLAN fibers. Additional applications using
such new tunable lasers span from holographic data storage (tunable blue-green
lasers) and free space optical communication to spectroscopy and environmental
sensing (with tunable mid-IR lasers). ***