* 9632959
* Interactions, Electron- and Energy-Exchange of Molecular and Electronic Defects in Ionic Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Fritz Luty, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 130,000.00

9632959 Luty This project studies the electronic and vibrational excitation,
energy- migration, and relaxation processes, involving various molecular and
electronic defects in ordered and disordered ionic solids. Research will include
electron-vibration energy transfer processes between F- centers and molecular
defects will be investigated using resonance Raman scattering, vibrational
luminescence and Fourier transform infra- red spectroscopy. A newly developed
technique will be used to produce high-quality ultra-thin crystals in the range
0.2 -100 mm. The influence of the mesoscopic size on the films on the energy-
transfer and phase behavior of the materials will be investigated and may lead
to new optical materials or research possibilities. %%% This project involves
the study of the optical properties of materials which are typically used in
laser devices. One area of interest is that of energy transfer processes that
need to be understand in order to optimize the optical and lasing properties of
the materials. Another important area is that of thin films of optical
materials, where the reduced size of the medium changes the properties of in
crystals in new and incompletely understood ways. The study of these materials
may lead to new laser materials or devise applications. ***