* 9632828
* Mechatronic Design and Control of Media Handling Mechanisms for Printing Engines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Masayoshi Tomizuka, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 08/31/2000
* USD 197,426.00

The objective of this GOALI research project is to study fundamental principles
for using advanced sensor, actuation and decision making methodologies in the
design of media handling system for the next generation of copiers and printers.
Many problems in copiers and printers are due to malfunctions in the media
handling system. These include paper jams, machine shut downs due to impending
paper jams (soft shutdown), smearing, damage to original documents, and poor
compilation. Current media handling systems are based upon open-loop control
systems and rely on the robustness of the system's mechanical design. The use of
sensors is limited to the detection of failures and are only used to trigger a
machine shutdown. This joint research project between the industry (Xerox) and
the university (U C Berkeley) addresses the issues concerned with media handling
in printers and copiers. The research utilizes and makes advances in:
mechatronics, discrete event and hybrid dynamic systems, identification and
adaptive control, intelligent and reconfigurable control systems, fault
detection and failure recovery, and integrated mechanical design and control.
The result from this research will be deployed in future copiers and printers.
The elimination of jams in media handling system will improve productivity by
reducing time lost in production. The current yearly lost production due to time
lost is valued at $ 0. 7 Billion. The ability to handle paper of very wide
lattitude serves to reduce cost of paper manufacturing and encourages the use of
the more economical recycled paper. Finally, this research is of critical
importance for American industries to maintain a position of technical
leadership in the extreme competitive photocopier and printer markets.