* 9632870
* Constraint-Based Database Interoperability
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Jan Chomicki, Monmouth University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2000
* USD 148,072.00

In today's highly interconnected networks there is an increasing need to
communicate among databases located at different sites and built using different
data models. The interoperability problem is made more difficult by the fact
that in many data models there is often an unclear relationship between the
actual representations and the abstract meanings of the databases. Hence it is
unwieldy to interoperate directly among pairs of those models. However, a clear
relationship exists between representation and meaning in constraint databases,
which are actually a set of data models parameterized by the types of
constraints allowed in the language. This project demonstrates how to express
most of the practical temporal and spatial data models using constraint
databases and how to solve in this context the interoperability problem.
Translations between different data models are expressed as queries in
constraint query languages. In addition, constraint query languages serve as a
convenient intermediate layer for query translation between different query
languages. This project explores the theoretical foundations of constraint-based
database interoperability and its practical applications. It will facilitate
data sharing and query reuse among different temporal and spatial database
applications.