* 9632852
* Long Term Ecological Research Program:  Shortgrass Steppe
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1997,11/30/2003
* William Lauenroth, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2003
* USD 4,001,274.00

9632852 Burke The shortgrass steppe (SGS) occupies the middle of the
productivity gradient along which the LTER grassland sites lie. It is unique
among North American grasslands for its long evolutionary history of intense
selection by both drought and herbivory, leading to an ecosystem that is very
well adapted to withstand grazing by domestic livestock. The distinctive
features of the SGS are both its vegetation and the concentration of biological
activity and organic matter belowground. The vegetation of the SGS is
characterized by low-growing plants that are either tolerant or resistant to
grazing and drought. The large concentration of biological activity belowground
reflects the distribution of plant production and the enhanced rates of energy
flow through heterotrophs belowground. It is also explained in part by the fact
that most biologically active elements in grasslands are protected from natural
disturbances by being stored in soil organic matter. The SGS LTER project has
been in operation since 1982 and currently supports 46 long-term experiments,
numerous short-term experiments, and has a large emphasis on integrative
simulation analysis. SGS LTER work is divided into five major areas: populations
and processes, biogeochemical dynamics, paleoecology and paleopedology, water
and energy dynamics, and disturbances. In addition, the SGS is involved in many
synthesis activities which will soon be summarized in a synthesis volume. One of
the unique aspects of this research program is the emphasis on integrating
knowledge about SGS ecosystems into simulation models. These models are used
widely, and they will continue to serve as a mean of integrating ideas and
developing hypotheses for future research in the SGS LTER program.