* 9632911
* Seismic Behavior and Design of High Performance Concrete-   Filled Steel Tube Columns
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Le-Wu Lu, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 09/30/2000
* USD 209,988.00

One efficient means of composite construction is that which utilizes high
performance concrete filled steel tube (CFT) columns. The filling of the tube
increases the stiffness and strength and overcomes potential local instability
of high strength steel tube. The tube confines the high strength concrete,
increasing its ductility. The combined system has the attributes of high
performance structural steel (speed of construction, strength, long-span
capability, lightweight) and high performance concrete (stiffness, damping,
economy), while using the tube as formwork. It is imperative in seismic
resistant design that the members be properly proportioned and the structural
system be well balanced. Currently there is a lack of knowledge of the seismic
behavior of CFT columns. Rational guidelines for the seismic design of CFT
composite construction are needed particularly when high performance concrete
and high performance steel are used. This research focuses on basic behavior of
CFT members with application to moment resisting and braced frames. The
objectives are to: (1) study the load-deformation response of non-circular CFT
columns composed of high strength concrete and steel under combined gravity and
lateral seismic loading; (2) develop and calibrate a analytical models and
computational methods based on experimental results for predicting the response
of CFT columns under seismic loading conditions; and (3) develop design
guidelines and recommendations for CFT columns constructed of high strength
materials. The investigator will involve pursuing analytical and large-scale
experimental investigations. Short CFT columns will be first studied, in which
the effects of various design parameters on a member's force-deformation and
moment-curvature-thrust relationship will be investigated. The results from the
experimental studies will be utilizes to develop and calibrate various
analytical models for predicting the response of a CFT to combined axial and
flexural loading. These models will include design-oriented strength prediction
equations and fiber-based formulations for capacity and overall force-
deformation response prediction. The second part of the project will investigate
the behavior of long CFT columns subjected to combined axial and lateral cyclic
loading, considering the effects of the design parameters. Using the models a
parametric study will be conducted to expand the experimental data base. The
results will be used to formulate the design guidelines. The knowledge acquired
and design guidelines developed will lead to the practical and reliable design
of this form of construction as well as develop the use of high strength
concrete and steel materials in seismic resistant design. This project also
involves close collaboration with Japanese and Germany Universities which will
enhance the quality of research. This is a project supported under the second-
year program of NSF initiative `U.S.-Japan-Cooperative Research on Composite and
Hybrid Structures,` NSF 94-154.