* 9632498
* Seismic Performance of Composite SMFs with Precast SRC      Columns, Strong Connections, and Steel Beams
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Chia-Ming Uang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 07/31/1998
* USD 99,295.00

This research project addresses seismic performance of a special moment frame
(SMF) system with precast SRC columns and composite steel beams. The proposed
framing system is composed of precast SRC column trees with strong connection to
steel beam stubs. The center portion of the composite steel beam is then field
spliced. The spliced location is the designated energy dissipative region, which
can be in the form of either conventional beam plastic hinging or some
mechanical energy dissipation devices. The selection of this type of composite
framing system and their potential for popular use in the United States system
are based on two main reasons. First, SRC columns with composite steel beam
construction has been accepted by design engineers for tall buildings in low to
moderate seismic regions-column steel shape is for structural use as well as for
erection purposes. Second, based on the poor performance of connections in steel
SMFs during the 1994 Northridge earthquake, it is highly desirable to move the
plastic hinge away from the column face. Several issues remain to be resolved
and verified, however, before seismic design guidelines can be developed. These
include the seismic performance of SRC columns with strong connections and beam
spliced bending in the strong or weak axis of the column. The ability to predict
the frame's seismic response also remains to be established. The work under this
project includes the design, per 1994 UBC or NEHRP Seismic Provisions of a
12-story prototype building with perimeter composite SMFs. Two full-scale
subassemblies, including exterior and interior beam-to-column joints,
respectively, will be tested cyclically in a quasistatic manner. Analytical
studies of the seismic response of test models will also be conducted. This is a
2nd-year award under the No. 94-154 initiative `Composite and Hybrid
Structures.`