* 9632421
* Collaborative Research:  Dimethylsulfide Metabolism in      Relation to Carbon Cycling Pathways in Sphagnum-Dominated   Wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Ronald Kiene, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/2000
* USD 137,218.00

9632421 Kiene Northern Sphagnum-dominated wetlands are complex, nutrient-poor
ecosystems that are major sources of atmospheric methane and store tremendous
quantities of organic carbon. These systems can emit unusually large amounts of
dimethylsulfide (DMS) into the atmosphere, and this efflux is often greater than
emissions from marine habitats that contain much more sulfur. Ongoing studies
revealed that rapid fluxes of DMS occur in oligotrophic areas of wetlands rather
that in more nutrient-rich sites. This peculiarity may to be due to the fact
that the methanogenic demethylation of DMS does not occur in oligotrophic peats,
while it does in minerotrophic ones and in neutral lake sediment. The present
study will investigate the production, consumption and emission of DMS in
wetlands of varying trophic status to elucidate the role of terminal decomposi~
processes in controlling DMS release. Several hypotheses will be tested: 1) DMS
emissions are most rapid in oligotrophic (ombrotrophic) regions of wetlands, and
this phenomenon is ubiquitous 2) DMS emissions (and accumulation) are faster in
oligotrophic regions because DMS is not decomposed by methanogenic bacteria 3)
Chemical conditions (i.e., pH, mineral content) are responsible for the lack of
DMS consumption in oligotrophic peats 4) Methylotrophic methanogens are sparse
in oligotrophic areas 5) Methylated sulfides are produced in all anoxic
freshwater systems The project will combine (1) field experiments measuring
emissions of reduced gases and distribution of pertinent chemical species along
trophic gradients within a wetland, and in separate wetlands of different
trophic status; (2) field manipulations in which wetland plots will be amended
with selected nutrients and/or trace elements; (3) laboratory experiments to
investigate pathways of organic matter transformations and relationships with
trace gas production; (4) investigations of the relative distribution and
abundance of selected microorganisms using molecular biotechno logy techniques.
The results will elucidate important aspects of bacterial metabolic pathways for
the production and consumption of methylated S compounds in wetlands, and
freshwaters in general. Since DMS transformations are conducted primarily by
microorganisms situated at the important terminal end of decomposition, these
data will provide insights into what controls decomposition in sites that tend
to accumulate large quantities of organic matter, and how methanogenesis,
acetogenesis, anaerobic metabolism, and methylation and demethylation activity
vary in response to changes in trophic status. The results will have broad
applicability to freshwater ecosystems in general.