* 9632319
* U.S. GLOBEC: Broad-Scale Patterns of the Distribution of    Zooplankton and Nekton in Relation to Micro- to Coarse-Scale Physical Structure in the Georges Bank Region
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1998,01/31/1999
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1999
* USD 90,000.00

As part of the U.S. GLOBEC NW Atlantic/Georges Bank study, Dr. Wiebe and
collaborators will determine the broad-scale distribution of zooplankton and
nekton populations on Georges Bank using a towed body equipped with multiple
frequency acoustical, bio-optical, and physical sensor systems. The primary
focus is on making high-resolution measurements of volume backscattering and
target strength of plankton and nekton throughout the Georges Bank region,
complemented with optical and physical data, to provide a multi-dimensional base
of estimates of the spatial distribution of biomass and size frequency of
acoustical targets which span the size range of the target species (cod,
haddock, Calanus, and Pseudocalanus) and their predators. The multi-frequency,
multi-beam system will provide high spatial resolution estimates of volume
backscattering and target strength. The bio-optical system will provide high
resolution video images of the plankton which will be used to determine the
relative composition and size distribution of the taxa along the tracklines in
the immediate vicinity of the towed body. These data together with theoretical
models will be used to interpret the acoustical data in terms of meaningful
biological properties, such as biomass and size distribution. The physical
sensors will provide the information about fine to coarse-scale physical
structure of the Bank environment and also the micro-structure relevant to
predator-prey interactions. The acoustic measurements can be directly related to
the data generated by the optical and net collections of plankton and nekton.
The acoustical spatial maps and time-series will also provide essential linkage
between the physical oceanographic conditions on the Bank and the biological
distributions of the species as determined from the net collections at the
stations distributed throughout the Georges Bank region.