* 9632255
* A Theory of Global Climate Change on Millennial Time Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Kirk Maasch, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 06/30/1999
* USD 101,658.00

Abstract ATM-9632255 Maasch, Kirk University of Maine Title: A Theory of Global
Climate Change on Millennial Time Scales In the northern hemisphere, large and
rapid shifts in environmental conditions have occurred repeatedly over the last
glacial- interglacial cycle. Indications are that climate change occurs on two
characteristic time scales, roughly 1 - 3,000 years and 5 - 10,000 years.
Evidence for millennial-scale climate variability has been found in ice cores
drilled through the Greenland ice sheet, sediment cores from the North Atlantic
Ocean, pollen records from both North America and Europe, and glacial deposits
in North America. Paleoclimate records from the southern hemisphere also show
climatic variability on millennial time scales. While interhemispheric synchrony
has been observed for the last termination, the record of alpine glaciers and
lake sediments in the Andes and New Zealand now suggest that these higher
frequency changes may also be synchronous with the climatic fluctuations of the
Northern Hemisphere. This award supports a project designed to model the higher
frequency variations of climate. One of the challenges of developing such a
theory for millennial-scale climate change will be to account for
interhemispheric connections within the context of a global environmental
system. While changes in the thermohaline circulation of the ocean have been
postulated as a cause for rapid climate change on millennial time scales in and
around the North Atlantic, interhemispheric synchrony would implicate the
atmosphere as a key factor in global climate change on this time scale.