* 9632660
* WORKSHOP: Biologically Inspired Autonomous Systems Workshop,to be Held March 3-5, l996, in Durham, NC.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Erol Gelenbe, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/1997
* USD 8,170.00

9632660 Gelenbe After a forty to fifty year cycle, the dramatic evolution of
this technology is enabling a return to the fundamental biological paradigms
which inspired the early intellectual of information technology such as John von
Neumann, Stephen Kleene and Marvin Minsky. As an example, artificial neural
networks resulted from the early models of McCulloch and Pitts concerning
biological neurons. Their mathematical theory was developed by engineers,
mathematicians and physicists, and a very broad variety of significant
applications have resulted from this work. Now psychologists have adopted them
as mechanistic models of human and animal thought processes, and are
contributing to the theory of how these models simulate and elucidate learning.
Similarly, concepts from genetics are modifying the manner in which computer
algorithms are being developed, while algorithmic and information theoretic
concepts (and neural networks) have become tools for research in genetics. The
purpose of this workshop is to broaden and pursue this long-term and fruitful
interaction of Engineering with the Life and Human Sciences, by investigation
the processes which provide Systems, both Artificial and Natural, with
Autonomous and Adaptive Behavior. The workshop will call upon prominent
researchers who study examples of autonomous behavior such as the food chain,
food ingestion, and animal psychology. The workshop will also call upon
researchers who take a Systems Engineering or Mathematical/Physical science
approach to artificial autonomous behavior such as self-organizing hardware,
genetic algorithms, neural networks, approximate reasoning and robotics. The
encounter between these two lines of thought in the presence of high-quality and
energetic audience - as well as a number of industrially relevant "real"
problems areas-will lead to a better understanding of the state of the art, to
new modeling efforts, and to the exchange of paradigms between these two impor
tant areas. Participation of young faculty members and post-docs, as well as
women and minorities will be emphasized. ***