* 9632921
* Long-Term Ecological Research at the H.J. Andrews           Experimental Forest (LTER4)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2003
* Frederick Swanson, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2003
* USD 4,210,077.00

Swanson 9632921 The central question guiding the HJ Andrews LTER is: How do land
use, natural disturbances and climate change affect three key ecosystem
properties: carbon dynamics, biodiversity, and hydrology? These three ecosystem
properties are of high scientific and social interest and represent three rather
different categories of ecological response to landscape patterns. The principle
spatial scale for synthesizing results of these studies is the Andrews Forest
landscape (6400 ha) and the adjacent upper Blue River watershed (9000 ha). The
time scale of interest spans the past 500 yrs and extends several centuries into
the future, based on model projections of alternative possible future
conditions. LTER studies link closely with work at larger spatial scales and
paleoecological time scales. This research follows a strategic plan to answer
this guiding question by continuing to use the Andrews LTER as the core of the
large, multi-faceted research program based at Andrews Experimental Forest in
Oregon. Since its inception in 1980, the Andrews Forest LTER program has
consisted of long-term experiments, measurement programs, short-term studies and
modeling analyses in a series of research components: climate, hydrology,
disturbance regimes/landscape dynamics, vegetation succession, biological
diversity, carbon and nutrient dynamics, and forest-stream interactions. Under
this renewal proposal, four related synthesis efforts will take place: effects
of species on ecosystem functioning, pattern and process during early
succession, analysis of small watersheds, and analysis of landscape dynamics.
Research under the continuation of this LTER activity will advance scientific
understanding of controls on ecosystem structure and function in the forested
landscapes of the Pacific Northwest.