* 9632926
* Collaborative Research: Paleoenvironmental Time Series From Postglacial Lake Basins on Kola Peninsula, Russia
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Glen MacDonald, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 06/30/2000
* USD 182,010.00

Abstract ATM-9632926 MacDonald, Glen M. University of California, Los Angeles
Title: Collaborative Research: Paleoenvironmental Time Series from Postglacial
Lake Basins on Kola Peninsula, Russia It is poorly known how dramatic changes in
deglacial and Holocene climates in the North Atlantic region propagated into the
Eurasian arctic. Lacustrine and estuarine records from the Kola Peninsula,
adjacent to the North Cape Current, the eastern-most limb of the North Atlantic
current, provide archives to assess postglacial and Holocene variations in
lakes, vegetation and tree line and inferred changes in atmospheric and oceanic
circulation. Extant cores from northern Kola Peninsula provide estuarine and
lacustrine records spanning at least the last 12,000 yrs. Preliminary analyses
demonstrate that these sediments are rich in biologic remains, ideal for
securing a reliable radiocarbon chronology and determining environmental
changes. This PALE/ARCSS award supports lake coring on a transect from the
tundra-dominated northern coast to the forested center of Kola Peninsula. This
research will utilize an array of paleoecological techniques such as pollen,
diatom, macrofossil and sediment analyses, augmented by recent advances in
stomate, chironomid and cellulose stable isotope analyses. To strengthen the
paleoenvironmental interpretations of the cores, modern sediment samples will be
collected from lakes to statistically calibrate pollen, stomate, diatom, and
chironomid records with present climatic, edaphic and vegetation conditions. The
research will provide new late glacial and Holocene records from the western
Russian arctic, currently a void in global paleoclimatic time series. The
collaborative research is with Dr. Steven L. Forman at the Ohio State University
(ATM-9600126).