* 9632311
* Mechanisms of Formation of Atmospheric Nitrous Oxide
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Mark Thiemens, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 07/31/1999
* USD 405,000.00

This award supports research by Dr. William C. Trogler and Dr. Mark H. Thiemens,
both of the Chemistry Department, University of California, San Diego, for
investigation of reactions leading to the production of nitrous oxide in the
environment. The project is jointly funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organometallic Chemistry Program, Chemistry Division, and the Atmospheric
Chemistry Program, Division of Atmospheric Sciences. The goal of the research is
to help resolve the global nitrous oxide budget and the variation observed in
nitrous oxide emissions and its isotopic composition. The role of atmospheric
carbon aerosol surfaces as catalysts for nitrous oxide formation will be
investigated, as will mechanistic and electrochemical studies of fundamental
chemical reactions that form nitrous oxide. In all the experiments, nitrogen and
oxygen heavy atom isotope effects will be determined as a possible indictor of
reaction mechanism and for comparison to existing isotopic data for atmospheric
nitrous oxide. Nitrous oxide is a source of stratospheric nitric oxide, an
important sink for ozone, and it can also contribute to greenhouse warming
because of its high warming potential. As a byproduct of industrial development
with a long lifetime in the atmosphere, it is important to understand its
sources but they are not completely known. In this research, some potential
sources for nitrous oxide will be examined.