* 9632595
* Diplomat:  A System for Building and Maintaining            Heterogeneous Database Alliances
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Michael Novak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/1999
* USD 420,000.00

Many large corporations find themselves with a massive legacy database problem.
Their data is distributed across many semantically related databases that are
physically and logically disjoint. Until now, there have been two primary
approaches for interconnecting heterogeneous database systems: (a) point
solutions, in which software systems supporting focused interconnections between
databases are constructed on an as-needed and ad hoc basis; and (b) global
solutions, in which a common, logical database is created that encompasses a
very large number of databases. (A variation of the latter is the federated
approach, which involves a global federation manager that controls all
interaction between the component databases.) The Diplomat project chooses a
middle ground between these two extremes, and provides technology to support
multiple loose database interconnections called `alliances`. The framework also
provides mechanisms to enforce consistency between individual databases, and
across alliances. The project draws on existing research on view specification,
inter-database constraints, and information flow. This research serves as a
proof of concept that maintainers of large business applications (such as
banking, insurance, and telecommunications) can integrate multiple,
heterogeneous, legacy database systems in a cost-effective, evolvable fashion.