* 9632717
* Education for Global Change:  Latin American Workshop
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1996,09/30/1997
* Joseph Stoltman, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 09/30/1997
* USD 58,092.00

9632717 Stoltman In order to extend the International Scientific Union's (ICSU)
Education in Global Change Project into Latin America, this workshop has been
proposed to bring together scientists from Latin America to identify topics or
sections of "Science for understanding tomorrow's world: Global Change;"
(student activities and teachers' guide for courses in biology, chemistry, earth
sciences, physics and general studies) that may be redesigned into a Latin
American context. Using data and research reports from their regions,
participants of this workshop, two from each Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research (IAI) member country, and IAI non-member countries (funded from
other sources), will develop local context extensions of activities in "Global
Change." The workshop will provide participants with necessary background
information about "Global Change;" will devote three days to supplement units in
Global Change for use by teaches/students of Latin America; and will conclude
with a day to finalize the supplements to the Latin American version of "Global
Change." This workshop will contribute to ICSU's Education in Global Change
Project by providing a final Spanish language version of "Global Change" which
will include a series of vignettes that will have been developed during the
workshop. %%% This workshop will provide an excellent opportunity for educators
in Latin America to convene in order to evaluate their global change educational
resources needs and to incorporate these needs into a version of "Global
Change," specifically for Latin America. Additionally, this workshop contributes
to the IAI scientific goal of increasing capacity building in the Americas. This
workshop is being co-cponsored ICSU, Pro-Clim, the Organization for American
States (OAS), and the United States National Science Foundation (NSF) on behalf
of IAI. The IAI is a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global
change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The National
Science Foundation is the U.S. Government agency designated by the White House
to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***