* 9632454
* Electrothermal Vaporization Introduction for ICP-MS
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1996,09/30/1999
* James Holcombe, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 09/30/1999
* USD 372,171.00

This project under the direction of Chemistry Professor James A. Holcombe of
the University of Texas, Austin, is supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry. The research concerns the
introduction of solid samples and microsamples into the inductively coupled
plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS). Electrothermal vaporization (ETV) will be
developed as the method of sample introduction. A set of fundamental studies
will be done to provide an understanding of how material is transported to the
ICP and the parameters influencing the process. Included in the work are studies
of the influence of carrier particle size on the efficiency of analyte transport
and the impact on transport of the nature of the type of association of analyte
with carrier. A second aspect of the sample transportation investigations will
be concerned with development of externally generated carriers. Two of the
methods to be explored for this purpose are the pyrolysis of benzene to form
carbon particles, and the reaction of gaseous titanium tetrachloride with water
vapor to form titanium dioxide particles. An entirely different approach will
involve the use of desolvated nebulizer-generated aerosols produced from
aspiration of selected salts. Another method to generate carbon particles will
involve oxygen ashing in the presence of palladium. Finally, to correct for
space charge effects on analyte transport, automatic lens correction procedures
will be explored to provide a dynamic correction technique for the transient
signal produced by ETV-ICP-MS. Instruments for chemical analysis necessarily
must have a means of introducing the sample to be analyzed into the instrument.
In some cases, this requires a change in the physical state of the species of
interest, for example, from a liquid to a gas. Often, not all of the sample
enters the measurement zone of the instrument and therefore the efficiency of
transport of sample is of great interest. This project is concerned with this
problem as it is encountered with the inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometer.