* 9633532
* Foundations for Reasoning About (Practical) Implicit        Invocation Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* David Garlan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/2000
* USD 75,000.00

A critical issue for large-scale systems design and evolution is the choice of
an architectural style that permits the integration of separately-developed
components into larger systems. Familiar styles include those based on remote
procedure call, shared variables, asynchronous message passing, etc. One
increasingly important architectural style for system composition is implicit
invocation (II). However, there is no established basis for reasoning about II
systems. In particular it is difficult to answer questions like: What will be
the effect of announcing a given event? Have enough event bindings been
declared? Does a given component announce the sufficient events to permit
effective integration? If I add a new component to an existing system, will it
break the existing system? The goal of this project is to provide such a basis
for reasoning about systems designed using the II architectural style. Two
central benefits are expected. The first benefit is a step towards being able to
reason fully about systems constructed in this style. The second and probably
more important benefit is to replace current ad hoc reasoning approaches used by
practitioners who use the II style with a collection of sound ideas that allow
better informal reasoning about such systems. ***