* 9633798
* Disordered and Lower Dimensional Porous Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Thomas Pinnavaia, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 07/31/2000
* USD 1,760,865.00

This award is made in the Office of Special Projects of the Chemistry Division
for continuing support of the collaborative research of Drs. Pinnavaia,
Kanatzidas, Billinge, Mahanti and Thorpe at Michigan State University. Also
participating is Dr. Stuart Solin of the NEC Research Institute. The research
deals broadly with chemical, physical and computational aspects of ordered and
lower dimensional nanoporous materials based on oxides and chalcogenides.
Specific research elements that will be investigated are the synthesis of new
metal oxide (silica, zirconia and titania) molecular sieves by self-assembly on
neutral amine or polyethylene oxide surfactant templates; synthesis by
surfactant templating, of new porous chalcogenide phases based on the pillaring
of lamelear metal sulfides and selenides; experimental X-ray diffraction and
computational studies of disorder and diffusion in open framework
mesostructures; studies of network stiffness by c-axis X-ray diffraction and
diffusion by inelastic neutron scattering of nanoporous silicate networks; and,
the synthesis and characterization of magnetic transition metal layered double
hydroxides. The synthetic studies of the metal oxides will lead to molecular
sieves with controlled phases and morphologies ranging from hexagonal or cubic
to worm-like channel motifs. The chalcogenide studies directed towards the
synthesis of layered metal chalcogenide phases with metal cluster pillars will
provide new semiconducting catalysts with the shape selectivity of zeolites.
Nanoporous materials with pore sizes in the 1.0-10 nm range offer exciting
opportunities for the rational design of adsorbents and catalysts for
applications in environmental remediation, molecular separations and a variety
of industrial processes based on large molecule transformations. Semiconducting
nanoporous structures hold great promise for the fabrication of sensors, organic
-inorganic hybrid materials and solid state devices. The properties and
performance of these nanoporous materials are dominated by long and short range
disorder and the dimensionality of the pore space. This combined experimental
and computational study will help elucidate the fundamental chemistry and
physics of these complex materials.