* 9633673
* Performance Modeling of Optoelectronic Communication        Networks for Ultracompact Massively Parallel Processing     Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Jose Cruz-Rivera, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Deborah L. Crawford
* 06/30/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9633673 Cruz-Rivera The objective of this Minority Research Planning Grant
proposal is to present a plan for preliminary studies that will facilitate the
development of a competitive research project in the area of optoelectronic
communication networks, with the full expectation that this project will form
the basis of a subsequent regular research proposal to the NSF's Optical
Communication System program. In addition to the technical activities that will
be carried out during the planning period, the work proposed herein seeks to
address certain infrastructure-related issues that are unique to the
establishment of an Optoelectronic Systems Research Group at the University of
Puerto Rico-Mayaguez - a primarily undergraduate institution that is currently
making great strides towards the development of a strong Ph.D. program in
Computer Science and Engineering. The technical activities to be carried out
during the proposed twelve month planning represent a single component of a
broader area of investigation that would constitute the main focus of the
Optoelectronic Systems Research Group at the University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez
(UPRM). In particular, the proposed line of inquiry seeks to advance the
development of an Applications-Driven Optical Interconnect Technology (ADROIT)
Model that would allow, for a given application class, the determination of :
(1) the optimal optoelectronic system implementation given set of algorithmic,
architectural, topological, and technological parameters, and (2) the relative
impact the optical interconnect technologies in question would have on the
overall cost/performance metric of these systems. The proposed activities would,
on the one hand, advance the short-term development of certain aspects of this
ADROIT model by providing insight into the topological-technological design
space associated with the implementation of optoelectronic communication
networks for ultracompact massively parallel processing sy stems, while on the
other, provide a framework that will allow the identification of the specific
research tasks to be undertaken and methodologies to be employed in the long-
term development of this model. The identified tasks and methodologies would in
turn form the basis for the subsequent research proposal. ***