* 9633601
* Workshop on Aerogeophysical Research in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Sridhar Anandakrishnan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1997
* USD 15,655.00

Anandakrishnan 9633601 Abstract This award supports a workshop on
Aerogeophysical Research in Antarctica to be held 18-19 March, 1996, at the
National Science Foundation offices in Arlington, Virginia. The National Science
Foundation has established a facility to collect airborne geophysical data in
Antarctica. The Support Office for Aerogeophysical Research (SOAR) (administered
by the Institute for Geophysics of the University of Texas at Austin) operates
state-of-the-art instruments for ice-surface elevation, ice thickness, gravity,
and magnetics on board a ski-equipped Twin Otter aircraft. This workshop will
bring together earth scientists and glaciologists to discuss the best possible
use of these tools and these types of data. To date the facility has been used
with great success in the West Antarctic to image the Byrd Basin/Ross Embayment
region. This area is a key to both glaciologic problems of ice sheet stability
and ice stream flow as well as tectonic problems of Gondwana reconstructions and
West Antarctic rifting. Identifying other such intersections of cross-discipline
problems will be of great importance in the long-term viability of SOAR. This
facility can be used in reconnaisance mode to map the magnetic, gravity, and
ice-thickness signatures of large areas or as a high-resolution mapper to
characterize in detail areas of particular interest. These two modes of
operation are distinct in philosophy and we will discuss the pros and cons of
each mode. The practical aspects of data handling, data visualization, and final
product delivery from SOAR will also be discussed. The different customers of
SOAR require different levels of analysis or integration of the data streams
available. These and other issues of data delivery will be discussed. The
specific goals of the workshop are: 1) Educate the Antarctic science community
on the capabilities and limitations of the SOAR facility; 2) Identify and
prioritize research objectives of b road interest and possibly global
applicability that would be best studied in the Antarctic using aerogeophysical
data; 3) Link the research goals of geologists and glaciologists to identify
areas of the Antarctic where these data would be of value to both communities;
and 4) Encourage the development of coordinated proposals for future use of
SOAR.