* 9633770
* Dissertation Research:  Technological Styles of Late        Preclassic Lowlands Maya Architectural Sculpture:  Cultural Explanations of Technological Change
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Richard Leventhal, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1998
* USD 5,250.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Leventhal, Mr. Eric Hansen will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will collect samples of stucco and samples
which have secure archaeological contexts and which have been collected from a
series of Preclassic lowland Mayan sites. These will be subjected to a series of
analyses including optical microscopy, image analysis of petrographic thin
sections and paint cross sections supplemented by instrumental examinations.
With this information he will be able to determine whether technological styles
- standardized techniques for preparation of these products - are present, their
degree of uniformity and how they change over time. Stucco and plaster were
widely used by Maya to coat temple walls, as a base for painted design and as
the material to shape into sculptures. They are produced by burning lime,
slaking it with water and then adding a variety of tempers. Preliminary work by
Mr. Hansen indicates considerable variability in the details of Mayan production
practices. Archaeologists study style for several reasons. Because styles change
over time, by looking at designs on potsherds for example one is often able to
construct chronologies, date selected examples by radiocarbon and then fit other
excavated examples in the proper time slot. Secondly, archaeologists study
standardization among items from a same site because it provides insight into
the degree of centralized organization and control. Standardization and
centralization are directly related. Through his research Mr. Hansen will both
develop a new technique of stylistic analysis and provide information on
specific Mayan sites. He, together with several other archaeologists believe
that the rise of Mayan civilization dates to a period earlier than many
researchers accept and the data he produces will be directly relevant to this
question. This research is important for several reasons. It will produce data
of interest to many archaeologists. It will help to pioneer the development of a
new technique of potentially wide archaeological applicability and it will
assist in the training of a promising young scientist.