* 9633243
* Dissertation Research:  Future Scientists:  Exploring       Factors Which Affect Women's Educational and Career Choices in Science, Mathematics and Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Sheldon Stryker, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/1999
* USD 9,640.00

9633243 Stryker This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement research examines social
factors affecting educational choices of academically talented women at their
initial stages of pursuing careers in science and technology. Despite efforts to
the contrary, proportions of women entering science and technology continue to
decline, and academically talented women drop out of these areas at higher rates
than men. This problem is explored via identity theory, which asserts that
academic and career choice are impacted by self-organization. The sample consist
of participants in summer programs for high school students in science,
mathematics and engineering. Data will be collected through a survey of 1,000
male and female students (before program attendance and after enrollment in
college), ethnographic observations at one summer program site, and follow-up
face-to-face interviews. These data will be studied to see how social
relationships organize students' identities and affect students' choices and how
gender-related variation in "future scientist" identity formation and
maintenance impacts educational and career choices. Major funding for this
three-year project has been provided by the Sloan Foundation. NSF funding will
be used primarily to compensate respondents, to conduct follow-up interviews
with students in the ethnographic component, and to support data entry
activities. *** ??