* 9633434
* Electrochemistry of Supramolecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Angel Kaifer, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 10/31/1999
* USD 446,676.00

With support from the Organic Dynamics program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Angel E. Kaifer of the University of Miami (Florida) will study the
electrochemistry of supramolecular systems, especially rotaxanes, dendrimers,
and host-guest systems. This is a continuation of previously funded work
(CHE-9304262) which showed that electron transfer reactions and proton transfer
reactions can be used to switch certain rotaxanes between conformers having
different electronic absorption spectra. The present project will involve
investigation of the thermodynamics and kinetics of electron transfer involving
such supramolecular architectures, the preparation of new rotaxane systems, and
continuation of fundamental investigations of binding, structure, and
intermolecular forces in host-guest systems. The electron transfer reactions are
selected for special emphasis. The project will include work intended to lead to
facile preparation of supported monolayers containing preformed binding sites.
The monolayers chosen for emphasis are amine functionalized receptors on
carboxylate terminated self-assembled monolayers. This project will prepare some
of the groundwork for the use of certain chemical compounds as `molecular
switches,` molecules which respond in some observable way to external stimuli
such as light or electricity. The work may eventually be useful in
nanotechnology, since it leads to new materials with the potential for molecular
level information storage and processing. Work with self-assembled monolayers
may lead to selective molecular sensors.