* 9633522
* Collaborative Research:  Mechanisms of Population           Regulation in Migratory Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1996,05/31/2002
* Nicholas Rodenhouse, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Pamela O'neil
* 05/31/2002
* USD 173,362.00

9633522 Rodenhouse This research is designed to test and evaluate the mechanisms
(i.e., processes) determining population size in North American migratory
songbirds. The study will help in understanding why some species are currently
showing population declines. The work focuses on breeding populations of Black-
throated Blue Warblers (Dendroica caerulescens) in the Hubbard Brook
Experimental Forest in north central New Hampshire. Through monitoring and
experimental studies, we will quantify the occurrence and strength of two types
of population regulation, namely density-dependence and site-dependence. Each
type is capable of generating negative feedbacks on population size. One test
will involve evaluating the effects of experimental reductions of local
population density, while monitoring will examine how habitat quality influences
bird survival and reproduction. Habitat quality will be defined in terms of food
abundance, weather, predator abundance, and vegetation composition and
structure. The ability of these measures, singly and collectively, to predict
territory-specific reproduction, survival, and dispersal of these species over
broad spatial and altitudinal scales will be examined. Data from these studies
will be employed in computer simulation models for comparisons of the regulatory
strength of the two potentially important regulatory processes. Model
projections and analyses will help to identify, assess, and integrate the
factors and processes determining population changes and abundances of this
migratory bird species. Results of this research will contribute not only to
basic ecological theory, but also will have direct management applications for
migratory songbirds, some of which are declining in abundance and are of
conservation concern.