* 9633039
* US-India Cooperative Research: Phase Selection in Ceramic   Oxides under Non-Equilibrium Conditions, Award in Indian    Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Vikram Jayaraman, Indian Institute of Science
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2001
* USD 20,580.00

Description: This proposal is for a US-Indo research collaboration between
materials scientists Carlos Levi of the University of California, Santa Barbara
and Vikram Jayaram of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. The project is
entitled `Phase Selection in Ceramic Oxides Under Non-Equilibrium Conditions.`
The investigators will study the evolution of oxide microstructures in ceramic
oxides synthesized under conditions wherein thermodynamic equilibrium is highly
constrained. The program will focus on relatively simple binary and higher
component systems using techniques with proven potential to bring about
substantial metastability. Compositions produced in this manner will be heat
treated to study the hierarchy of states by which the non-equilibrium structure
evolves towards a more stable one. The primary objective is to enhance the
understanding of phase selection processes, their relationship to fundamental
forms of metastability, as well as their impact on microstructure evolution
through subsequent transformations. Scope: The PIs have extensive experience in
this area and have collaborated productively in the past. The bulk of the
experimental work will be carried out at the Indian Institute of Science. The US
collaborator will provide guidance in the design of experiments and analysis of
results, as well as access to atomization and characterization facilities at the
UC, Santa Barbara. The research is expected to generate a mutually beneficial
interaction with the ongoing research on the synthesis of structural ceramics
and functional inorganic oxides at the NSF Materials Research Laboratory at UC.
This project will provide a unique international opportunity for a US graduate
student to participate in the experimental research at the IISc, Bangalore.