* 9633568
* Synthetic, Structural and Reactivity Studies on             Supramolecules Obtained from Catechol Functionalized        Macrocycles. Studies in Nb/S Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Dimitri Coucouvanis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 01/31/2000
* USD 304,000.00

Dr. Dimitri Coucouvanis, Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division to perform synthetic, structural and reactivity studies on
supramolecules obtained from catechol functionalized macrocycles. The systems of
interest include catechol-functionalized tetraazamacrocyclic complexes capable
of undergoing intramolecular electron transfer upon changes in pH,
supramolecular crown ethers which change their function depending on what is
bound in the crown ether portion of the molecule, and optically active
`propeller` molecules which could be useful as supports capable of asymmetric
induction in the epoxidation of olefins. Molecular `reactors` which contain
separate subunits for both the storage of electrons and the activation of small
molecules will also be synthesized and their reactivity patterns delineated. The
chemistry of coordinated sulfur and selenium ligands in niobium and tantalum
complexes and their reactivity with heteroallenes, alkenes, alkynes, sulfur
dioxide and molecular hydrogen will also be explored. Molecular architecture
involves the synthesis of complex, multi-functional systems which are designed
to transform a bound substrate molecule, much the way enzymes function in living
systems. Metallomacrocycles, systems which incorporate metal ions into large
ring structures, are examples of these so called `supramolecular` systems. These
molecules may function as elementary molecular devices with potential
applications in photochemically induced charge separation, photoswitching,
catalytic redox processes, electron storage, or substrate molecule activation.