* 9633485
* SBIR Phase II:  Vector/Scalar Magnetometer
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Andy Brown, POLATOMIC, INC
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 06/30/2000
* USD 388,237.00

*** Slocum 9633485 In Phase I a concept was defined for a novel laser-pumped
helium 4 magnetometer. The magnetometer employs a dual mode of operation
(vector/scalar) to measure both the magnitude and direction of the geomagnetic
field. The key technical component is a patented tunable diode laser (TDL)
pumping source. The feasibility of measuring scalar fields with a resolution of
0.3 pT/~Hz, an order of magnitude better than conventional resonance
magnetometers, was demonstrated with a laboratory breadboard. The concept of an
omnidirectional single cell, single beam sensor was also demonstrated. A concept
was also developed for extracting three-axis vector information from the single
cell sensor. Phase I results will be used to design, fabricate, demonstrate and
characterize a prototype portable Geomagnetic Vector Scalar Magnetometer (GVSM)
including the sensor and electronics modules for high resolution scalar mode and
three-axis vector mode in Phase II. The GVSM instrument will be the first
portable resonance magnetometer to provide vector components and high-resolution
scalar field information. It will be state-of-the-art instrumentation for
geomagnetic research and exploration. GVSM instrument would also find
application in undersea surveillance, anti-shoplifting surveillance, mine
countermeasures and planetary and space magnetic surveys. ***