* 9633771
* Dissertation Research:  Community Organization on the       Chacoan Frontier
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Barbara Mills, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1998
* USD 11,928.00

Under the direction of Dr. Barbara Mills, MS Sarah Herr will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological research in the
Mogollon rim area of Arizona and supplement this with the analysis of museum
collections. Her focus will be on the period between the 10th through 12th
centuries AD. Kivas are large, usually well constructed partially underground
structures with wooden roofs and were used for religions purposes. Because they
serve as a central focus for a community, by determining a kiva's size, care
expended on its construction and its internal organization it is possible to
gain insight into the structure of the community which built it. MS Herr, will
coordinate her work with the University of Arizona field school and excavate the
kiva at the Hough's Great Kiva site. She will study the ceramics and other
materials collected and augment these data with analyzes of materials from other
Mogollon rim sites. On this basis she will reconstruct the social organization
of the region and compare it to that in neighboring areas. The Southwest has
long served as a focus for archaeological attention because of the imposing
ruins present and the roads which linked many of them. Clearly prehistoric
people achieved a significant degree of social complexity in a harsh desert
environment. Most researchers have concentrated their efforts on the largest
sites and the areas which contain them and relatively work has been done in what
appear to be underpopulated regions. Thus little is known about how communities
in these latter areas functioned and how they were integrated (or not
integrated) into more `central` areas. The Mogollon Rim has traditionally been
viewed by archaeologists as a peripheral area and it forms the focus of MS
Herr's study. She has proposed an original perspective - frontier theory - from
which to view this area and to examine its relationships with more `central`
regions. This work will provide the data to test her idea. This research is
important for several regions. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists and shed new light on the American past. It will serve to develop
the application of a very powerful theoretical approach and will assist in the
training of a promising young scientist.