* 9633711
* Primary Production in the Ocean: The Grazing Problem Revisited
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Nicholas Welschmeyer, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1999
* USD 288,692.00

9633711 WELSCHMEYER Uncertainties in rates of oceanic primary production have
been disputed for years. Although, the problem has been the subject of much
review and experimentation, a discrepancy still exists between estimates of
primary production based on non-manipulative biogeochemical calculations and
those based on short-term 14C incubation experiments. We renew the theoretical,
but untested, arguments that grazer-induced losses of metabolized carbon result
in measurable underestimates of the true rate of primary production in standard
14C experiments. A model is elaborated which predicts significant (two-fold)
underestimates of production using realistic assumptions commensurate with
modern views of marine food web structure. The model clearly identifies the
importance of the timing of diel microzooplankton grazing as it affects the
outcome of routine 12 h or 24 h incubations. Preliminary experiments, both in
the lab and in the field, suggest the model is indeed realistic, and that
underestimates of production are easily demonstrated, even in short 12 h
daylight incubations. This project will undertake extensive laboratory
experimentation designed to establish the stochiometry of metabolized 14C-loss
against known rates of microzooplnakton grazing rates and respiration. The model
will thus be empirically parameterized, allowing predictive estimates of
14C-production errors to be made under in situ conditions of temperature,
grazing and phytoplankton growth. A series of testable hypotheses is generated
for field samples, and a complementary plan of field experiments is proposed,
which will quantify grazer-induced production errors along a gradient of
coastal-oligotrophic sites, including the JGOFS Hawaii time series station. An
increasing gradient in production errors is expected as the natural community of
grazers changes from coastal to oligotrophic plankton assemblages. This research
project will result in a fully-tested analysis of grazer-induced errors in
primary production experimen ts, including recommendations for optimized
methodology , and will provide realistic constraints on error limits which may
pertain to contemporary primary production data. A potentially significant
portion of the oceanic productivity dilemma may be resolved as a result of this
project. ***