* 9633062
* Self-Assembly of Inorganic/Organic Multilayer Thin Films:   Novel Chemical Systems for Self-Assembly and Incorporation  of Nonlinear Optical Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Catherine Page, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 01/31/2000
* USD 307,389.00

This award is made in the Office of Special Projects in the the Chemistry
Division in support of the research of Dr. Catherine Page at the University of
Oregon. The research deals with the design, synthesis and characterization of
self-assembled inorganic/organic multilayer thin films. Two specific areas will
be investigated: (1) the incorporation of nonlinear optical (NLO) chromophores
into metal bisphosphonate multilayers, both as new NLO films, and as a
diagnostic tool for assessing orientational order and kinetics of monolayer
formation; and, (2) the synthesis of new hybrid multilayer films based on
transition metal diisocyanide coordination complexes. In the latter system, the
role of solvent, transition metal and diisocyanide structure will be explored.
Synthesis and dynamics of metal diisocyanide multilayers and hybrid multilayers
of metal diisocyanide and metal bisphosphonates will be investigated.
Multilayers will be characterized by FTIR, grazing angle x-ray diffraction,
ellipsometry and XPS. Additionally, the orientational order of the layers and
the kinetics of monolayer formation will be determined by second harmonic
generation measurements. This research has elements of both fundamental
importance and commercial relevance. Incorporation of nonlinear optical
chromophores into self-assembled films provide a means of addressing fundamental
issues of film orientation and growth. Additionally, multilayer structures with
nonlinear optical properties offer the prospect of applications in electrooptic
conversion, optical switching and frequency doubling devices.