* 9633628
* Dissertation Research:  Prehistoric Socio-Political         Development and Wetland Agriculture in West Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* James Schoenwetter, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2000
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. James Schoenwetter, Mr Glen Stuart will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to gain insight into
prehistoric Middle American agricultural techniques and to examine the
relationship between the development of large scale agriculture and the
emergence of complex societies. Investigation in many areas of Middle and South
America has revealed the presence of `raised field` complexes. These are located
almost exclusively in low-lying poorly drained areas and consist of rectilinear
arrangements of raised earth separated by linear canals. These appear to be a
widespread form of wetland control and modern experiments to reconstruct such
fields indicate that they are capable of sustaining intensive planting. However
archaeologists do not understand just what crops were planted on such fields and
have not developed robust analytic techniques to provide such information. Prior
research has indicated the presence of extensive wetland agricultural systems in
the Jalisco region of West Mexico. Through a program of field studies of these
system's remnants and laboratory studies of radiocarbon, ceramics and pollen
obtained during the course of fieldwork, Mr. Stuart will accomplish several
goals. First he will gain insight into the relationship between wetland
agricultural intensification and socio-political and economic development.
Through study of fossil pollen he will elucidate the types of crops grown and
how these may have changed through time. He will also develop a method to
recognize the palynological signature of wetland agricultural systems.
Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies and civilizations arise.
Central to the integration of large numbers of people is some form of
hierarchical control and it is unclear what processes led to the development of
social inequality. One influential idea ties this to the development of
irrigation systems which are both central to survival in arid and semi-arid
environments and which require some kind of centralized management to distribute
water, an essential limited resource. In many Middle American environments
prehispanic states arose and because this process occurred in wetland
environments where irrigation is not necessary, the irrigation hypothesis does
not hold. Archaeologists however have noted other types of large field systems
and wish to know whether these played a causative role. Mr Stuart's research
will address this question. This project is important for several reasons. It
will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and help to develop a
methodological tool of great potential use. It will also assist in training a
promising young scientist.