* 9633107
* Arsenic Doping of Zinc Selenide via Neutron Transmutation   of Selenium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Jack Boone, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2000
* USD 341,266.00

9633107 Boone This project address a key issue, p-type doping in II-VI
semiconductors, utilizing nuclear reactions and homoepitaxy to prepare thin film
crystalline ZnSe with As dopant atoms 'trapped' at Se lattice sites. The
approach is based on growth of ZnSe using isotopically enriched 74Se exposed to
thermal neutrons before growth to allow the doping process to be decoupled from
crystal growth, and other processes which can lead to compensation effects. The
idea is that most of the resulting 75Se will decay to As after growth is
completed, and ZnSe will have been synthesized by a process 'guaranteeing'
substitutional As doping. The aim of the research is to provide unique material
to gain fundamental insight into fundamental doping mechanisms in II-VI
materials. %%% The project is multidisciplinary combining fundamental materials
physics and materials processing studies with advanced characterization tools
and analysis methods to address basic issues in a topical area of high
scientific value and potential technological benefits. The research will
contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level important to
several aspects of advanced electronic/photonic device fabrication and
operation. The knowledge and understanding gained from this research project is
expected to contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced
devices by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
producing improved materials. An important feature of the program is the
integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***