* 9633534
* Seismological and Regional Uplift Field Investigations      Following the M=8.2 Irian Jaya, Indonesia Earthquake of     February 17, 1996
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Robert McCaffrey, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 04/30/1997
* USD 29,862.00

9633534 Nabelek On February 17, 1996, a great earthquake M=8.2 occurred along
the northwestern coast of Irian Jaya, Indonesia. Initial reports show wide-
spread destruction of the coastal communities resulting from strong shaking and
a large tsunami. This research, in cooperation with Indonesian scientists, will
take advantage of an extraordinary opportunity to use advanced prrtable seismic
instrumentation and space-based geodesy to study the distortion due to the
event, including a rare opportunity to measure co-seismic slip distribution
during a great subduction earthquake. It is also and opportunity to study the
interaction of parallel thrust and strike- slip faults that display slip
partitioning during the earthquake sequence. This part of the subduction fault
was considered to be largely inactive based on past seismicity, seismic
reflection profiles of the New Guinea trench, and recent geodetic measurements.
The grant will support operation of a temporary seismograph network on the
hanging wall of the thrust to map the fault with aftershocks, and measurement of
the static uplift of the coastal areas by measuring coseismic sea level changes.
Reoccupation of the geodetic GPS site established in the area from previous
grants will be supported there. This research is funded under the Small Grants
for Exploratory Research Program and is a component of the National Earthquake
Hazard Reduction Program.