* 9633729
* Time Division Multiplexing of Optical Interconnection       Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Rami Melhem, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/2000
* USD 187,016.00

The goal of this research is to study, design and evaluate control mechanisms
for time-multiplexing optical interconnection networks in multiprocessor
applications. Such mechanisms decouple the relatively slow network control from
the high optical data transmission bandwidth. The research will assess the
advantages, capabilities and limitations of time-division multiplexing.
Specifically, models will be developed to specify the communication requirements
of applications, to express and measure the communication locality present in
communication loads, and to estimate the communication cost in multiplexed
interconnection networks. Different control protocols will be simulated and
tested on traces collected from actual parallel applications, and on synthetic
traces generated with the help of the communication locality model. Centralized,
distributed and pipelined control strategies will be implemented and compared.
This project is motivated by several observations. First, without multiplexing,
the control overhead of establishing end-to-end connections in a network may be
prohibitive. Second, applications exhibit communication locality which amplifies
the benefits of multiplexing. Third, the high bandwidth of optical paths allows
for multiplexing with minimal effect on the transmission rate on individual
connections. Finally, the nature of massively parallel programs allows compilers
to determine, with current technology, the multiplexing sequences that satisfy
most of the communication requirements.