* 9633561
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Colloidal     Interaction Forces in Crystalline Colloidal Arrays
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* H. E. Anthony Duncan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 07/31/2000
* USD 405,000.00

With funding from the Organic Dynamics Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professors Sanford Asher, Rob Coalson, and Anthony Duncan will conduct
theoretical and experimental studies leading to an understanding of
electrostatic interactions in strongly interacting colloidal dispersions. The
project will explore the possibility of exploiting these interactions to produce
novel colloidal crystalline materials. In part the work will study colloidal
crystals composed of mixed positive and negative colloidal particles. The
primary techniques to be employed are photothermal diffraction spectroscopy,
fluorescence bleaching, molecular dynamics simulations, and other theoretical
treatments. The weaknesses in DLVO (Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek) theory,
applicable to weakly interacting colloidal systems but substantially flawed when
interactions are strong and particle densities high, are expected to be overcome
by a new lattice field theory (LFT) approach. The crystalline colloidal arrays
represent an unusual arrangement of matter and are of importance to material
science. The work deals with interfacial chemistry of large charged colloidal
particles and with the consequent electrostatic potentials and electric fields.
Electrostatics are crucially important in membrane biology. Models developed for
colloidal particles at high density, although not necessarily directly
applicable, may thus also have biological relevance.