* 9633638
* Self-Assembled and Modulated Domain Epitaxial Oxide         Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Alexander Roytburd, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 11/30/1999
* USD 314,951.00

9633638 Roytburd This combined theory and experiment research project aims for
a rigorous theoretical understanding and experimental verification of strain
controlled structural modulation(cooperative ordering) in epitaxial systems.
Fundamental aspects of solid state transformation under coherently constrained
conditions in metal oxides such as perovskites will be studied with respect to
understanding the mechanisms and kinetic parameters of the transformations, and
with respect to developing new routes to the design and realization of
transversely modulated domain and heterophase microstructures inside
heterostructure and superlattice layers. The correlation of transversal
modulations in layers of superlattices and possibility of 3-dimensional
superlattices will be explored. The thermodynamics and kinetics of the evolution
of modulated structures in solid-solid phase transformations will be studied
specifically in ferroelectric, ferroelastic, and ferromagnetic transformations.
%%% The project is multidisciplinary combining fundamental materials theory and
experimental synthesis and processing studies with advanced characterization
tools and analysis methods to address forefront issues in a topical area of
technological relevance and high potential payoff. The research will contribute
basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to several aspects of
advanced electronic devices and integrated circuitry. The knowledge and
understanding gained from this research project is expected to contribute in a
general way to improving the performance of advanced devices and circuits by
providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing
improved materials, and materials combinations. An important feature of the
program is the integration of research and education through the training of
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***