* 9633624
* Adaptive, Profile-Based Compilation of Highly Interactive,  Graphical Applications by Demonstration
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Bradley Vander Zanden, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/1999
* USD 173,729.00

Rapid prototyping environments provide high-level operations that allow users
rapidly to create and modify interactive applications, such as graphical
interfaces, scientific and program visualizations, and simulations (i.e.,
quickly program the Obig pictureO). These environments often sacrifice speed and
storage for increased flexibility. Researchers have proposed optimizations that
can reduce storage and improve performance. However, the programmer must
manually apply these optimizations, which impedes rapid, iterative development
of applications. The objective of this project is to develop adaptive, profile-
based compilation techniques that automatically apply these optimizations so
that the programmer can make use of rapid prototyping techniques while still
retaining excellent time and storage performance. Constraints and structured
graphics are targeted by this research since studies show that these two
techniques facilitate the rapid, iterative development of graphical user
interfaces. This project is developing techniques whereby: (1) a profiler
monitors operations as they execute and extracts information about constraint
evaluation and variable access, and (2) an adaptive compiler uses this
information to dynamically implement various performance and storage
optimizations. ***