* 9633111
* Physiological Ecology of Marine Cyanobacterial Communities
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Brian Palenik, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2000
* USD 370,000.00

9633111 PALENIK This project will use an integrated multi-investigator approach
to determine the extent and causes of cyanobacterial biodiversity in the marine
environment. The project hypothesis is that stratification in the oceans,
although often transient, has led to the development of a limited number of
physiologically and genetically distinct and recognizable groups ("species") of
cyanobacteria specifically adapted to the high light, low nutrient mixed layer
and others adapted to the higher nutrient, low light life below it. Even this
simple scenario is much more complex than the current oceanographic paradigm.
There is currently little knowledge of the spatial or temporal variations in
natural cyanobacterial diversity, and we can only guess at the factors that may
be driving it. The importance this diversity may have in determining
oceanographic rate processes, such as in situ growth or carbon fixation rates,
is unknown, and its role cannot really be addressed until we understand the
extent and patterns of cyanobacterial diversity. This project is the first step
in being able to assay the growth rates and metabolic activities of individual
physiological or genetic types. Since similar genetic and physiological
processes probably also occur in other groups of phytoplankton, these questions
are of general significance to biological oceanography. This project will also
begin to look at not just the number of microbial "species" in an environment,
but why that number? The microbiota of the marine environment are coming to be
seen as remarkably diverse, and an understanding of the processes underlying
this diversity will best be gained by examining the diversification of a related
group of microorganisms in detail in relationship to physiochemical parameters.
The marine environment is probably the best place to begin to understand these
questions because there is also considerable experience in understanding the
physiochemical gradients surrounding the o rganisms. RNA polymerase gene
sequences from strains and bulk community samples, flow cytometric analyses,
pigment analyses, antibody assays for motile Synechococcus and other strains,
strain isolation techniques, physiological studies on nitrogen and light
utilization, and physiochemical data will be the initial set of tools we will
bring to these problems, with others under development. Three sites in the
oligotrophic boundary of the Southern California Bight will be sampled at
several depths for two consecutive years at the same season to ensure the
reproducibility of our conclusions. A third cruise will focus on characterizing
the same sites at a different season in order to begin to explore temporal
variations in diversity. This focused sampling effort will ensure a tractable
approach to understanding the importance of cyanobacterial diversity to marine
ecosystems. ***