* 9634806
* Group 13 Chalcogenides: Molecules and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Andrew Barron, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 07/31/2000
* USD 322,500.00

This award is made in the Office of Special Projects of the Chemistry Division
in support of the continuing research of Dr. Andrew Barron at Rice University.
The research will focus on the role of precursor molecular structure during
chemical vapor deposition of Group 13-16 materials and the synthesis and
reactivity of new Group 13-chalcogenide compounds. Having discovered that
metastable solid phases can be formed from stable cage structure intermediates,
conditions will be investigated which retain the cage structure in the gas
phase. To this end, an aerosol-CVD system will be built which will eliminate gas
phase decomposition. Specifically, cyclic and cage organometallic complexes of
gallium and indium, sufides, selenides and tellurides will be synthesized and
decomposed under conditions designed to preserve the structural integrity of the
precursors, New phases will be characterized by Auger spectroscopy, XPS, TEM,
SEM, x-ray diffraction and electron diffraction. Mechanistic studies of phase
growth will be followed by time-of-flight mass spectrometry and matrix isolation
of the decomposition products. Other studies will investigate the use of
gallium-sulfide cages as molecular building blocks for extended mesophase
structures and the use of caged gallium sulfide structures as models for
alumoxanes in Ziegler polymerization. The fundamental chemistry of Group 13-16
chalcogenides is less well developed than the corresponding oxides This research
will define the structural and kinetic requirements for the design and synthesis
of new solid phases for applications in compound semiconductors, catalysis, and
porous zeolite-like materials.