* 9634145
* Analysis of the Plant CR4 Receptor Kinase and Gene          Family
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1997
* Philip Becraft, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 03/31/1997
* USD 35,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY _ The Project Summary should include a statement of objectives,
methods to be employed, and the significance of the proposed activity to the
advancement of knowledge or education. Avoid use of first person to complete
this summary. DO NOT EXCEED ONE PAGE. (Some Programs may impose more stringent
limits.) The maize crinkly4 (cr4) gene encodes a receptor kinase involved in the
development of leaf epidermis and the aleurone of kernels (Becraft et al., in
preparation). The novel extracellular domain contains a 39 amino acid repeat
motif and a cysteine-rich region with similarity to the extracellular ligand-
binding domain of mammalian tumor necrosis factor receptors (TNFRs). A
nucleotide probe containing the extracellular domain coding sequence hybridizes
at low stringency to several genomic fragments in both maize and Arabidopsis,
thus cr4 represents a new gene family. The objectives of the current proposal
are twofold: 1. to initiate attempts to isolate the signal molecule by direct
molecular techniques and 2. to characterize this gene family in Arabidopsis. The
latter will also result in the isolation of the cr4 cognate gene which will be
used to develop a genetic system to study the CR4 receptor and possibly to
identify the signal molecule. The similarity between CR4 and the ligand-binding
domain of TNFR suggests that CR4 probably also binds a peptide signal molecule.
Toward the first objective, a phage display library will be constructed using
RNA from leaves at the stage when the mutant phenotype first becomes apparent.
The library will be screened by biopanning for clones encoding peptides bound by
the extracellular domain of CR4. Members of the cr4 gene family will be isolated
by screening an Arabidopsis genomic library at low stringency with the
extracellular probe from the maize cr4. The clones will be used to examine
expression of the Arabidopsis genes by RNA gel blot analysis. These probes will
also be used to genetically map the genes and obtain cDNA clones which will be
sequenced. Sequence comparisons among Arabidopsis gene family members and with
the maize gene will provide clues to functionally significant amino acid motifs.
Particular, attention will be paid to the TNFR-like domain. The cr4 cognate gene
will be determined from structure and sequence similarity, and become the focus
of longer term studies comparing the developmental role of cr4 in Arabidopsis
with maize and to functionally dissect the CR4 protein. This could also provide
a tool for genetic screens to identify the signal molecule if direct molecular
methods are unsuccessful. NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)