* 9634424
* CRI: A Model-Driven Investigation of Hippocampal            Functionality in the Rat
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Phillip Best, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 09/30/1998
* USD 99,930.00

ID: IBN-9634424. PI: Ali A. Minai The hippocampus is an extremely important
region of the brain. It is well-established that the hippocampus is crucial to
memory-related performance in most mammals, including humans. the best candidate
mechanism for memory --- long-term potentiation (LTP)--- is known to occur in
many parts of the hippocampus. Finally, It is also an important epileptic focus
region and a prime target of Alzheimer's disease in humans. It is thus
critically important to understand the functioning of this brain region. So far,
most research on the hippocampus has been driven by physiological and behavioral
experiments. This has produced an impressive body of data, but a systematic
understanding of hippocampal function is still lacking. Such understanding is
necessary if experimental research on the hippocampus is to proceed logically
with mutual feedback between theory and experiment. The broad objective of the
proposed research is to develop and validate a concrete quantitative model of
the hippocampus as a system. This model, based on existing data, would then
provide a theoretical framework for posing precise questions and designing
systematic series of experiments. Further, because of its computational nature,
the model will allow concrete predictions to be made on the basis of
simulations, thus providing a means for continuously improving the quality of
the model itself. In the short term, the project will focus on the issue of
spatial learning (e.g., remembering places) for which a large amount of well-
organized experimental data is available. The specific issues addressed will be:
1) The role of multiple inputs to the hippocampus; 2) Discrimination between
similar places and environments; and 3) The role of timing in the storage and
recall of information. The model will use methods developed in the area of
neural networks and dynamical systems, proceeding from a phenomenological level
to one of greater physiological detail. The hypotheses and predictions of the
model will be rigorously verified using behavioral and physiological
experiments. The project thus represents a significant integration of
computational and experimental techniques. Future work will generalize the
results to other aspects of memory function.