* 9634375
* GOALI: Optimal Hybrid Control and Coordination of Engine    and Transmission Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Le Yi Wang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2000
* USD 195,867.00

9634375 Wang The main objective of this project is to develop new optimal hybrid
control methods and to investigate feasible control strategies for coordination
and robust control of automotive engine and transmission systems. The project
will formulate and investigate certain generic optimal hybrid control problems
which are strongly motivated by the problem of stabilization and performance
optimization in automotive powertrain systems. In terms of automotive
applications, the discrete actions will be VDE (variable displacement engine)
and transmission gear selections. Performance measure will then be introduced to
formulate an optimal hybrid control problem. Feasible hybrid control methods
will be investigated and developed. This project will be of importance in
gaining a better understanding of essential features of hybrid control systems,
and in developing reliable design methods for hybrid systems. The approach of
employing powertrain control as benchmark problems will provide the PI and
industry collaborators with insightful motivations for problem formulation,
clarifying criteria for justifying design assumptions, and a platform for design
verification. This project will provide certain benchmark problems and feasible
control strategies for hybrid systems, and contribute toward narrowing the gaps
between good intuition and rigorous problem formulation, between trial-and-error
design and reliable control methods, and between application-oriented
methodologies and mathematical theory. The project will provide an excellent
opportunity for intensive long-term cooperation between the PI and researchers
at Ford Motor Company. Several Ph.D. students of the PI will participate in the
project as part of their dissertation research and will be jointly supervised by
the industry collaborators. A graduate-level course on automotive control
systems will be developed. ***