* 9634635
* Coalition for Science and Technology in a Knowledge-Based   Economy; May 28-29, 1996; Sacramento, CA
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1996,10/31/1996
* C. Judson King, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rolf Piekarz
* 10/31/1996
* USD 30,240.00

9634635 Greenwood This award is for the partial support of a conference to be
held in Sacramento, California on May 28-29, 1996. The conference will bring
together representatives from business, local governments and universities to
develop action plans for the future of science and technology in California
based on model government/university/industry partnerships. The California
economy, like that of the nation, has undergone a major transition in recent
years. Large organizations relying on low wage labor have been replaced by small
and medium sized companies relying on a workforce requiring continued education
and training. In recognition of those changes, the document Science in the
National Interest set as one of our nations goals the need to "stimulate
partnerships that promote investments in fundamental science and engineering."
California, because of it's large and diverse economy and its plethora of
research universities, provides an ideal climate for developing such
partnerships involving academic, industrial and economic development
organizations. Furthermore, California particularly exemplifies the successful
shift from Cold War military industries to new areas that utilize the skills of
those workers, and the conference will include a discussion of successful models
for that shift. This conference may act as a model that can be utilized by other
regions of the country as our nation moves from a military economy to a civilian
economy and as science and engineering are relied on more heavily to be the
engines of economic development. ***