* 9634808
* MOTI:  A Distributed Decision Framework Integrating         Manufacturing Planning and Multiple Supply Chain Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Patrick Harker, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 08/31/2000
* USD 392,058.00

9634808 Wu In order to remain competitive, many companies must increase product
variety at the same time that they decrease product volumes. As product lines
proliferate, these companies often struggle to plan production and manage
complicated supply chains across multiple production facilities and product
lines. This research involves the development of integrated production planning
and supply chain management functions in such an environment. The investigators
will develop an analytical framework for production planning with multiple
supply chains, each with its own unique dynamic. Rather than decoupling supply
chains, this research investigates methods of integrating decisions along and
across multiple supply chains. Trade-offs between centralized and decentralized
(distributed) decision-making, resource consolidation and capacity management
are considered. Using economic techniques such as market auction theory and game
theory, it will provide a basis for distributed decision-support, with the
requisite information transfer between supply chains and production facilities.
The investigators will work closely with a large automotive firm and a major
electronics company to ensure that the research is responsive to industry's
needs. Supply chain management is a pressing concern in industries that, by
virtue of their complex product lines and introduction of new technologies, have
layers of suppliers. Moreover, the push to lower inventories in most
manufacturing concerns makes supply chain management even more critical. This
research should have high potential for better capital management, material
planning, and customer service, and thus improved competitiveness, especially in
certain critical industries, such as automotive and electronics.