* 9634717
* Passive Vibration Control by Solid Free-Form Structural     Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Yu Wang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 08/31/2000
* USD 150,000.00

This research project focuses on the development of an innovative passive
techniques for vibration suppression and control. A design technique of solid
free-free structural optimization is formulated. In this design methodology, a
structure is defined as a spatial arrangement of micro- structural elements. The
structural design starts with a specified design domain as a union of every
conceivable design space that can possess materials without violating any
geometric and loading constraints. Then the design domain is divided into many
small design cells. Each of the design cells is modeled as a `composite`
material with micro- geometry perforations. By changing the parameters defining
the micro-geometric structures, the topology and shape of the structure is
represented effectively and desired structural dynamic characteristics can be
obtained during the research project. Two major passive vibration suppression
techniques are investigated:(i) eigenstructure assignment, and (ii) frequency
response function shaping. The essence of the first approach is to derive the
response of a structure in terms of a set of desired modal properties, whereas
the second approach aims at controlling the overall response characteristics of
the structure at certain critical points and through a bandwidth of interest.
The proposed approaches are validated by using scaled models in experimental
testing. The results of this research lead to the development of robust design
techniques of passive vibration control for aerospace and automotive
applications, and a new structural design tool for substantial performance
improvement in lightweight engineering structures.