* 9634385
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Collaborative Research for AdvancedModeling and Numerical Simulation of Surfactant Enhanced    Aquifer Remediation."
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Gary Pope, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

ABSTRACT DMS-9634385 The migration and fate of nonaqueous phase liquid (NAPL)
organic contaminants in the subsurface has been the subject of intensive
investigation in the past few years. It is now generally recognized that the
prevalence of NAPLs at contaminated sites is a significant impediment to aquifer
restoration. Based upon the perceived limitations of conventional pump-and-treat
methods for aquifer remediation, considerable interest is currently focused on
the development of alternative remediation strategies. One of these alternative
strategies is surfactant enhanced aquifer remediation (SEAR). There are three
outstanding problems related to the design of successful SEAR projects. First,
relatively little attention has been focused on the mathematical modeling of
fluid flow in SEAR. Secondly, because of the limited sampling over the spatial
extent of an aquifer, fluid flow and transport models will necessarily have
large uncertainty in the presence of heterogeneity. Thirdly, the very large
computations involved in simulation of the SEAR process require algorithms that
are both reliable and efficient. Because of the complexities involved in the
SEAR process, the proposed research will bring together the expertise from
several disciplines, namely geosciences research, petroleum engineering and
applied mathematics. The investigators propose to develop models and numerical
algorithms to simulate the initial dispersal of organic contaminants and later
cleanup by means of' surfactant floods. These numerical algorithms will employ
complex multi-phase flow models, state-of-the-art geostatistical methods and
modem numerical techniques such as adaptive mesh refinement, dynamic upscaling
of physical properties and object-oriented programming. The computations will be
performed on workstations, and on supercomputers employing parallel processing.
Graphical user interfaces and interactive visualization techniques will be
developed.