* 9634206
* Real-Time Processing and Multi-Spectral Imaging             Equipment for Intraocular Image Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Badrinath Roysam, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/1997
* USD 21,521.00

This research involves two components. The first component is an extension of
prior work under NSF grant MIP-9412500 on the development of algorithms for
automatic generation of retinal vasculature maps, and real-time feature-based
determination of retinal position from intra-ocular digital video image
sequences. Specifically, a TMS320C80 video signal processor chip will be used to
achieve fully transparent image tracking by reducing the time required to
establish a tracking lock to a small number of video frame intervals. The second
component to this research is to modify the fundus imaging system acquired under
the previous award to achieve simultaneous imaging in the near infrared and
visible bands using a pair of low-light video cameras. This instrumentation will
be used to investigate real-time algorithms for artificially superimposing
computed vasculature landmarks on late-phase Indocyanine Green angiograms. This
research will result in the development of real-time image processing hardware
and software technology for enabling the development of novel instrumentation
for laser retinal surgery and related applications. It is motivated by the need
to reduce the currently high failure rate (approaching 50%) of current
procedures. This project is an application of high-performance computing
technology to enable new advances in ophthalmology and related problems in
biology and medicine. In addition to reducing the failure rate, this technology
is expected to reduce the cost of laser retinal surgery by eliminating the need
for repeated corrective procedures.