* 9634873
* Non-Perturbative Numerical Studies of Lattice-Gas Models in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Per Arne Rikvold, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/2000
* USD 168,000.00

9634873 Rikvold This research involves the study of the statics and dynamics of
several lattice-gas models with applications in materials physics and chemistry
using non-perturbative numerical techniques and analytical methods of
statistical mechanics. The project consists of two parts: (1) a study of
equilibrium and nonequilibrium aspects of ordering and fluctuations in
electrochemical adsorption, and, (2) a fundamental study of metastable phases of
matter and their modes of decay. Both parts of the research cross traditional
boundaries of physics, chemistry and materials science and will require the use
and development of novel computational algorithms. %%% This theoretical research
is comprised of two parts. One part will apply various models to study the
adsorption of molecules to the surface of materials due to electrochemistry.
This electrochemical adsorption is fundamental to a number of processes
including electrodeposition of metals (electroplating), corrosion and batteries.
While there has recently been an upsurge in the available experimental data,
there has been a dearth of modeling to interpret this data. The second part of
the research will study fundamental issues of phases of materials which are
neither stable nor unstable. These unusual metastable states of matter are of
high interest in helping to understand the transition between stable and
unstable states. They are also of interest in their own right and apply to such
systems as superheated steam. ***