* 9634053
* Structure and Dynamics of Plankton Communities in the       Antarctic Frontal Zone: Interactions of Physical Forcing,   Iron Limitation and Microzooplankton Grazing
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Michael Landry, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 02/28/2001
* USD 410,000.00

96-34053 Landry This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1 ) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical favors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. The
Southern Ocean is a vast and variable environment with a potentially large role
in global carbon cycling. The JGOFS Southern Ocean Program seeks to advance the
understanding of this region by investigating seasonal and spatial dynamics in
two important subsystems -- the Ross Sea shelf and the Antarctic Polar Front
Zone. This project will contribute to this effort by determining microbial
community structure and by assessing rates of phytoplankton growth and
microzooplankton grazing on four cruises covering the spring, summer, and autumn
seasons in the open-ocean frontal zone. The overall goal of this research is to
understand how physical processes (advection, mixing, and light), iron-
limitation, and grazing interact to determine plankton community structure and
production in the open oceans. Population abundances and biomasses of the
plankton community will be assessed by analytical flow cytometry (bacteria and
phytoplankton) and microscopy (nano- and microplankton) to determine their
temporal and spatial patterns relative to physical features of the polar front.
Growth rates of phytoplankton and bacteria, and microzooplankton herbivory and
bacterivory will be measured with a suite of complementary methods including
dilution, fluorescently labeled prey, size fractionation, and a Iysozme assay
for bacterivory. Results of this project will contribute to the general
understanding of phytoplankton control mechanisms and trophic interactions in
high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll regions of the world's ocea ns. They will also
help to identify how potential global change affects water-column stability and
how physical forcing in the Southern Ocean may alter food web structure, carbon
storage and export from the euphotic zone.