* 9634024
* A Nonlinear Dynamical Technique for Improving the Function of the Human Postural Control System
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* James Collins, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 189,712.00

9634024 Collins The objective of this project, which is a renewal proposal of a
prior NSF award, is to develop a noise-based technique which can be used to
lower the detection thresholds of the proprioceptive system and thereby improve
the performance of the human postural control system. Upright stance in humans
is regulated by a complex control system that involves a number of different
sensory mechanisms, including the proprioceptive system. Aperiodic stochastic
resonance (ASR) is a phenomenon wherein the response of a nonlinear system to a
subthreshold aperiodic input signal is optimized by the presence of a particular
level of noise. ASR has been demonstrated in a simple neuronal model and in
cutaneous sensory neurons. This work suggests that it should be possible to
introduce noise artificially into a neurophysiological sensory system (e.g., the
proprioceptive system) in order to improve its ability to detect arbitrary
subthreshold signals. To date, however, bioengineering applications have not
been explored. The specific objectives of this study are 1) to develop a
physiologically-realistic neuronal model as a test-bed for bioengineering
applications of ASR; 2) to demonstrate that the detection thresholds of the
proprioceptive system are changed with the addition of input noise; and 3) to
demonstrate that noise-induced changes to the proprioceptive detection
thresholds at the ankle affect the postural control system. This work could
result in the development of an inexpensive technique for improving the
performance of the human postural control system. Such a technique could have
important ramifications for individuals with elevated proprioceptive thresholds,
such as older adults and patients with neural disorders, who may be predisposed
to falls. Thus, the results of this project could eventually serve to reduce the
incidence, cost, and health risks of falling. ***