* 9634719
* PDS: Architecture, Algorithms and Applications for Future   Generation Supercomputers
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Ahmed Sameh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Van Rosendale
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

This research proposes a preliminary evaluation of enabling technologies for 100
TeraFLOP class computers. The research is broadly classified into the following
parts: architectures (single node architecture, parallel architecture), system
software (languages, compilers, programming tools and environments), algorithms
(design models, performance and scalability) , and applications (scaling and
realizable performance). Single node architectures for future generation
computers will exploit considerable implicit parallelism. Candidate technologies
for single node architectures include super-scalar execution, very long
instruction words, simultaneous hardware multithreading, and processors-in-
memory. The PIs propose a processor architecture based on the VLIW with possible
implementations using PIMs. Parallel architectures are based on clusters of
these nodes in a hierarchical network. Due to the large number of computational
units, algorithm design and scalability issues become critical. Hierarchical
decomposition of problems with an emphasis on proper mapping to the underlying
architecture is necessary. Whereas problems at higher levels must be loosely
coupled, they can be very tightly coupled at lower levels. Alternate algorithm
design methodologies and abstract machine models must be constructed. Finally,
the scope of applications that can effectively use these architectures needs to
be identified. This research will perform a study of each of these aspects of
future generation computers. The PIs expect to draw heavily from their
experience in the design of scalable parallel algorithms and architectures and
from the CEDAR project.