* 9634191
* Observational and Numerical Investigations of the           Interaction of Synoptic Scale Weather Systems with the      Orography of the Western United States
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* W. James Steenburgh, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/2001
* USD 206,477.00

9634191 Steenburgh It is well known that the Rocky Mountains have significant
effects on cyclonic weather systems as they cross the mountains. The exact
nature and reason for this impact, however, is not well understood. The primary
objectives of this project are (1) to describe the interaction of extratropical
cyclones and fronts with the complex orography of the western United States and
(2) to document the evolution and dynamics of convective snowbands that form
along the Wasatch Mountains of northern Utah. These orographic effects and
features dominate the meteorology of the western United States and are
responsible for life threatening and economically disruptive snowstorms,
windstorms, and flash floods One component of the investigation will examine how
synoptic systems, such as cyclones and fronts, are modified by their interaction
with the Rocky Mountains. The project will develop regional climatologies of
such interaction and perform a series of observational case studies utilizing a
variety of mesoscale data sets. Numerical simulations utilizing an advanced
mesoscale numerical model will be used extensively to supplement observational
analyses and examine how orographic processes alter the structural evolution and
dynamical balances of these systems. The second part of the investigation will
describe the structure and dynamics of post-frontal convective snowbands that
form along the Wasatch Mountains of Northern Utah. These features produce heavy
snowfall in the Salt Lake City metropolitan area and appear to form as a result
of the interaction of the synoptic flow with local orographic features,
including the Great Salt Lake. Observations from a local mesoscale network and
WSR-88D Doppler radar, coupled with numeri- cal simulations, will be used to
document the evolution and dynamics of these snow- bands. In order to improve
local forecasting, a climatology of post-frontal snowstorms along the Wasatch
Front will also be devel oped. This project will advance the understanding and
forecasting of terrain induced phenomena of the western United States. It will
describe the interaction of cyclones and fronts with the complex orography of
the region and evaluate the ability of numerical models to simulate mesoscale
features produced by such interaction. ***