* 9634034
* Changing The High School System: Implementing The  Interactive Mathematics Program In Arizona (AZ IMP2)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Nora Ramirez, Maricopa County Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* diane spresser
* 08/31/2001
* USD 560,000.00

9634034 Jaslow Maricopa County Community College District will initiate a
60-month Local Systemic Change project for 187 teachers in grades 9-12 in 5
Arizona school districts and schools in the UCAN RSI. The project's partners,the
unified districts of Chandler, Sunnyside, Nogales, Mingus and Sedona-Oak Creek,
Maricopa County Community College, Arizona State University and the Intel
Corporation, will implement the Interactive Mathematics Program (IMP) in those
districts through the use of seven integrated components: 1) inservice on the
mathematics and pedagogy of IMP, 2) follow-up support activities, 3) internal
capacity for professional development, 4) school teams for support of teachers,
5) teachers from schools considering IMP, 6) articulation with feeder schools,
and 7) impact on preservice teacher training. In addition to the high school
teachers, support teams consisting of school administrators, counselors and
other teachers, teams of middle school teachers that feed into the participating
high schools, teams from schools considering the implementation of new
curriculum materials, and personnel from each of the three state universities
will take part in the professional development activities. Additional school
districts will join the project in years three and four. There is cost sharing
equivalent to 244% of the NSF funding.