* 9634899
* Measurement of the Hydrate Phase via Raman and NMR          Spectroscopy
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* E. Dendy Sloan, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/2001
* USD 336,613.00

CTS-9634899 Sloan, E.D. Colorado School of Mines PROJECT SUMMARY A new state-
of-the-art protoype for hydrate experiments is proposed by measurements of the
hydrate phase structure and composition, using Raman and NMR spectroscopy. In
this work we propose to do the following six things: 1. Measure the relative
cage occupancies of 129Xe and 13C (methane) in sI hydrate via NMR, for
calibration with data of Ripmeester and our Raman work, 2. Use the hydration
numbers and cavity occupation measured via NMR and Raman methods to assess the
van der Waals and Platteeuw statistical theory, 3. Determine the kinetics of
solid phase transitions between hydrate structures( e.g. sI to sH ) using our
existing 400 MHz NMR, and a new Raman instrument, 4. Design, fabricate, and test
a new type of apparatus which combines a Raman devices (to measure the solid)
with a regular macroscopic phase equilibria instrument, 5. Assess the viability
of Raman spectroscopy for kinetic hydrate studies, and 6. Assess the viability
of a Fiber Optics Raman device as an in-line hydrate monitor. The work will have
three major impacts: 1. The hydrate structure is virtually never measured but
predicted. There are multiple instances in which the incorrect hydrate structure
has been predicted. With at least three common hydrate structures, the incorrect
structure(and associated formation conditions) is predicted more frequently than
commonly realized. The proposed work will demonstrate how this problem may be
corrected. 2. The hydrate phase composition( cavity occupation, guest-to-host
and guest-to-guest ratios) is also predicted rather than measured. However, such
measurements are necessary to correct the existing thermodynamic model since
hydrate formation conditions depend not only on structure but also on the phase
composition. 3. The advent of Fiber Optics technology enables measurement of
hydrate phase composition simultaneously with the macroscopic measurements of
phase equilbria. This technology not only has the potential to change the method
of hydrate measurements in the laboratory, it also has the potential to be used
as an in-line monitor for hydrate formation in process streams. To date industry
only has pressure drop to determine the initiation and growth of hydrate in a
pipeline. The proposed work should be done now in our laboratory because: 1. We
have experimentally validated the concept of the Raman measurement of hydrate
structure and guest composition for sI, sII, and sH. 2. A recent NSF matching-
funds equipment grant has provided a 400 MHz NMR instrument capable of solid or
liquid measurements. 3. We have expert personnel available to supervise the
work. Mr. Ben Bloys (ARCO) will be industrial liaison with our consortium of 10
companies to the project. Dr. Bob Burruss. (USGS) will provide Raman expertise
and apparatus availability. Dr. John Ripmeester will act as an adjunct professor
in supervising the proposed NMR work.