* 9634297
* Mathematical Sciences:  Methods for Developing and          Evaluating Computer Models Used in Integrated Assessment
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Robert Weiss, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 09/30/2000
* USD 400,000.00

9634297 Berk In this project, the investigators will develop methodological
tools essential for computer models used in integrated assessments. Three kinds
of methodological contributions are involved: 1) a flux coupler that links
output from one model to input from another, 2) methods to assess uncertainties
in coupled computer models, and 3) statistical diagnostics for coupled computer
models. The flux coupler transforms model output in one set of units, and for
particular spatial and temporal scales, into model input in new units and
spatial temporal scales. The tools for assessing uncertainty capitalize on
recent advances in resampling procedures to represent sampling distributions for
key model parameters and outputs. The diagnostic techniques exploit new ways to
link multiple inputs to multiple outputs in a nonlinear fashion. As such, they
provide a yardstick with which to judge the performance of coupled computer
models. The laboratory for developing and testing the methodological tools is a
coupled computer model linking local weather, local air quality, and human
outdoor water use for the Los Angeles Basin. The interactions between humans and
the larger physical and biological environment are often simulated with large-
scale computer models. In this project, the investigators focus on how human
water use affects local climate and air quality and then, in turn, is affected
by local climate and air quality. Outdoor water use, for instance, has impacts
on local temperature and the meteorological conditions that contribute to urban
smog. But the computer models used in such simulations need to be carefully
evaluated. The key products of this project are new tools for developing and
assessing the computer models used to understand human-environmental
interactions. The new tools include: 1) a means to allow computer models to more
effectively transfer data between them, 2) methods that allow the statistical
uncertainties in the computer results to be better described, and 3) techniques
for analyzing more thoroughly how well the computer models are using the
information provided to them. These tools all speak to the more general issue of
improving large-scale computer simulations in a wide variety of applications.