* 9634199
* Dissertation Research:  The Ethnoarchaeology of Gamo        Artisans
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Steven Brandt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1998
* USD 11,980.00

Under the direction of Dr. Steven Brandt, MS Kathryn Weedman will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct ethnographic fieldwork among the
Gamo people of southwestern Ethiopia. The Gamo are extremely unusual because the
make flaked stone tools and use these in their production activities. Only in
this portion of Ethiopia do present day groups retain this prehistoric practice.
The Gamo are divided into ten intra-ethnic sections and MS Weedman will examine
variation in tool production and utilization across them. In the early part of
her study she will conduct an ethnographic survey to locate stone workers and
record their background and geographical relationships. A sample of new, used
and discarded tools will be collected from each worker. On this basis it will be
possible to compare the geographical distance of hide workers against the
similarities and differences manifest in their stone tools. Preliminary
interviews will focus on kinship and other types of social relationships. In the
next step of the work a selected sample of artisans will be studied in detail
and the process of tool manufacture and use carefully documented. MS Weedman
will attempt to construct the typologies which exist in the users' heads to
discern variability in terms of style and function. Workers will be video-taped
and photographed to record production and utilization in detail. The collected
tools will be analyzed following techniques which archaeologists employ to study
prehistoric specimens and the results will be compared to categories defined by
the Gamo. For all but the last few thousand years humans have lacked the ability
to work metal and have relied on tools chipped from stone to accomplish a wide
variety of tasks. The oldest known examples date to over two million years ago.
Because stone tools have played such a crucial role and are abundant and well
preserved in the archaeological record, archaeologists have relied heavily on
them in their attempts to reconstruct past cultures. They have made many
assumptions about how tools were used and have developed many analytic
techniques to study them. However since so few modern day peoples use such
implements, detailed ethnographic studies are lacking and archaeologists do not
know how robust their assumptions and methodologies are. MS Weedman's research
will permit her to test these archaeological approaches against an ethnographic
reality and then work to refine and develop them. The results of this work will
have important methodological implications.