* 9634045
* GOALI/Engineering Faculty in Industry:  Finite-Capacity     Scheduling and Diagnostic at Schlumberger's Manufacturing   Facilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Valerie Tardif, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 07/31/1997
* USD 15,980.00

9634045 Tardif This GOALI proposal is for the PI to spend three summer months
with Schlumberger Austin Research working in the area of finite-capacity
scheduling and diagnostics. She will be working directly with the End-to End
Simulation group in developing the diagnostic tool. The project has two main
goals. The first is to tailor MRP-C to facilitate its implementation at a few
key manufacturing facilities. Special attention will be given to the modeling of
yield loss in order to capture potential correlation between cycle time and the
number of defective items produced. The second goal is to encourage managers and
production schedulers to use MRP-C in their daily planning and to assess its
impact on decision-making and on-time delivery performance. The study will
provide a great opportunity to determine the information needed by managers and
schedulers to make and justify decisions and the desired format for such
information. It will make possible investigation of more systematic and
graphical ways to represent alternative schedules. The availability of advanced
computer equipment and technical support at Schlumberger research labs and
manufacturing plants makes it an ideal site to develop and implement new
procedures which rely heavily on computers and information technology. The
relationship of the PI and her industrial partner, Schlumberger, should greatly
benefit her career. Her proposal is well thought out and has high potential for
making a real impact on industry. The synergistic effect of this academic-
industry relationship should prove very productive.