* 9634223
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Elastic Systems With Liquid Sloshing  Pressure Impacts
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Raouf Ibrahim, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 12/31/2000
* USD 150,470.00

Liquid free surface sloshing in moving containers can occur in the form of one
of three possible regimes: linear planar motion, weakly nonlinear non-planar
motion, or strongly nonlinear motion characterized by hydrodynamic impacts. The
interaction of the second or third regime with the dynamics of the supporting
elastic structure has direct impact on the roll stability and safety of liquid
tankers and automotive vehicles carrying gasoline tanks. The main objective of
this research project is to develop analytical, numerical, and experimental
tools to examine the stability and dynamic characteristic of these systems in
order to improve their rollover stability. To accomplish this objective,
analytical models are developed which are capable of describing liquid pressure
impacts in moving partially filled tankers. The liquid pressure impact model is
formulated based on representing the impact forces by a visco-elastic high power
nonlinear damper. The resulting equations of motion are analyzed using nonlinear
`non-smooth` generating solutions rather than trigonometric functions commonly
used for weakly nonlinear systems. For weakly nonlinear regime, a unified
approach combining the method of normal form and the theory of Lie groups is
used to study the liquid-structure interaction in the presence of internal
resonance. The validity of analytical results are verified by numerical
simulation and experimental tests. The numerical simulations estimate the system
response for both liquid sloshing regimes. The stability and characterization of
the response are examined by numerically estimating the Lyapunov exponents and
embedding dimensions. The experimental tests provide additional safety study
regarding the favorable locations of baffles, to be inserted in liquid
containers, which enhances the roll stability of liquid tankers. Another
contribution of this research is to develop realistic models describing liquid
sloshing impacts which can be used for vehicle dynamic simulation, and also that
can be introduced in multibody dynamics codes.