* 9634135
* A Proposal for the Network Office of the U.S. Long Term Ecological Research Network form an Association of Institutions
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2004
* John Vande Castle, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/29/2004
* USD 7,289,433.00

9634135 Gosz This project will support the Network Office for the Long-term
Ecological Research Network to continue critical activities including
communication, data management, data dissemination, and technological advances.
The Network Office will form a consortium with the San Diego Supercomputer
Center, the Santa Fe Institute, the Center for Microbial Ecology at Michigan
State University, and the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis.
The facilities and interactions with these institutions and centers will enhance
the research and creative activities of the Long-term Ecological Research sites.
The principal goals of the Network Office are to (1) facilitate communication
among the LTER sites to encourage integration of data sets and data analyses,
(2) enhance the interaction of the LTER Network with a broad group of
disciplines outside of ecology, (3) promote and disseminate new technologies
relevant to long-term ecological research, and (4) provide leadership in data
management and data dissemination to the LTER community and other scientific
communities. Long-term data are fundamental to understanding environmental
systems and the management of our natural resources. The Long-term Ecological
Research program provides a unique ability to generate this important
information and the current LTER sites have provided many important
contributions. The LTER Network Offices plays the very important role of
catalyzing intersite activities that allow the individual sites to function as
an integrated network. This network approach allows new knowledge to be
generated from the individual sites in the form of comparative research,
synthesis and expansion to regional scales. The collaboration of the LTER
network with other international networks provides unprecedented opportunities
to share information with international colleagues, develop exchanges of
scientists and students. And develop a global understanding of our ecological
systems.