* 9634422
* CRI: A Combined Visual Display and Eye Tracking System for  High-Field fMRI Studies
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Paul Gamlin, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 09/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

Lay Summary Principal Investigators: Gamlin, Twieg Proposal Number: IBN-l
9634422 Recent developments in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) allow
researchers to investigate the functional activation of the brain that is
associated with particular sensory, cognitive, and motor functions. To date,
most of these functional MRI (fMRI) studies have been conducted at relatively
low magnetic field strengths, but we can achieve higher resolutions using higher
field strengths. Also, although a number of studies have investigated functional
activation of the brain by various visual stimuli and during certain eye
movements, few of these studies have attempted to confirm fixation accuracy or
eye movement performance. This is a shortcoming of these studies, because if one
is unsure that the subject is maintaining fixation or looking at the required
target, it is hard to interpret the results of the experiment. Furthermore, in
earlier studies, the optical systems did not permit the eyes to view high-
resolution images. One aim of the research funded by this proposal is to
establish a collaboration to solve technical problems that must be remedied to
further understanding of how the human visual and eye movement systems operate.
More specifically the aim is to develop and build a high-resolution optical and
eye-tracking system to be used in a high-field MRI system. It is expected that
the system developed through funding of this grant will be invaluable to all eye
movement and vision-related fMRI studies, and will result in significant
advances in our understanding of the workings of the human brain.