* 9634292
* Climate Change Damages, Adaptation, Innovation, and         Abatement Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* James Hammitt, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 08/31/1998
* USD 157,000.00

The objective of this research is to characterize the dependence of optimal
near-term decisions about policies to abate global climate change on two
potentially important factors that have received inadequate attention in current
integrated-assessment efforts: (1) selection of the evaluation endpoint and
parametric form of the damage function (relating economic losses to climate
change), and (2) decision making about adaptation to reduce damages. The
analysis will use a combination of analytic and integrated-assessment models to
evaluate the effects of changes in these factors on optimal greenhouse-gas
emission paths and to develop an understanding of the reasons for these effects.
The Harvard Center for Risk Analysis (HCRA) Integrated Assessment Model will be
used for exploratory modeling. Compared with other integrated assessment models,
the HCRA model is relatively simple and flexible, characteristics which permit
rapid modification to incorporate new specifications and solutions for optimal
greenhouse-gas emission trajectories. The results of this research should
provide an initial understanding of the importance for climate-abatement policy
of variations in the choice of endpoint and/or damage function and the magnitude
and control of opportunities for adaptation. Exploration of the effect of these
factors will provide information about the importance of including them in other
integrated assessment activities and will help to suggest which aspects warrant
greatest attention.