* 9634544
* Electrocatalysis for Electroanalysis:  Anodic               Oxygen-Transfer Reactions at Doped Metal-Oxide Film         Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1996,11/30/2000
* Dennis Johnson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 11/30/2000
* USD 370,000.00

This project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the
Division of Chemistry, is directed by Prof. Dennis C. Johnson of the Chemistry
Department at Iowa State University. The work utilizes electrochemical cells
containing doped metal oxide anodes whose electrocatalytic properties will be
exploited in a study of oxygen-transfer oxidations involving polar organic
molecules. Oxygen atom mediation is proposed by the PI as the mechanism by which
these oxidations proceed. Experiments designed to provide evidence to support or
deny this mechanism will be carried out and digital simulations will be used to
confirm mechanisms. Aliphatic amines, amino acids and small peptides, many with
functional groups containing sulfur, are the test compounds. Working electrodes
fabricated as disks suitable for the rotated disk electrode assembly are used to
obtain current-voltage curves which can be analyzed for their mechanistic
information. The surface topography of the electrodes is explored using the
scanning electron microscope. To provide additional information to support the
mechanism studies, chemical analysis of the products of exhaustive electrolysis
will be done with gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and electrospray-mass
spectrometry. Electrode reactions in electrochemical cells produce chemical
changes in the ions or molecules which take part in the reaction but until the
pathway is known by which such a change occurs, scientific use of the process is
limited. The objective of this project is to understand the nature of reactions
taking place at the anode of a cell which involve the transfer of an oxygen atom
to form a product. There are many examples of compounds which might follow such
a pathway including some of biological interest and others of environmental
concern. Potential applications of the knowledge gained are found in the area of
sensors for chemical analysis.