* 9634767
* Time/Frequency Approach to Phasor Dynamics in Power Systems Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1999
* George Verghese, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 05/31/1999
* USD 144,662.00

9645767 Verghese Dynamic studies in power systems have long exploited analytic
simplifications gained by approximating all voltages and currents in the network
as sinusoids of "slowly varying" magnitude and phase. With this assumption,
network behavior in dynamic analyses is characterized by power flow equations
that represent time-domain bus voltages via complex phasors. This is typically
referred to as the "sinusoidal quasi-steady-state" approximation (abbreviated
here by the acronym "SQSS"), and is widely utilized in modern computer packages
used to study electromechanical behavior and control system dynamics. For faster
time-scale phenomena, the most widely used techniques are time-domain
simulations in which all relevant network voltages and currents are represented
as three-phase, time-domain signals, without any requirement of nearly
sinusoidal behavior. This latter approach involves tremendous computational
burden and analytic complexity, because one uses instantaneous quantities rather
than phasor, and dynamic circuit models rather than algebraic impedance
relations. The goal of the research outlined in this proposal is to provide a
middle ground between the approximations inherent in an impedance-based SQSS
representation, and the analytic complexity and computational burden associated
with representing network voltages and currents as time-domain quantities in a
three-phase circuit. In particular, this work will adopt a viewpoint on phasors
that is closer to time/frequency representations utilized in signal processing,
but extending these representations to a dynamic formulation. The result will be
termed "Phasor Dynamics" (PD) models, and will involve a carefully constructed
hybrid of the impedance and circuit representations. This approach will allow an
important extension that is not possible in standard phasor representations: a
dynamic analysis that includes higher order harmonics. The work proposed will
treat these cases by re presenting relevant states as weighted sums of narrow-
band signals, each located about a harmonic center frequency of interest. The
time evolution of the weights are governed by dynamic equations derived directly
from the original instantaneous model. ***