* 9650993
* Integrating Computer-Enhanced Molecular Visualizaton into   Organic Chemistry, General Chemistry, and Chemistry for     Non-Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Chris Maricondi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 30,007.00

This project supports the purchase of computers and nine pieces of software in
order to integrate state-of-the-art molecular visualization and computational
chemistry into the organic and general chemistry courses. Problems addressed by
this project include the cost of maintaining equipment, such as infrared (IR)
and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrophotometers, for instructional
purposes; the need to revise instruction in organic chemistry to keep up with
developments in the actual practice of chemistry; the challenge of motivating
introductory-level students and non-science-majors; and the difficulty of
helping students visualize three-dimensional molecular structures. The
objectives are to (1) develop and incorporate exercises which teach chemistry
concepts using software to simulate actual equipment; (2) develop and implement
a revised organic chemistry curriculum that mates computation with
experimentation and provides students with clear understanding of molecular
structure and computational chemistry; and (3) use computer-enhanced instruction
to illustrate the real-world relevance of the material being taught to help
students visualize the structure they are studying and to motivate student
learning. To accomplish these objectives, the project director has carefully
selected software and has conceived curricular revisions and exercises.
Substantial time has been devoted to developing a proposed reshaping of the
relevant laboratory curricula so as to deliver significant instructional
enhancement. This project can have significant impact in advancing chemistry
students' understanding and in enabling introductory students and nonmajors to
see the importance of the submicroscopic world.