* 9650169
* Using Computing and Modern Measuring Equipment in           Undergraduate Fluid Mechanics Experiments
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Francis Ting, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1999
* USD 9,000.00

This project implements a realistic, inexpensive plan for using computing and
modern measuring equipment in experiments designed for a civil engineering
undergraduate fluid mechanics laboratory course. Previously, the laboratory
study of basic concepts and significant phenomena in fluid mechanics and the
undergraduate development in experimental fluid mechanics and hydraulics have
been hampered by a lack of modern instrumentation. With the purchase of an
Acoustic Doppler Velocimeter for measuring flow velocity in open channels, a
differential pressure transducer for measuring head loss in pipe flows, and two
PC-based data acquisition systems for data collection and display, this problem
can be remedied. The equipment is used in developing six new experiments
(acceleration field, conservation of linear momentum, hydraulic jump, turbulent
shear stress, friction loss along a pipe, and fundamentals of data acquisition).
These experiments allow for a better understanding of fluid mechanics principles
and give undergraduates experience with modern equipment. Because the
experimental setup and procedures are simple and practical, experiments may be
readily adapted at similar institutions. Test results and students' evaluations
can be obtained to assess the impact of this project on undergraduate learning
of fluid mechanics principles and modern laboratory techniques. The development
plan and the outcome assessment can be disseminated through publication in the
American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) Annual Conference Proceedings.
Experiments can also be documented in a Fluid Mechanics Laboratory Manual to be
published locally at South Dakota State University.