* 9650360
* Extension of an Investigational Learning Undergraduate      Program to Upper-Division Physiology Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Michael O'Connor, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/2000
* USD 40,825.00

This project details a method for transporting the student-team research
approach to biology education that has been implemented in the Enhanced
Bioscience Education (EBE) program to content-sensitive upper-division courses
in animal physiology. This approach is designed to maintain content breadth in
the lecture component of the course and emphasize in-depth, student-initiated
and -conducted research in the laboratory component of the course. In this way,
the project maintains and extends the research skills and enthusiasm engendered
by investigational programs such as EBE while protecting the breadth of coverage
required in certain upper-division courses (particularly those with a
preclinical audience). The department is remodeling the current laboratories in
physiology by purchasing equipment to allow research by students in one of five
concentration areas (modules). These modules allow the department to focus the
research, obtain sufficient equipment for those modules, and facilitate research
with pretested and approved protocols. By using computers for background
research, data acquisition, data analysis, and modeling physiological systems,
participants build on the strengths of EBE. Furthermore, the project is
extending the research skills of the students both by providing equipment
capable of research activities as close as possible to current professional
levels, and by creating a Physiology DataBank for research results, allowing
replication and extension of prior work in the courses. Finally, the project
involves a presentation of results that is integral to the student's research.