* 9650348
* Electronic Information Skills for Collaborative Learning    in an Undergraduate Geography Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Lucy Jarosz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/1999
* USD 46,000.00

The Geography Collaboratory is a place where undergraduate students, faculty,
and librarians come together to enhance learning through synergistic exploration
of course topics using electronic information skills. Collaborative learning, as
an approach to active learning, engages students on a peer-to-peer basis with
instructors and librarians. Learning substantive material through the use of
electronic information skills helps students retain both substantive material
and skills. A department-wide instructional framework for electronic information
skills has been articulated to help geography faculty select skills appropriate
to their courses. Four courses from the three non-geographic-information-systems
departmental concentrations are part of this project: Geographic Understanding
and Health, International Geographies of Production and Trade, Local Economies
and Market Areas, and World Hunger and Resource Development. A group learning
area composed of six conversation workpods for three to five students, each with
a Pentium computer and 21` display monitor, form the configuration for
collaboration. An SVGA projector and Pentium workstation support group project
presentation displays. Individual work for group projects is carried out at
scholar workstations_Pentium machines with 17` display monitors. Support for
evaluation of this project comes from several units on campus, including the
Faculty Council on Educational Technology, Undergraduate Education Office of
Assessment, Center for Instructional Development and Research, and Classroom
Support Services. All are interested in the unique computing configuration used
for collaborative learning through electronic information skill development.