* 9650891
* An Advanced Communications Curriculum for Undergraduate     Technology Students Integrated Around a Fully Functional    Cellular Base System
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Michael Munoz, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* SIMONEAU ROBERT W
* 12/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

The current and future growth in telecommunications (National Information
Infrastructure) requires technical expertise at all levels to develop, install,
and operate the equipment. There are no schools in the midwest that offer a
telecommunications program for undergraduate engineering technology students.
Educators have recognized the need and have created a specialization in
telecommunications. From discussions with GTE Mobilnet, Exxon, Motorola, and
EDS, it has become clear that telecommunications and networking professionals
are needed. This project expands the communications curriculum and provides a
new and innovative advanced communications laboratory. The project provides for
an advanced telecommunications lab consisting of a cellular base station and
supporting lab equipment. This equipment is being integrated into the advanced
communications curriculum. The project plan has been laid out over several years
by the department communications team with the active participation of GTE
Mobilnet. Project goals and objectives include: developing an advanced
communications course sequence for engineering technology students; developing
an integrated wireless/cellular telecommunications laboratory; providing
industry standard communications equipment for student research and projects;
providing hands-on lab experience with high-technology test equipment and
simulation software used in the telecommunications industry; promoting new and
continued industry involvement in the ongoing development of the communications
curriculum; and providing a plan for the continued improvement of the
communications curriculum.