* 9650994
* Teaching at the Interface of Biology and Chemistry: Use of  Capillary Electrophoresis
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Gary Cote, Millikin University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/1997
* USD 22,727.00

The main goal of this project is to increase the emphasis on quality education
at the interface between biology and chemistry. For this goal, there is a
critical need for modern instrumentation that can be used to teach the technical
and intellectual methods of biochemistry and cell biology to majors in chemistry
and biology and can also be used to introduce science to students at all lower
levels and to non-science-majors. This project involves the purchase of a
capillary electrophoresis system for use in upper-division laboratory courses in
biochemistry, molecular and cellular biology, and instrumental analysis.
Students in specific chemistry courses can also be trained as technical experts
in the use of the instrument and assist students and instructors in lower-
division courses and courses for non-science-majors. In this way, the benefits
of the instrument can be realized at all instructional levels and the student
"experts" gain practical experience applying what they have learned to real
problems. The capillary electrophoresis system is ideal for an undergraduate
institution because of its advantages of speed and safety. The instrument also
significantly increases opportunities for undergraduate research projects in
biology and chemistry. The benefits to students include improved instrumentation
available for instruction and student research, improved exercises and projects
in laboratory courses, the ability to perform sophisticated analyses even in
lower-division courses and courses for non-majors, and the opportunity for
upper-division chemistry students to apply what they have learned by serving as
"technical experts."