* 9650584
* Computational Chemical Modeling Throughout the Science      Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Leela Rakesh, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/1999
* USD 69,891.00

Computers are now accepted in the scientific laboratory not only for data
collection and analysis but for actually predicting experimental results.
Computer modeling of chemical structure and reactions is a way to quickly make
predictions of structure and reactivity regarding many molecules. The graphical
input of molecules and visualization of results makes computational chemistry
accessible to undergraduate students in a laboratory setting with very little
training time. The student's understanding of fundamental chemical principles
can be greatly enhanced using this tool. The goal of this project is to
introduce and use molecular modeling throughout the chemistry, physics, and
mathematics curricula. For the large numbers of students, workstation computers
are being installed in the upper-level computer lab, while Macintosh computers
are used for the general chemistry labs (majors and nonmajors). The Spartan
software, which runs on all of the computers, offers a wide range of
computational sophistication and yet is simple enough to use at all levels, from
freshman to senior. The general chemistry student is introduced to molecular
structure and polarity with molecular mechanic and semi-empirical calculations.
In organic chemistry lab, regio-selectivity, transition states, and activated
complexes of reactions are explored with semi-empirical and ab initio
calculations. Physical chemistry, quantum physics, and applied mathematics
courses can use quantum mechanic calculations to examine molecular wave
functions beyond H2 and a host of available molecular properties. Chemical
modeling can then be used by students in advanced organic and inorganic
chemistry, biochemistry and polymer chemistry, mathematics, and physics as a
familiar aid to understanding chemical concepts and solving chemical problems.