* 9650618
* Improvement of Chemistry Curriculum and Laboratory Program  for Minority Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Angel Arcelay, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 09/30/1998
* USD 32,640.00

This project, entitled Improvement of the Chemistry Curriculum and Laboratory
Program for Minority Students, is designed to upgrade the undergraduate
chemistry curriculum at this university. For this goal, new instrumentation is
being purchased and its use integrated into the classroom and laboratory
curricula. The chemistry program was developed to introduce modern laboratory
techniques at all levels of instruction, to aid in the learning of many concepts
presented in the classroom through hands-on experience, and to expand the
undergraduate research program. The specific laboratory programs affected by the
project include physical chemistry, analytical chemistry, biochemistry, organic
chemistry, and courses in instrumental analysis. Implementation of this project
permits the introduction of additional modern experimental procedures in the
upper-division laboratory program and provides needed instrumentation for
student research projects including talented high school students involved in
special projects. Project implementation affects all chemistry majors and
students who take organic chemistry as a requirement in their majors such as
biology, medical technology, and premedical students. The main outcome of this
project is the strengthening of the basic undergraduate curriculum in chemistry
through an improvement in the resources that are available to the students. The
project affects approximately 150 students each year including the chemistry
majors. The improvement results in a better prepared graduate of the campus who,
in turn, is better motivated and prepared to continue graduate studies or to
work in the local industries or government. The project is also in line with the
priorities of AMERICA 2000, especially with the objective of increasing the
number of minorities and women who complete degrees in science, given that 59
percent of the students are female and 98 percent, minorities.