* 9650021
* Environmental Radiation Monitoring Experiments for          Radiation Detection Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* William Johnson, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/1998
* USD 31,265.00

Radiation detection laboratory exercises in undergraduate health physics
programs have traditionally been limited to experiments examining the basic
properties of radioactive decay, the effects of shielding, and detector
characteristics. Applied undergraduate laboratories are normally designed with a
curriculum that supports reactor health physics and involve experiments using
basic radiation monitoring equipment in such a setting. In this project,
environmental health physics experiments are being integrated into junior- and
senior-level laboratory courses required of health physics majors.
Demonstrations designed to stimulate the interest of non-science-majors in
applied radiation protection are being included in introductory courses.
Experiments utilizing an alpha/beta discriminating liquid scintillation system
and thermoluminescent dosimeters (TLDs) are being added to undergraduate health
physics laboratories. Demonstrations of liquid scintillation counting are being
performed in an introductory health physics course for nonmajors. Long-term
experiments examining the sources and doses resulting from background radiation
are being designed for use in courses for both majors and nonmajors. Equipment
involved in this project is also being used to accommodate the growing number of
undergraduate research projects in environmental radiation that have previously
relied on borrowed equipment or off-site analysis. Over the next decade, many
undergraduate health physics programs may begin to revise curriculums to
emphasize environmental applications. With this in mind, the experiments
developed or improved under this program can be evaluated and the successes and
difficulties reported to other health programs at national meetings and through
literature.