* 9650319
* Development of a Molecular Biology Track Focused on the     Population Genetic Analysis of Threatened and Endangered    Species
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Myra Jacobsohn, Arcadia University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 58,428.00

The purpose of this project is the development of a curriculum in cell and
molecular biology with a laboratory focusing on the population genetic analysis
of threatened and endangered species. This can be an integral part of the
Biology major. It fits into the curriculum well because the research problems
being addressed combine molecular techniques with an application that has
intrinsic relevance to students with a strong interest in organismal biology.
The plan is to accomplish this objective through the distribution of basic
concepts and techniques among several courses at the introductory (100 and 200)
level followed by the application of these techniques in upper-level (300)
courses. The focus of the laboratory work in the upper-level courses is on the
development and usage of microsatellite genetic markers designed specifically
for population genetic analysis of a particular threatened or endangered
species. As a result of this program, students are gaining experience with
molecular techniques such as DNA isolation, restriction analysis, Southern
blotting, cloning, library construction and screening, DNA sequencing, and
polymerase chain reactions. Audiences targeted by this program include women,
who comprise 75 percent of our student population, prospective teachers (about
35 per year), and biology majors. The impact on curricular development can be
analyzed by surveys and course evaluations. It is further expected that the
laboratory activities developed in this program will be published in journals
and in laboratory manuals.