* 9650653
* SUNY Farmingdale CAD Laboratory Improvement to Include Rapid Prototyping
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Lee Jacknow, SUNY College of Technology Farmingdale
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 06/30/1998
* USD 47,040.00

In today's industry, rapid prototyping is an integrated part of most
engineering design and development processes because of its cost effectiveness
and quick production capability of complex three-dimensional physical parts from
computer models. Currently, the Computer Aided Design (CAD) Laboratory hosts
more than 24 486-66 PCs, 2 RISC 6000 IBMs, and 1 SUN-SPARC model 41.
Workstations are all computer networked and fitted with solid modeling and
finite element analysis software. This project adds a rapid prototyping system
that is necessary to enrich students' experience with such new technology. In
order to manufacture competitive products, engineering and engineering
technology students must have the technical skills and appropriate methodology
to design products and develop applications suited for today's modern and
competitive industrial environment. Therefore, the main objective of this
project is to develop a rapid prototyping capability at the CAD Laboratory. The
incorporation of such modern techniques supported by actual industrial
applications in the CAD Laboratory can greatly enhance both the teaching and
training activities in the Mechanical Engineering Technology Department. It is
estimated that 700 students annually can benefit from the training and exposure
to this new technology. In addition, the proposed equipment will be part of the
center for technical education and distance learning that was realized through
an ARPA-TRP Manufacturing Engineering Grant to disseminate interactive
educational courses to local universities, community colleges, and nationwide
audiences. This campus is also the main hub of an educational computer network
called `Exel-Link,` which connects most of New York state industrial firms and
educational institutions.