* 9650656
* A Mobile Multimedia Computer Laboratory Mentorship Approach to Improving Undergraduate Mathematics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Carl Lee, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/1999
* USD 69,900.00

This project is assembling a completely mobile, state-of-the-art multimedia
laptop computer laboratory, networked through wireless infrared technology. This
laboratory is being used for undergraduate mathematics courses for majors,
client disciplines, and preservice teachers. This portable laboratory represents
an extremely versatile configuration that enables any classroom to be used as a
normal classroom, as a technology demonstration room, and as a computer
laboratory. The ACE Teaching Cycle forms the unifying theme for the different
content areas using the mobile computer laboratory. This pedagogical approach
implements the findings of current constructivist learning theory research by
providing students with an experiential base with mathematical ideas through
carefully constructed computer activities in cooperative learning groups before
formal discussion of the material. During the first phase, each of the co-PI's
fully implements activity-first mathematics courses using the mobile computer
laboratory. Two of the five courses targeted during this phase are directed at
elementary and secondary school pre-service teachers. Other courses include
Calculus II, Introduction to Statistics, and Business Calculus. The second phase
involves doctoral candidates teaching undergraduate courses using the mobile
computer laboratory under the supervision of the co-PI's. (These interns in the
mathematics doctoral program with concentration in the teaching of college
mathematics can concurrently be involved in their second research-based course
in the teaching of college mathematics.) The final phase involves an increased
number of undergraduate courses throughout the undergraduate mathematics
curriculum using the laboratory with additional graduate faculty members
mentoring interns in teaching college mathematics. As more of our students,
graduate interns, and faculty gain experience with hands-on computer activities
before formal discussion of material, interns are expected to view "reform" in
term s of learning theory and pedagogy rather than in terms of "calculus" or
"differential equations," etc. Both the wireless portable lab and the
mentor/internship program serve as national models for improving undergraduate
mathematics instruction through research-based use of technology.