* 9650233
* Laser Spectroscopy Experiments in Advanced Undergraduate    Chemistry Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Jeffrey Gray, Ohio Northern University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 05/31/1998
* USD 12,490.00

Laser-based instruments for optical spectroscopy provide new and exciting
experiences for students in undergraduate physical chemistry and analytical
chemistry courses. This project incorporates miniature pulsed Nd:YAG and tunable
dye lasers into several experiments designed to illustrate key features of
molecular structure and dynamics. Students are using lasers to record spectra
with much higher resolution than is offered by traditional spectroscopic
instruments. Fine structure observed in laser-based spectra reveal couplings
between molecular motions that students often struggle to visualize. Time-
resolved laser-induced-fluorescence studies illustrate the competition between
radiative and nonradiative relaxation mechanisms. Multiphoton excitation and
resonance-ionization spectroscopy using short pulses can introduce fast electro-
optic technology into physical and analytical chemistry courses. Laser Raman
spectroscopy complements existing nuclear magnetic resonance, gas
chromatograph/mass spectroscopy, and Fourier-transform infrared capabilities for
chemical identification in synthesis courses. Students engaged in undergraduate
research gain hands-on experience with individual hardware components in modular
instrument configurations. The presence of modern spectroscopy in the
undergraduate curriculum strongly enhances student preparation for advanced-
degree programs in chemistry, medicine, and engineering.