* 9650963
* Using Computer-Based Electronic Probes to Introduce Studentsto Research in Physiology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* John Brennan, Hamline University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1998
* USD 26,572.00

This project introduces physiology students to investigative learning by
engaging them in experimental projects that use computer-based instruments to
solve problems that they pose about animal systems. In the introductory
physiology and neurophysiology courses for majors, and in the introductory
physiology course for nonmajors, students use an array of computer-interfaced
transducers and electrodes to measure and analyze a variety of physiological
processes, ranging from action potentials to brain waves. Consulting closely
with the instructor, students in collaborative teams use computer-based guides
to set up and work through the phases of a focused study in physiology. These
include searching the literature on-line and in the lab library, posing
questions, learning the rudiments of experimental design, logging hardware,
reducing and depicting results in graphic formats, performing appropriate
statistical tests, and developing reasoned conclusions in oral and written form.
This laboratory project enables students to raise original questions about
physiological systems and to acquire some of the problem-solving strategies and
skills needed to answer them. As a result of these experiences, students not
only gain a practical and intimate appreciation of the dynamics of physiological
processes but also acquire computational skills for pursuing new problems they
will encounter in other venues, such as honors projects, graduate studies, and
professional employment.