* 9650943
* Equipment for Acquisition, Processing and Visualization of  NMR Spectra
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Kenneth Williamson, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Grushow
* 05/31/1998
* USD 54,952.00

This project upgrades the data acquisition, control, and processing hardware
and software on three nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometers acquired in
1979, 1987, and 1989. The old computer hardware cannot be modified or updated.
The software is not supported by the spectrometer vendors; it is outdated, slow,
inflexible, and difficult for undergraduates to use. Off-line data processing is
either not possible or extremely expensive with the old systems. The number of
students who can be instructed simultaneously on the operation of the
spectrometers is limited to the number who can crowd around the console. The
objective of this project is to acquire new hardware and software that replaces
the old operating systems of these spectrometers. This allows off-line
processing and remote operation of the spectrometers which, coupled with data
projection equipment, allows the teaching of spectrometer control, operation,
and data reduction in a lecture setting. Off-line data processing greatly
increases the number of spectra that can be run on a given day. There is a great
demand for NMR spectra in organic chemistry, instrumental analysis, NMR, protein
chemistry, and two inorganic courses. In addition, three faculty make extensive
use of NMR in their research on biodegradable polymers, organometallic
compounds, and studies on myoglobin mutants and complexes. New microscale
problem-based undergraduate NMR experiments, combined with molecular modeling,
are constantly being developed for the organic chemistry course. Faculty can
disseminate the results of this project, especially new experiments, through
homepages on the Internet, lectures, seminars, published research papers, and
poster presentations at professional meetings, as well as through a widely used
organic chemistry laboratory textbook.