* 9650697
* An Innovative Student Network Laboratory for Teaching,      Research and Development for Undergraduate Computer         Technology Program
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Anastasios Chassiakos, California State University-Long Beach
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 12/31/1999
* USD 44,500.00

This project addresses a major challenge in training engineers and
technologists in the extremely fast growing area of communications technology,
including uses of photonics technology in networking and communications. This
project is designed to expand and integrate fiber networks, ATM LANs, and
multimedia to the desktop. In the course of this project, several new
experiments are being developed, involving newer networking technology and
techniques integrating technologies for supporting multimedia to the desktop,
for simulated manufacturing, and for business environments. Recovery, fault-
tolerance issues, and recovery as it applies to ATM networks can be explored.
Applied computing using object-oriented tools and techniques, and rapid
prototyping in a client/server, as well as peer-to-peer arrangement, can be
introduced as used in workplace and industrial settings. An undergraduate
textbook and laboratory books are being produced for a variety of applications,
ranging from vanilla flavored Novell networking issues to more complex
internetworking issues interfacing with TCP/IP and SPX/IPX, ATM LAN
environments, and interfaces to wireless. Faculty are also producing software
programs for various aspects of simulation, protocol issues, balancing, and
recovery of multiple heterogeneous networks. This is a very innovative project
for two reasons. It integrates diverse technologies and allows teams of
undergraduate students to plan, design, configure, and choose the technology
components for `their network.` The instructor acts as a guide and facilitator
for multiple project teams who work together for seamless delivery of final
projects. Since these networks are designed independently of the campus network,
students are free to explore various architectures, product combinations,
internetworking, and fault-tolerance/recovery without any restrictions or fear
of disrupting other campus operations. The approach that is used for assigning
laboratory experiments is to choose sample situations from industry from local
manufacturing, communication, and control applications and then to identify
suitable technology and configurations. The problems are assigned and their
progress monitored in a way to emulate real-world issues encountered by our
graduates in a diversity of settings. Students on each team evaluate each other
in terms of contributions to the group, teamwork, and performance.