* 9650921
* Integrating X-Ray Diffraction in the Composite Materials    Engineering Curriculum at Winona State University
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Beckry Abdel-Magid, Winona State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 08/31/1998
* USD 86,110.00

The Department of Engineering is purchasing an x-ray diffraction (XRD) system
for the study of material crystal structure and phase identification. An x-ray
diffractometer is needed to complement major courses in the Composite Materials
Engineering curriculum. These courses are Properties of Material, Composite
Characterization Techniques, and Mechanical Characterization Laboratory. In
these courses, students learn material science and material characterization and
begin to understand the relationship between the internal structure of materials
and the properties of materials. For understanding the properties of engineering
materials, one needs to understand their structure on the atomic and/or
microscopic scale. XRD is a powerful technique used to identify the crystalline
phases present in materials and to measure the structural properties of the
phases. It offers unparalleled accuracy in the measurement of atomic spacing. In
addition, XRD is noncontact and nondestructive and can be used in most
environments. The new equipment is being used to offer undergraduate students in
Composite Materials Engineering hands-on experience in the analysis of materials
at the atomic and microscopic level. The equipment is crucial for preparing
undergraduate students in materials engineering with the basic knowledge that is
highly needed for the analysis, synthesis, design, and processing of advanced
materials. Advanced composite materials are nationally recognized as one of the
key technologies in the next few decades.