* 9650531
* Testing-Comparison-Origin (T-C-O): A New Model for          Mechanical Behavior of Materials Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Blair London, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1998
* USD 34,888.00

This project focuses on enhancing undergraduate materials engineering education
in the area of the mechanical behavior of structural materials. An innovative
methodology is being presented, in which students perform experiments to measure
key mechanical properties on a range of materials (Testing), use materials
selection charts to compare the properties measured with those of other
materials (Comparison), and then use this information to get at the fundamental
concepts behind the properties at hand (Origin). The T-C-O approach uses both
laboratory and lecture to promote true learning in the mechanical behavior of
materials. A state-of-the-art tensile testing system is also being used in this
project. This system, of appropriate size and capability for undergraduate use,
is the cornerstone of the mechanical behavior of materials laboratory facility.
Several sets of T-C-O experiments are presented at the sophomore through senior
level for materials engineers and other engineering disciplines where students
can use the new tensile testing system, plus other mechanical testing equipment,
to discover the nature of the mechanical behavior of materials. The T-C-O method
is being evaluated by student surveys at several levels and by Beta Testing at
San Jose State University and the University of California, Davis. Successful
results can be disseminated to the materials and mechanics communities at the
Beta Test sites, by presentation at a national technical meeting, and by
publication in a refereed technical journal.