* 9650680
* Molecular Analysis by Liquid Chromatography for             Mycobacterium Identification
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Arlyn Perez Samot, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/1998
* USD 54,980.00

This project improves the curriculum of biology courses by establishing an
innovative system of Mycobacterium classification that uses a modern method of
statistical analysis based on the fatty acid content. This system, which uses
the liquid chromatograph, is being linked to the local network in order to
service a greater number of students. The project introduces a new Mycobacterium
characterization method, updates the chromatographic techniques in the
Microbiology Laboratory, and increases the knowledge and skills of the biology
students through the practical operation of high-technology instruments. The
teaching-learning process can be improved because the results can be more
precise and the student can be more involved in the analysis, evaluation, and
application of the results. These objectives can be achieved through the design
and development of new experiments that improve the biology courses affected by
the project. The utilization of the liquid chromatograph system and the related
software for the biochemical analysis of micro-organisms can be duplicated in
other undergraduate settings. The new experiments can help the students acquire
and/or improve the following skills: (1) relating structures and chromatographs,
(2) analyzing statistical data and using the system, (3) managing and operating
the chromatograph, (4) comprehending the complex nature of the components of
micro-organisms, and (5) learning new taxonomic criteria based on molecular
composition. The courses that the new technology benefits, in terms of their
curricular content, are General Microbiology, Cellular and Molecular Biology,
Medical Biology, and Research Methods.