* 9650263
* Electronic Total Stations for Field Applications in Geology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Michael Cummings, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 06/30/1998
* USD 40,855.00

In the late 1980's, the Geology Department at Portland State University decided
that the future lies in an applied geosciences program. This decision resulted
in more hands-on experiences for students. The purpose of this equipment grant
is to continue curricular evolution by providing equipment that enhances
technology innovation in field programs and trains students with modern
equipment. Through this project, the department is replacing obsolete surveying
equipment. The new equipment supports current curriculum revisions for geology
majors, especially field-based courses and laboratories, and provides additional
learning options for nonmajors in the reform of General Education requirements,
including training of pre-service teachers. The equipment supports coursework
and undergraduate research wherever accurate field measurements are required.
Specifically, the project involves the purchase of six Sokkia Total Stations to
replace the 1950's (and earlier) plane-tables and alidades. This change is
modernizing the field portions of the program and fostering additional major and
nonmajor curricular options. Modern surveying equipment has an impact on the
curriculum by providing for major revisions of the Field Methods and Anatomy of
Landslides courses; revised labs in Applied Geophysics, Field Geophysics, Field
Geology, and Engineering Geology; increased undergraduate major and nonmajor
research opportunities; and support development of nonmajor undergraduate
courses (Geology of the Oregon Country). The Geology of the Oregon Country
course is of particular importance to pre-service teachers because it requires
all students to develop field-based studies to test a hypothesis, and the use of
this instrumentation is integral to the course requirements. Pre-service
teachers also have the option to take the other courses listed above to fulfill
their certification requirements. Use of this surveying equipment will make
important contributions to the training of pre-service teachers by i ntroducing
the appropriate use of a modern technology, and by allowing future teachers to
participate in the design and implementation of field-based class projects.
Strengths of the equipment-based program include the extension of a well-
developed program of curriculum evolution in the Department of Geology;
furthering of the curriculum not only in geology, but also in other departments
(Civil Engineering and Environmental Studies); fostering of cooperation among
students as they develop strategies to accomplish tasks requiring precise
location and distance measurements; the easy adaptation of existing courses for
instruction of methods for which the equipment is intended; and the promotion of
collaborations between senior and junior faculty in projects involving
undergraduate education. The Geology of the Oregon Country course, in
particular,