* 9650041
* Participatory Learning Using Interactive Multimedia in      Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Glenn Sproul, Johnson State College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

The major objective of this project is to provide for the use of multimedia
computers in mathematics and science courses. This step enables students to
become more actively involved in their education and to better prepare
themselves to participate in a society that is increasingly technological and
scientific. The equipment used supports introductory and advanced courses in
mathematics and the sciences, as well as courses in the general education
program. The new software allows students to develop models of natural
phenomena, analyze data, and prepare presentations. The computer laboratory is
used to introduce computer graphics, simulations, and modeling into the
pedagogical style used in courses in the Departments of Mathematics and Sciences
(biology, geology, environmental science, and chemistry). Students are able to
access public domain software, databases, and information using the Internet.
The computer laboratory is also used to assist faculty members to develop the
skills required to benefit from the use of interactive multimedia in the
classroom. The overall emphasis here is not on equipment, but on active modes of
student learning. The new hardware and software are intended to support and
extend existing efforts to encourage students to be active, inquiring
participants in their science and mathematics courses, rather than passive
spectators. This laboratory provides for a learning community characterized by
active engagement in teaching and learning, by high standards of academic work
and human relations, and by seriousness of purpose.