* 9650247
* Human Performance Laboratory Improvement Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Raymond McCoy, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 19,190.00

The purpose of this project is to improve the Human Performance Laboratory. The
new equipment enables the undergraduate students to perform three-dimensional
human gait analysis of the lower extremities. This capability affects the
general biomechanics course, the mechanics of human locomotion course, and the
independent research projects for undergraduate students. The equipment includes
a bilateral gait analysis computer program, an analog sampling system, and a
force platform. This equipment interfaces with an existing four-camera
computerized video analysis system and a force platform. The entire system
enables students to perform a complete description of the movement and forces of
both lower extremities during one full stride of walking, running, and other
forms of locomotion. The need to examine both lower extremities is clearly
evident when examining patients with abnormal asymmetrical gait. With this
system, the Human Performance Laboratory can be prepared for clinical gait
analysis of patients referred from orthopedic surgeons. This would be an
excellent subject pool for projects resulting in professional presentations and
publications by undergraduate students. The new equipment is significantly
improving the training of students in the mechanics of the gait cycle and is
serving as a model to other schools interested in developing gait analysis for
undergraduate students.