* 9650581
* Laboratory Lessons for Discovery-Based Statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Richard Scheaffer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/1998
* USD 46,620.00

Modern introductory statistics courses are moving toward more emphasis on data
analysis and the practice of statistics, with correspondingly less emphasis on
mathematical manipulations. Within the data analysis view, however, one must
still emphasize basic statistical concepts such as the role of randomness,
sampling distributions, confidence and significance. Since these ideas cannot be
explained by appealing to formal mathematics, they must be explained through
intuitive arguments using data and simulation. Technology, then, becomes an
essential tool for the teaching of concepts, as well as for the analysis of real
data. Much good software and supporting material is available for the latter,
but little attention has been paid to developing software and attendant material
for the former. This project will make use of the hands-on activities developed
under the Activity-Based Statistics Project (USE-9150836) and the ExplorStat
software developed under the project on Constructing Knowledge of Statistical
Concepts Through Modern Technology (DUE-9354419) to develop, field test, and
publish a series of hands-on, self-directed laboratory lessons for discovery-
based learning of fundamental statistical concepts. It is anticipated that 15 to
20 lessons will be needed to adequately lead the student through the concepts
covered in most introductory courses. For teaching situations in which a
computer laboratory is not available, these lessons can serve as the basis for
classroom demonstrations of these concepts. Although the primary focus for the
project is undergraduate statistics, these materials will be of use to high
school teachers who are now emphasizing statistics as part of the mathematics
curriculum, especially those who will participate in the new Advanced Placement
Statistics program.