* 9650519
* Advancing General Science Instruction at Evangel College:   A Meteorology/Geology Computing Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Michael McCorcle, Evangel University
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 08/31/1998
* USD 38,218.00

This project will provide a state-of-the-art Internet access laboratory to
advance the teaching methods currently used in the Meteorology and Geology
Laboratory courses. Both meteorology and geology represent two of the core
offerings of the general science curriculum and thus serve a large and diverse
student population. To date, the laboratory sections of these courses have
incorporated antiquated lecture/lab manual methodologies of instruction
featuring little investigative content. This project seeks to restructure these
classes completely into a vibrant, hands-on learning environment through the use
of internet image and data products, geographical information system software,
and simulation products. This project allows for the construction of a World
Wide Web homepage that contains selected data and training modules designed
specifically for the meteorology and geology laboratory. Following 1 year of
construction, student operation, and student evaluation, the homepage can be
made public to the entire environmental studies community. To be effective, the
science laboratory curriculum must reflect the latest innovations and
instructional technology. This project prepares science majors with effective
computational analysis skills that they can use in their own specific area of
interest. For nonmajors, exposure to this technology may encourage them to
pursue higher-level science and mathematics courses. This laboratory is of
particular importance for future primary and secondary educators, as these
courses may represent their only exposure to meteorological and geological
technology.