* 9650488
* Instrumentation for Chemistry via Local Area Network        (INCLAN)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Robert Landolt, Texas Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 27,000.00

The chemistry department is addressing the needs of a mostly non-traditional,
commuter student population through laboratory experience in a recently revised
curriculum emphasizing analytical chemistry. Project INCLAN (Instrumentation for
Chemistry via Local Area Network) provides, in introductory and intermediate
courses, practical, instrumentation-based, hands-on problem-solving experiences
for 60-90 science majors per year; exploration of technological/environmental
issues for 80-100 non-science-majors through real-world laboratory experiments;
and minimization of time/access constraints that severely limit effective use of
four crucially useful, single-station techniques. Project INCLAN features
acquisition of Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (FT-NMR) and
Infrared (FT-IR) spectrometric instrumentation for use in freshman and sophomore
organic and analytical chemistry courses and in Natural Science courses devised
for non-science-majors. The new instrumentation is being incorporated into a
Local Area Network currently under construction. Hands-on experimentation is
being conducted by freshmen and sophomores assisted by upper-class chemistry
mentors. Instrument output is funneled into the LAN system for student
interpretation, freeing time for analysis of more samples during available lab
periods. The major foci for program assessment includes (1) level of student use
of spectrometric equipment in affected courses, (2) fraction of real-time
devoted to analysis versus spectrum retrieval and interpretation on networked
computers, and (3) efficacy of the Chemistry Mentorship as beginning and
intermediate students are assisted in acquiring and interpreting information by
upper-class students. The LAN system is used to log levels and summarize
patterns of use. Progress during Project INCLAN is being communicated with
colleagues by means of INTERNET listserv/interest group exchanges.