* 9650049
* Automated Particle-Size Instrumentation For the             Undergraduate Geology Curriculum at Colorado College
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Paul Myrow, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 07/31/1998
* USD 23,885.00

The Colorado College Geology Department will develop an instructional program
using automated equipment for particle-size analysis: a sedigraph for analyzing
silt and clay, a settling tube for analysis of sands, and a DOS-based
control/data management module. Particle-size analysis is a critical to the
interpretation of modern sediments, as particle-size characteristics reflect
conditions of transport and deposition. Evaluation of particle-size
distributions is also fundamental in studies of soil genesis and of soil
development as an indicator of landscape instability, and in many studies of the
effect of human activity on geomorphic processes. Throughout our soft-rock
curriculum, students are introduced to concepts related to particle-size
characteristics, and this equipment will provide students with the opportunity
to make rapid and precise particle-size determinations, introduce students to
modern quantitative techniques, and link classroom, field, and lab aspects of
sedimentary geology, geomorphology, and soils. The instruments will strengthen
curriculum and student research opportunities in soft-rock and environmental
geology, and will allow the development of field and laboratory exercises in
Introductory Geology, Geomorphology, Soils, and Sedimentary Petrology courses.
Individual students will utilize the equipment for projects in these courses as
well as Glacial Geology, Archeological Geology, Sedimentation and Stratigraphy,
and Environmental Sciences. Geology and Environmental Sciences majors will also
use the instruments to obtain high-quality data on sediment and soil
characteristics in their thesis work. The instrumentation will also be available
to students from the other Keck Consortium colleges for Keck project-related
research.