* 9650782
* Development of Undergraduate Curriculum Through Computer    Based Molecular Modeling
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Julia Baker, Winthrop University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Grushow
* 06/30/1998
* USD 59,542.00

The Department of Chemistry and Physics is improving the quality of the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum through the establishment of a computer-based
molecular modeling laboratory program. Laboratories developed to utilize the
acquired hardware and software give students graphical representations of
chemical principles. This hands-on approach gives students a better feel for
concepts that have heretofore been visualized only in the minds of students.
Students in the introductory chemistry courses conduct experiments to examine
chemical bonding, molecular vibrations, the greenhouse effect, molecular
geometry optimization, and biochemical macromolecular (protein and nucleic
acids) structure visualization. Organic chemistry students conduct experiments
to relate energy and reactivity to geometry. Physical chemistry students perform
experiments developing various levels of theory and relate physical properties
to electronic charge distribution or changes in geometry. Students in the
biochemistry class perform geometrical calculations and manipulations on
molecular systems to predict biological activity. Students conducting senior
research projects apply molecular modeling principles to examine specific
research problems. This program exemplifies the full extent to which molecular
modeling methodology can be successfully incorporated into undergraduate
programs at all levels.