* 9650556
* Implementation of Surface Chemistry Experiments in the      Physical Chemistry Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Karen Peterson, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 12/31/1998
* USD 21,031.00

The objective of this project is to introduce the field of surface chemistry to
undergraduate students using the technique of scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM). In order to accomplish this goal, faculty are developing a sequence of
three experiments for the physical chemistry laboratory course that will
introduce the students to surface structure and dynamics. Although a number of
different experiments will be evaluated for use in the undergraduate laboratory,
a possible set of experiments could be as follows: 1. Analyze the highly
oriented pyrolitic graphite surface in air. 2. Compare the graphite surface in
air and in water. 3. Analyze the electrochemical deposition of a metal on the
graphite surface by correlating the rate or amount of deposition and the change
in the surface structure. Surface chemistry is an important branch of physical
chemistry that is generally not included in undergraduate courses. Although most
surface analytical equipment is expensive and difficult to use, the STM method
is relatively simple. Most importantly, the capability of the STM method to
image surfaces in air and liquids allows experiments on surfaces to be
accomplished without the added complication of ultra-high vacuum equipment.
Therefore, it is an ideal tool for an undergraduate teaching laboratory. The new
equipment can also be used for undergraduate research projects.