* 9650347
* A Laboratory for Integrating Digital Design and Test
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1999
* John Nestor, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 05/31/1999
* USD 60,236.00

As the complexity of digital circuits increases continuously_the Intel
Pentium-P6 processor (1995), for example, has 5.5 million transistors while the
80386 (1989) had less than one-half million_the cost of device testing has also
increased sharply. The rising complexity of testing has shifted more and more of
the testing responsibility toward the design engineer. Today, many of the
testing issues must be planned within the earlier design phase. This project
introduces the various issues and corresponding techniques employed in testing
to digital design courses. To implement this idea, the department is developing
an innovative laboratory for linking design and testing through hands-on
experiments. The integration of testing with design is an important attribute
within the range of abilities of a modern day undergraduate computer engineering
student. Thus, the project addresses this emerging need through the use of a
laboratory with a computer-assisted design (CAD) tools and testing facility.
Students can implement their ASIC (Application Specific Integrated Circuit)
designs through a set of PLDs (Programmable Logic Device) without the waiting
period for IC fabrication. Many of the testing techniques such as DFT (Design
for Testability) and BIST (Build-in-Self-Test) must be planned in the design
phase by students. Converting the simulation data into test programs and
performing the actual testing on ATE (Automatic Test Equipment) for students'
own designs can not only offer hands-on experience, but also provide them an
integral perspective of the design of digital systems. The laboratory
infrastructure is capable of meeting the demands of design and test as an
integral unit. This facility can provide three courses in the digital system
area for more than 100 undergraduate students annually. This department's
approach and experience can help other ECE/CS programs to offer an enriched
education in digital design to their students.