* 9650658
* Mathematics Learning Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Dehlly Porras, CUNY Laguardia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/1998
* USD 70,000.00

This project is reforming the mathematics program by dividing the curriculum of
the second level developmental mathematics course into two courses. The decision
to restructure the curriculum is based on an analysis of students' difficulties
in successfully completing the extensive content to be covered in this course in
a semester of only 12 weeks and the fact that the success rate in upper-level
courses indicates that even students who pass may be in jeopardy in precalculus
and calculus. In addition, in the present structure, students receive no
college-level algebra instruction prior to precalculus. While the department has
had significant success in infusing new teaching methodologies in precalculus
and calculus resulting in significantly higher pass rates, hundreds of students
never make it to these upper-level courses because of their poor preparation.
The department is using this project to do a better job of preparing the vast
majority of students who start out in developmental mathematics for upper-level
precalculus and calculus courses. Central to this project is the transformation
of sections of these developmental courses along with sections of precalculus
and calculus into multimedia laboratory courses where students work individually
and in small groups on state-of-the-art, interactive, CD-ROM-based instruction,
supported with accompanying texts that contain exploratory environments, video
clips, simulations, explanations, and exercises. Using this new technology,
students work on modules at their own pace, taking proficiency exams when they
are ready. The self-paced nature of the new CD-ROM technology makes better use
of the additional time students have in this course.