* 9650859
* Equipment for Research-Oriented First-Year Seminar and UpperLevel Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Donald Nelson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/1998
* USD 39,842.00

This project addresses the problem of how best to stimulate and then sustain
undergraduate interest in science. The underlying assumption is that early
exposure (i.e., first semester or first-year) to the excitement and rigor of
scientific research is a spark that will ignite students' latent scientific
interests. Two pilot research-oriented first-year seminars, Preserving Genomes
and Protein Structure, have proven to be valuable in identifying promising
scientists and in motivating students to engage in research. The project
objective is two-fold: to upgrade the research-oriented first-year seminar
courses by incorporating technologies utilizing the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and computer simulations of biomolecular structure, and to apply what has
been learned in the two pilot studies to a select group of upper-level courses,
Recombinant DNA, Bioanalytical Chemistry, and Biophysical Chemistry, an
extension the department believes is required to sustain the students'
enthusiasm for original research beyond the introductory level. The proposal is
thus targeted at first-year students and upper-level students who enroll in
affected courses. PCR-based experiments, using DNA templates that have never
been amplified before, are being introduced in the first-year seminar Preserving
Genomes and offered at a more advanced level in Recombinant DNA. Computer
simulations of protein and nucleic acid structure are being carried out on
graphics workstations in the first-year seminar Protein Structure. Modular
experiments in which novel structures are simulated are being developed for
incorporation into the advanced courses Bioanalytical Chemistry and Biophysical
Chemistry, in which aspects of original research involving isolation and
characterization of novel proteins already exist. The success of the pilot
research-oriented first-year seminars has been described in an undergraduate
presentation at a national conference and in an article in the Journal of
Chemical Education. Similar means can be used to evaluate and disseminate
descriptions of incorporating PCR and computer simulations of biomolecular
structure into these courses. Results can be shared at a national meeting, in
written articles, and on the World Wide Web.