* 9650259
* Project PreCALC: Pre-Calculus as a Laboratory Course
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Marcelle Bessman, Jacksonville University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1998
* USD 15,615.00

The purpose of Project PreCALC (PreCalculus As a Laboratory Course) is to
replace Precalculus Mathematics with a new course, Mathematics of Motion and
Change. This new course is designed to serve as a preparation for the
technology-intensive, laboratory-based, calculus program and a fulfillment of
the mathematical needs of science students for whom this course is intended as
preparation for successful articulation of their major curriculum. In addition
to the skills content needed for calculus, this course stresses active and
cooperative learning and the development of students' written and oral
communication skills in mathematics. Each semester, 20 freshmen in the Division
of Science and Mathematics are expected to enroll in an experimental section of
the Project PreCALC course. In a computer laboratory setting, they use data,
graphs, and formulas to explore the concepts of functions, motion, and change.
They apply suitable technological tools to finding solutions for real-world
problems in the sciences. Through this process, they strengthen their
understanding of the role of mathematics in the development and practice of
science. Students going on to Calculus I are monitored and compared with other
students normally registered for the course. The progress of the other students
can be qualitatively and quantitatively monitored with respect to communication
and problem-solving skills in their subsequent major course. After 2 years, the
project can be evaluated through analysis of students' successful participation
in Calculus I or, for students who do not go on to calculus, through assessment
of students' abilities to apply the mathematical understanding gained to
relevant courses in their majors.