* 9650045
* Tools for Discovery-Based Organic Chemistry - Simple Gas    Chromatographs and Integrators
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Ernest Blakeney, Centenary College of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 9,356.00

A growing national awareness indicates that traditional ways of teaching
chemistry often fail to communicate to students the excitement and intellectual
challenge of the science experienced by practicing chemists. One emerging model
that addresses this concern introduces discovery early in the chemistry
curriculum. Verification experiments where students prove the validity of
lecture material are replaced by cooperative exercises designed to allow
students to discover for themselves fundamental concepts of the science. These
laboratory discoveries then serve as the starting point for lecture discussions.
The Department of Chemistry at Centenary College has committed itself to this
discovery-based method of teaching. Discovery-based teaching, especially in
organic chemistry, depends extensively on instrumentation. This project makes
use of a number of simple gas chromatographs and integrators in several
discovery-based experiments. Organic experiments are designed to allow students
to investigate the correlation of physical properties with structure, and the
parameters that govern nucleophilic substitution. In addition to these that
depend on gas chromatography's power to separate and quantitate, the instruments
also are being used as preparative tools in other experiments. Finally, the
simple, rugged design of the gas chromatographs makes it possible to introduce
several experiments using this instrumentation into the higher enrollment
introductory course.