* 9650566
* A National Model for Photonics Proficiency in Undergraduate Electrical Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Guifang Li, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 05/31/1998
* USD 79,332.00

Photonics is becoming a pervasive technology, with applications ranging from
consumer products (CD players and laser printers) to social infrastructure and
defense (intelligent highways and optically controlled radars). As a result,
photonics is being recognized as an integral part of the electrical engineering
(EE) curriculum. Because it has not been traditionally offered in undergraduate
EE to date, most universities still regard photonics education as curriculum
enrichment. As such, different aspects of photonics are emphasized in different
universities, largely following the expertise or research interests of the
faculty members, a situation that may not address effectively students' long-
term career abilities and industrial needs. The growing importance of photonics
technology and its needs in industry dictate that every undergraduate EE student
should acquire a minimum standard proficiency in photonics. In this vein, this
project is shifting the paradigm in undergraduate photonics education in EE.
Instead of treating it as an enrichment, photonics will be taught as a
requirement. A photonics proficiency standard_a collection of knowledge and
technology base_is being identified and incorporated into a required course in
photonics involving both classroom instruction and laboratory experience. The
preliminary photonics proficiency standard includes laboratory safety,
geometrical and physical optics, lasers and detectors, lightwave modulation, and
optical communications. A series of 10 labs, each associated with particular
areas of photonics applications, is being developed to complement and, moreover,
synergize with classroom instructions. The photonics proficiency standard and
the curriculum are being refined in the course of this project so as to serve as
a national model for photonics education in EE. Finally, an undergraduate
textbook with a companion laboratory manual can be published for dissemination.