* 9650587
* Undergraduate Applied Environmental Geochemistry Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Charles Spooner, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 05/31/1998
* USD 25,927.00

Approximately a decade ago, the Department of Geology and Geophysics initiated
a new major program in the Environmental Geosciences. The program was designed
with the objective of giving the undergraduate students a primary understanding
of surface and near subsurface geologic phenomena that directly influences the
quality of our natural surroundings. The topics that were initially included
were geologic hazards, hydrology, marine processes, chemistry of natural waters,
sedimentation processes, and geophysics. In response to student interest, the
program has recently been extended to include the effects of anthropogenic
changes, fate and transport of pollutants, and the role of metals in the near
surface environment. In addition, increasingly more Environmental Geoscience
majors are getting involved in actual field and laboratory projects at
environmentally contaminated sites. Student participation in these projects
occurs in a variety of ways, including laboratory exercises, senior theses,
honors program studies, and individual research projects. The department's
analytical facilities include gas chromatograph, neutron activation
instrumentation, x-ray diffraction, multisensor water quality probe, and several
other smaller instruments. However, the department has previously had no method
of measuring concentration of inorganics in water/solid samples. This project
addresses the acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) spectrometer,
an instrument that greatly enhances the `hands-on ` educational experience and
provides research opportunities for the Environmental Geoscience majors. The
undergraduate students are learning the principles of the ICP analytical
technique and instrument operation and are getting the opportunity to perform
course exercises as well as student senior research. The ICP instrument was
selected for its relative ease of use, for its ability to detect low levels of
wide range of elements, and because ICP is the EPA standard for analysis of
metals in aqueous and other environmental samples.