* 9651096
* Advanced Information Technology Laboratory Development
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Kala Seal, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 08/31/1998
* USD 55,779.00

This project establishes an advanced Information Technology Laboratory for
improving the undergraduate curriculum in computer information systems (CIS).
The improvements include developing new and upgraded laboratory projects for all
the courses, in particular, Information Systems Analysis and Design and
Management Support Systems courses, as well as offering a new course in Software
Development. The projects are team-oriented and emphasize group problem-solving
skills with groupware support. LotusNOTES is used to create workgroups that
facilitate the storing and sharing of project information. In the Information
Systems Analysis and Design course, students are required to work in groups on
real-life business information systems problems. Each project group undertakes
an in-depth analysis of an information systems problem, develops a set of
requirement specifications, and designs a system to meet those needs. In the
Management Support Systems course, students work on a new semester-long project
to develop a prototype decision support system based on a real-life business
problem. In each of these courses, the projects require substantial computing
resources, both hardware and software, not previously available to the students.
The new laboratory includes 15 networked student workstations, 3 instructor
workstations, 1 network server, application development software, workgroup
software, and other auxiliary equipment.