* 9651242
* NetCo/CoNet Lab Proposal
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Chandler Stevens, Minnesota Riverland Technical College (Austin Campus)
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/1998
* USD 58,000.00

The converging technologies of telecommunications, computers, and media are
creating new businesses, new jobs, and new courses of study at technical and
community colleges. Students need access to digital TV, multimedia, wireless,
community server, public kiosk, and audience feedback technologies in order to
become builders of future information infrastructure, a new national priority
with local and regional economic development and community building potential.
This project, which equips students in this area of advanced technological
education, has been organized within the framework of a new networking
communication (NetCo) curriculum that both draws upon and contributes to
building rural community networks (CoNets). Some of the equipment for this
project goes into college electronic labs, computer labs, and video production
studios for NetCo students pursuing three study options: communication
technology, multimedia software, and interactive television. Equipment can also
be shared through links into and among rural communities, which make up a CoNet
model. This model involves spread spectrum transceivers on antenna towers and
public kiosks in various local sites. This CoNet model_impacting handicapped,
elderly, young, and especially rurally remote families_includes new RAN (rural
area network) wireless links among LANs, WANs and MANs. Mayors, school
superintendents, teachers, librarians, county agents, and business people
attended week-long summer workshops to learn how to initiate CoNets locally and
regionally in 1995. In 1996-97, 60 faculty statewide can learn to use this
equipment in support of NetCo curriculum.