* 9651271
* Computer Assisted Interdisciplinary Problem Solving in      Mathematics and Science
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Carol Freeman, Finger Lakes Community College
* Standard Grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 08/31/1998
* USD 31,830.00

This project integrates real-world interdisciplinary activities into targeted
mathematics and science courses: Introductory Statistics, Algebra/Precalculus,
General Chemistry, and General Physics. Two computer-equipped classrooms, one
for mathematics and one for science, are essential for the success of the
project. Each classroom provides an environment where students work in teams on
activities designed to develop problem-solving skills and an understanding of
course concepts. Three types of activity are used to meet the objectives of the
project. TYPE I activities are designed to introduce students to problem-solving
methodologies using a real-life scenario and an innovative problem-solving model
called the WHEEL. TYPE II activities involve students from one discipline in a
direct interaction with students from another discipline. TYPE III activities
use technology for instruction within a specific course. They are designed to
guide students in their construction of knowledge. The software required for the
computer equipped classrooms (10 computers each) are Minitab, a statistics
package; Derive, a computer algebra system; Quattro-Pro, a spreadsheet program;
and PCSOLVE, a general problem-solving software package. This project can serve
as a model for 2-year colleges to integrate a real-world problem-solving
learning environment into their curriculum.