* 9651117
* Bringing DNA Sequencing Technology to Undergraduate         Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Susannah Gal, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/1998
* USD 28,225.00

Using molecular approaches, scientists have recently isolated disease-linked
genes, mapped complicated traits in plants, and identified homologous genes in
numerous species. Much of the information generated now comes from massive DNA
sequencing projects taking place around the world. The newest technology for DNA
sequencing employs fluorescent dyes to detect the sequencing products, an
important advance that will be used for many years to come. However, the
equipment needed for the separation and detection of the fluorescently labeled
products is prohibitively expensive. Therefore, this project arranges for the
purchase of two DNA sequencers for use in an advanced molecular biology
laboratory class, enabling undergraduate students to train in this new
technology. This equipment permits students to sequence unique DNA fragments,
compare these results to known sequences, and submit the cloned DNA to central
collection sites, making this information available for research. This addition
to the undergraduate laboratory is a logical next step in the current molecular
biology course, making it possible for students to make an important
contribution to the scientific community, which would undoubtedly increase their
interest in the future of biological endeavors. This equipment can also be used
in undergraduate research in a number of laboratories in the department. Initial
steps are being taken to offer use of this equipment for undergraduate teaching
by other colleges in the area, as well as in demonstrations for high school
students and teachers. This project is likely to affect at least 200
undergraduate students, college educators, precollege students, and teachers
during the 2 years of funding.