* 9651042
* SMART LAB, An Integrated Interdisciplinary Science/Math     Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Philip Sandberg, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 35,200.00

The College of Natural Sciences is developing a computer-based SMART LAB
(Science/Math Active Response Technology Laboratory) to support
interdisciplinary, undergraduate learning in science and mathematics. The
learning model for the laboratory is technology mediated, allowing for active
student response to science/math topics through involvement in cooperative
learning groups, which design, complete, and report on lab projects.
Laboratories use topic-based investigations, which are structured to emphasize
the interconnected nature of the science disciplines and mathematics, both
through the particular exercises used and through collaborative interchange
within and beyond the immediate lab setting. The SMART LAB serves as a locus for
exchange of data, insights, and science/math concepts among classes in different
disciplines using the lab. Computers function in four major roles: as device
controllers for laboratory data acquisition; as analytical tools for the
visualization, inspection, evaluation, and interpretation of lab data; as
gateways to network data resources relevant to the lab projects; and as links
for communication with other educational communities, such as South Dakota
tribal and nontribal K-12 classrooms and other undergraduate science/math
classes, both in the United States and abroad. Preservice secondary science/math
education majors in combined Education/Natural Sciences programs and preservice
elementary education majors are a substantial part of the student population
addressed by the project. Learning science by doing science, the central theme
of the SMART LAB, is particularly important in the preparation of K-12 science
teachers. Those preservice teachers, as well as other undergraduate majors,
benefit from the shared knowledge and the network links between the laboratory
and other classrooms (K-12, tribal colleges, universities). By assuming the role
of mentor/teacher, college students in the SMART LAB add significantly to their
own comprehension of the particular lab topics and of general science/math
concepts.