* 9651484
* Acquisition of an Ion Chromatograph and Field Equipment for Undergraduate Environmental Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Martin St. Clair, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 04/30/1998
* USD 9,962.00

There is a growing consensus that student learning in the sciences is enhanced
by a research-like laboratory experience. However, the number of students who
can actually participate in faculty-student research is generally limited by
both faculty time and resources. An alternative to this is to provide research-
like experiences during course laboratories by allowing students to carry out
experiments in which the outcome is unknown. Courses in environmental analysis,
which often are interesting to students, are offering students an opportunity to
participate in these experiments. This project incorporates the use of ion
chromatography and field analyses into two courses_Analytical Chemistry and
Environmental Analysis. The Analytical Chemistry course is introducing two new
experiments involving multiple analytical techniques (including ion
chromatography). These experiments focus on the drinking water treatment
process. Environmental Analysis, a new course focusing on the interplay of
chemical and biological factors in ecosystems, provides a strong field and
laboratory component. The course is being team-taught by an ecologist and an
analytical chemist. It involves extensive use of an ion chromatograph to study
both freshwater and soil processes. Multiple field pH and dissolved oxygen
meters enable the class to work in small groups simultaneously, measuring
chemical parameters in the field. Use of these instruments results in increased
student interest.