* 9651303
* Laboratory Enhancement of the Undergraduate Learning        Experience in Biological Anthropology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Susan Ford, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 31,697.00

Most undergraduate courses in biological anthropology remain primarily lecture
because of the lack of scheduled laboratory sessions and the scarcity of
available materials. This department has added a new laboratory section to the
most heavily attended introductory class. However, previously resources have
allowed for only an adequate laboratory course, not a truly outstanding,
innovative opportunity for students to gain hands-on experience with state-of-
the-art materials and instrumentation including computer simulations and
databases. Through this project, the department is building on existing
materials to develop a series of truly involving and challenging laboratory
experiences designed for both students in the introductory class and to enhance
the interactive learning components of other classes in the bioanthropology
curriculum. The new equipment, computers, software, measuring devices, recording
materials, casts, and magnification equipment, makes possible a series of
specific laboratory exercises in the introductory class which enhances students'
problem-solving and cooperative learning skills, encouraging collaboration,
interchange, and deeper levels of understanding of the material. Because of the
special nature of the university's student body, the project has the opportunity
to reach many students who come from backgrounds often marked by poor exposure
to science, from the under-funded school systems of inner city Chicago and the
rural areas of Illinois, Missouri, and Kentucky. These students include first
generation college students, minorities, economically and socially disadvantaged
students, and physically challenged and learning disabled students. Results can
be disseminated through presentations at professional meetings, publications in
journals, and the compilation of a lab manual which can be made available to
other schools.