* 9651059
* Enhancing Thinking Skills Using Computers in Non-Majors     Biology at a Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Richard Null, Lane Community College
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 06/30/1998
* USD 60,234.00

The science faculty at this college believe that a basic knowledge of
biological concepts and an awareness of the relevance and applicability of these
concepts to current social issues is essential for students to make responsible
life choices. The goal of this project is to provide students with the tools and
activities to help them develop critical thinking, problem-solving, and
decision-making skills that will help them achieve this knowledge and awareness.
The project utilizes computer-based inquiry-learning activities and computer
technology to enhance student learning in several so-called emphasis biology
classes for nonmajors. The biology faculty is collaborating with faculty in the
University of Oregon's Workshop Biology project to customize existing learning
activities and develop new ones for these unique emphasis classes and for the
nontraditional student population. The college has not previously had enough
equipment to implement these activities effectively. However, the equipment
makes it possible to install computers in three classrooms so that students may
work collaboratively in a variety of learning activities which foster problem-
solving and critical thinking. In addition, a computer resource center with 16
computers is being set up to allow independent use outside of classtime. The
project is being evaluated through pre- and post-testing and surveys to
determine the degree to which students have developed critical thinking,
problem-solving, and decision-making skills. Through dissemination, this project
can serve as a model for other schools to develop their own computer-enhanced
biology curricula.