* 9651050
* Integrating Group Laboratory Activities Across the          Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Cynthia McDaniel Wang, College of Notre Dame of Maryland
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 36,316.00

An initiative entitled Integrating Group Laboratory Activities Across the
Chemistry Curriculum is working to solve a serious problem in chemistry
education. Nonscience and science majors enrolled in introductory courses are
not involved in cooperative group laboratory exercises relevant to the
environment, advanced materials, and biotechnology because of the lack of
versatile, state-of-the-art instrumentation. As a group project in Instrumental
Analysis, chemistry majors are developing and testing protocols involving CE,
IC, infrared, and VIS spectroscopies. These experiments are being exported to
introductory chemistry lab courses and executed by combined groups of science
and nonscience majors. Chemistry majors, acting as peer-instructors, guide
students in executing experiments that reinforce chemical concepts. The project
supports three major objectives in a revised introductory chemistry curriculum:
cooperative laboratory interaction between students in General Chemistry, The
Chemical World Around Us, and Instrumental Analysis; rigorous demonstration of
quantitative chemical principles in relevant contexts to modern chemical
perspectives; and a challenging project-oriented laboratory experience that
facilitates peer-directed group learning. The audience for this project includes
women of traditional college age who are enrolled in introductory chemistry
courses, as well as junior and senior chemistry majors. About 45% of the
students in the Chemical World course are preservice teachers. The project
affects more than 300 students. The impact of this project is that it increases
interaction between students in the upper- and lower-division courses;
introduces women to technology-centered experiments; introduces preservice
teachers to pedagogy that will be important to them in their future classrooms;
introduces sophisticated concepts in the context of modern chemical experiments
using instrumentation; and creates peer-directed learning opportunities for
science and nonscience majors.