* 9651126
* Progressive Use of Technology in the Undergraduate          Mathematics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Adrienne Dare, Western New Mexico University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/1998
* USD 45,000.00

Students majoring in mathematics, students majoring in fields that require
substantial amounts of mathematics, or students planning on teaching mathematics
need the technological expertise to be successful in their careers. The
objective of this project is to provide a technologically enriched environment
in order to carry out activities that give students the expertise with
appropriate software for understanding mathematics, solving problems, and
accessing information through networks such as the world wide web. To carry out
this objective we are obtaining twenty computers for student use, along with
appropriate instructor equipment and printers to be included in a modern
electronic classroom. This equipment will be used in each of the targeted
courses, Calculus, Linear Algebra, Differential Equations, and Geometry, to
carry out exploratory activities and integrated projects. The appropriate use of
technology is especially important in a minority institution such as Western New
Mexico University. Students that have traditionally been underrepresented in
mathematics and science will be given opportunities to explore mathematical
ideas and problem solving in ways that allow full participation in a cooperative
learning environment. The activities and projects developed in this project will
be made available through presentations at national, regional, and local
meetings as well as through regional workshops.