* 9651246
* Introduction of Computer Technology and Instrumentation     to Science Laboratories at Florida International University - North Campus
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Milagros Delgado, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 06/30/1998
* USD 26,362.00

Florida International University (FIU) opened it's Southwest Miami campus in
1972, and a second smaller campus, the North Campus, in 1977. The proposed
project is being developed at the North Campus. We are establishing a computer
laboratory for biology and chemistry students, to purchase an absorption
spectrophotometer, specialized physiology equipment, and computer software to
enhance and expand our current laboratory curriculum. The requested
instrumentation allows us to conduct computerized experiments that will
reinforce concepts such as kinetics, equilibrium, muscle, cardiac, nerve, and
respiratory physiology, data analysis, and spectroscopy. The University has a
diverse student population of approximately 28,000 with 66% of the students
being minority. The North Campus, the site of this proposed project has the
following distribution: 35% black, 28% Hispanic, and 26% white. Our departments
are striving to stimulate early interest in science and encourage students to
pursue scientific careers. Minority students, being in the majority at this
university, would, therefore, be the beneficiaries of the proposed project. To
teach and motivate students, it is imperative to provide them with current
technology in the laboratory, a well balanced program of exciting experiments,
and facilities to increase computer science literacy. It is our belief that
implementation of this project will have a significant impact on both science
and non-science majors with the potential expansion of innovative programs to
other courses at the North and South campuses.