* 9651095
* Enhancement of Undergraduate Field and Laboratory Research  Experiences In Lake and Wetland Studies
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Robert Young, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 05/31/1998
* USD 14,689.00

This project supports an undergraduate research initiative in Lake and Wetland
Studies within the Geology Department. New equipment enhances undergraduate
field and laboratory research experiences in two new courses (Coastal and
Wetland Geology, Modern Sediments) and several existing courses. The project
provides a vibracoring rig, a rapid grain size analysis system (settling tube),
a video core logging system, and two water level float recorders. This equipment
is being used to introduce focused Lake Champlain Basin research problems into
the undergraduate curriculum at all levels. For example, the Modern Sediments
course is aimed at advanced undergraduates and should prove to be a springboard
to senior research for many of them. This course has the format of a lab seminar
course. The course meets once a week for 3 hours. Initial sessions focus on
background reading and discussion directed toward the solving of a particular
research problem. The remainder of the course is entirely made up of stating the
problem and solving it through fieldwork and laboratory analysis with the class
working together as a whole. Students collect cores and water-level data,
perform grain size analysis, video-log the cores, and describe the Holocene
evolution of lakeshore wetlands and the Champlain Basin. The ultimate goal of
the course is to produce original scientific research worthy of presentation at
a professional meeting. Introductory level courses, such as Oceanography, can
benefit as well; the class participates in the taking of a sediment core and
some very basic facies analysis to illustrate concepts of environmental change
and basic stratigraphy, providing some insight into how scientists have
deciphered the evolution of the ocean basins and large lakes such as Lake
Champlain.