* 9651061
* Enhancing Undergraduate Analytical Lab Skills Using the     Technique of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Venkat Chebolu, Jefferson Community College
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 08/31/1998
* USD 37,737.00

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a major technique for elucidation of the
structure of organic compounds. Until now, students in the undergraduate organic
classes were not able to get more than a glimpse of this methodology because of
the lack of an NMR instrument of reasonable capability. The project involves
purchase of an NMR instrument capable of proton decoupling, with a variable
temperature probe. A spiral teaching approach introduces students to NMR
techniques early in the semester and then uses the methodology throughout the
year. Understanding the structure of the organic compounds is central to a good
understanding of the reactivities and properties of the molecules. The
curriculum provides a strong correlation between the structural features
discussed in the classroom and the methodology that enables one to see it
experimentally, and it enables students to learn by discovery. Students gather
data on problems, then think them through to reach meaningful conclusions. This
pedagogy rivets student interest in lab activities and helps them develop
higher-order thinking skills, as well as analytical skills. Relating spin-spin
splitting parameters to the structure of organic molecules and studying
temperature and concentration effects on NMR spectra of compounds are primarily
used. Open-ended lab projects assess the skills developed by the students. This
project, with its use of NMR as a foundation for discovery-based learning,
serves as a model for other undergraduate organic programs, providing a
curriculum that balances creativity and structure in discovery-type labs.
Projects and examples that work well in such a format can be fine-tuned.
Specific discovery-based learning methods can be developed for dissemination in
publications such as the Journal of Chemical Education and at educational
conferences sponsored by the American Chemical Society.