* 9651155
* Paleomagnetic Laboratory Development for Use in             Undergraduate Education
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Michael Valentine, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/1998
* USD 18,742.00

This project provides funding to complete assembly of a working paleomagnetic
laboratory, which furnishes students with a practical tool with which to examine
fundamental geological problems. The lab provides an example of how real, vital,
contemporary paleomagnetic and tectonic studies are done and allows
undergraduate students to participate directly in such research. Undergraduate
students are now introduced to a number of geophysical instruments and
techniques in a freshman-level course. The instruments previously used are
mainly for looking at small-scale features and local geologic problems.
Paleomagnetism is one of the most important geophysical tools used for examining
`big-picture` tectonic processes. The ability to do paleomagnetic analyses fills
a need in this area and complements the previous geophysical program perfectly.
In addition to use by introductory-level students, the lab can be used by upper-
level geology majors as part of a well-supported, faculty-advised undergraduate
science research program at the university. The equipment fits into continuing
and proposed student research projects involving all faculty in the Geology
Department as advisors. This innovative project affords students the unusual
opportunity to be involved in a significant way in a young, rapidly developing
field of geological research.