* 9651368
* Quantitative Geochemical Laboratory Experiences in the      Undergraduate Geology Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Kenneth Sargent, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 05/31/1998
* USD 83,485.00

Furman University is currently revising its curriculum to reflect the earth
systems approach suggested by the NASA advisory council. As the earth systems
approach involves the teaching of sophisticated geochemical concepts, it is
necessary to incorporate analytical instrumentation, the process of geochemical
analysis, and data interpretation into each of the classes. This project focuses
on developing an integrated, problem-solving-based curriculum in which the
sophistication of geochemical concepts and participation in sample analysis will
increase as the student moves through the curriculum. Current research in
pedagogy indicates that (1) problem solving increases learning retention and
critical thinking ability and (2) active participation in a cooperative learning
environment will attract women and minorities into the sciences. Therefore, the
acquisition of a new, fully automated x-ray fluorescence (XRF) unit will have a
major impact on the Earth and Environmental Sciences Department by allowing
students to discover geochemical principles through integrated field and
laboratory exercises and research projects. At the introductory level, students
are being introduced to geochemical analysis through demonstration of sample
preparation and analysis, followed by interpretation of a data set from rocks
seen on previous field trips. At the advanced level, the presence of an XRF unit
in the department enables faculty to give increasingly more responsibility for
sample preparation and analysis to the students as they progress through the
major. Data collected by the students can be used to illustrate the partitioning
of elements in the Earth's crust by geologic processes such as magma
crystallization and weathering. The XRF unit can be used in nearly all courses
for majors including earth materials, advanced earth materials, sedimentary
geology, ore deposits, and a field-based course in geochemistry. As active,
participatory learning is important to the curriculum, all students participate
in res earch projects throughout their career, finishing with an independent
research project. The XRF unit enables students involved in geochemical research
to be involved in the process of research beyond data interpretation.