* 9651177
* Implementation of a Model Course for Non-Science Majors     Incorporating Modern Molecular Biology Techniques, Molecular Modeling and Instrumental Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Emeric Schultz, COMMONWEALTH UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 08/31/1998
* USD 14,510.00

The Department of Chemistry is implementing a model laboratory-based science
experience for non-science-majors. This enhancement includes the purchase of the
molecular biology components needed for the newly developed laboratory. The
initial audience for this course is made up of incoming students in the
university's Honors and Scholars program. These high-aptitude students represent
an ideal audience for ascertaining whether topical, highly interesting coverage,
usually reserved for upper-level science courses, can be presented at the
introductory level. The structure of the course highlights the laboratory
experience. This approach is novel and perhaps radical in that it approaches the
curriculum, in the area of molecular science, from the top down. The assumption
that computer modeling can support this approach is being tested. Students take
part in a cloning project in which the gene for bioluminescence is transferred
from one bacterium to another. They learn the concept of `molecular
fingerprinting` by comparing the molecular characteristics of two micro-
organisms. This fingerprinting idea is then applied to the analysis of self-
selected samples using modern instrumental analysis. It is expected that the
student not only develop an appreciation for, but also an understanding of, the
nature of science, especially the excitement that accompanies discovery. The
order of laboratory exercises specifically addresses issues related to the
development of abstract concepts from concrete experiences. The success of this
project may serve as a model for the development of similar laboratory focused
courses for non-science-majors. Such courses may have a major impact on
addressing the issue of science literacy.