* 9651026
* A Computer-Based Modern Physics Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Jorge Lopez, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2000
* USD 88,574.00

Many science and engineering students take a course on modern physics without
taking the modern physics laboratory. This exposition to the experimental
foundations of modern physics is far from adequate. To correct this problem, we
propose to add an interactive component to the modern physics class: a set of
computer exercises designed to simulate key modern physics experiments.
Simulated experiments in quantization (e.g., photoelectric effect), scattering
(e.g., Rutherford), and quantum mechanics (e.g., Stern-Gerlach) will be designed
and developed at UTEP. The simulations will give students direct control of
input variables, access to output data and to analysis tools for a rapid study
of the results. A manual will be written to accompany the software. The use of
the simulations will be tested at UTEP and New Mexico State University. The
modules will be later implemented in UTEP's modern physics course. Assessment
and evaluation of the simulations will be done at the student and faculty level
and by a consultant. Physics departments serving science and engineering
colleges will benefit from the product of this proposal. For greater
compatibility, the simulations will be developed for MacIntosh and PC systems.
In particular, community colleges and institutions with small laboratory
facilities will find the simulations useful. Implementing the teaching tools at
UTEP will greatly benefit minority students.