* 9652066
* Institute Wide Integration of Computer Based Instructional  Aids into the Science and Technology Curriculum at Caltech
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,09/30/2000
* David Goodstein, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 09/30/2000
* USD 200,000.00

The proposal requests NSF support for a newly-initiated Caltech program
designed to foster Institute-wide development of computer-based teaching tools.
These computer-based materials will be prepared on topics spanning the complete
range of technical disciplines in the physical and social sciences emhasized at
the Institute, including efforts in the physical, chemical, biological, earth,
and planetary sciences, mathematics and applied mathematics courses, chemical,
electrical, mechanical, civil, environmental, and aeronautical engineering
courses, and in economics and the social sciences. To accomplish this task,
Caltech is seizing an opportunity to involve its most valuable resource, the
skills of its own undergraduate students, intimately into the instructional
process, Undergraduate students will work closely with Caltech faculty in
developing improved visualization, computation, and communication aids for the
instruction of a broad range of technical courses at the Institute. A committee
will be established to oversee the Institute-wide teaching reform projects, and
this committee will receive student and faculty feedback, will be responsible
for dissemination of materials to the faculty and to the non-Institute
community, and will report directly to the Caltech administration and Faculty
Board regarding the success and future direction for the program. This effort
thus strives to be another Caltech-led national model for systemic reform,
having a focus on comprehensive, coordinated, Institute-wide efforts to
incorporate multimedia materials into the routine course experiences of the
science and engineering student.