* 9652791
* Aur-Och: The Origins of Speech and Gesture: An              Interdisciplinary, Multimedia Project
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,12/31/1999
* William Beeman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/1999
* USD 151,622.00

"Aur-Och: The Origins of Speech and Gesture" is the title of a CD ROM-Internet
hybrid. It is being developed by PROLARTI: The Project on the Language-Art
Interface at Brown University. It aims to offer a solution to three distinct
problems in contemporary education: (1) the widening gap between the sciences
and humanities in the academy--a problem with theoretical consequences; (2) the
subordination of visual data in the study of human behavior, not only in the
sciences but, ironically, in the humanities and social sciences, as well--a
problem with epistemological consequences; (3) and the rapid growth of content
deficient multimedia--a problem with pedagogical consequences. PROLARTI's goals
for Aur-Och are theoretical, epistemological and pedagogical. The central
theoretical and pedagogical questions around which Aur-Och will be developed are
the following: What can we learn about human communication generally by studying
speech and gesture together -- communication systems that are visual and verbal,
iconic and symbolic? What role does the voice play in communication? What role
does the rest of the body play? What role does the body play when the voice does
not or cannot play a role? How might the methodologies, data, and theories from
the various sciences (social and life) as well as the humanities help us to
understand the totality of speech-and-gesture's communicative qualities, their
biological necessities, their evolutionary beginnings, their cultural
components, their neurological constitution, their aesthetic dimensions? In
presenting the material, Aur-Och will exploit the new CD ROM and Internet
technologies. Rather than be course specific, it will be modeled as an
electronic library of multimedia "tomes". These tomes will consist of open-ended
laboratories, tutorialq, classic experiments, texts, lectures, profiles and
discussions (debates and dialogues). It is hoped that Aur-Och will appeal to a
broad national audience of university/college students and profe ssors as well
as to other learning communities. Aur-Och is scheduled for classroom beta-
testing in 1998. A final version 1.0 will follow, pending further sponsorship.