* 9652117
* Development, Deployment, and Evaluation of an               Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Curriculum Development      Testbed (UCDT)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Timothy Killeen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 06/30/2000
* USD 199,459.00

A team of professors from six schools and eight departments at the University of
Michigan (UM) proposes to build an Undergraduate Curriculum Development Testbed
(UCDT) to foster institution-wide reform of undergraduate education. The Testbed
will bring together innovative curricular elements already developed by members
of the proposing team. Specifically, the UCDT will build on the previous
experience and success in the design of interdisciplinary undergraduate lecture
courses and laboratory modules in the field of earth system science and global
change. The overall goal of the proposed work is to establish improved
methodologies for the infusion of interdisciplinary courses and materials into
the undergraduate programs of major research universities. Interdisciplinary
courses, and particularly those involving global environmental issues, will be
an integral part of undergraduate education for the next century. The
development of such a reformed curriculum faces significant obstacles that need
to be identified clearly and overcome - this is a major objective for the UCDT.
The project will provide the following: 1) further development of an
interdisciplinary courses in global change; 2) development and evaluation of
generalizable tools and templates for interdisciplinary courses; 3) will promote
more widespread deployment of interdisciplinary courses on and off campus; 4)
will assess the viability of new teaching credit schemes for interdisciplinary
undergraduate teaching. Additionally, two focused course development activities
will be completed. The first pertains to the introductory sequence "Introduction
to Global Change". These courses will be improved through the accelerated
development of computerized, multimedia laboratory modules, Internet resources,
and other lecture materials. The second involves efforts that will involve the
upgrade of the new NSF-sponsored "Global Change Laboratory" to provide well-
structured opportunities for hands-on experimental and data analysis ex
periences for undergraduates. This work will involve the development and
documentation of specific experiments to be conducted as part of formal
undergraduate course requirements, or as part of summer undergraduate research
opportunity programs. New teaching credit schemes within departments and schools
will be explored as means to provide effective incentives for improved
interdisciplinary teaching. These will be worked out with the direct involvement
of three UM deans. The Testbed activity will be subject to a continuous
evaluation carried out by the UM's School of Education.