* 9652129
* The CSUF Undergraduate Reform Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Richard Rocke, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 199,999.00

The CSUF Undergraduate Reform Initiative will address infrastructure issues
relating to the academic needs of three undergraduate populations at California
State University, Fullerton: lower- division majors in science, mathematics and
engineering (SME); upper-division SME majors; and students not majoring in those
fields. Specifically, it will address the need to retain greater numbers of
lower-division majors in science and engineering; to produce more scientifically
literate graduates from all majors and to give future teachers more confidence
in science and mathematics; and to provide graduates the skills they need for
successful careers. The initiative focuses on three areas: foundation courses,
general education and teacher preparation, and interdisciplinary enhancements
for majors. Three interdisciplinary faculty teams will lead the initiative,
participating in retreats and meeting during the academic year to plan and pilot
specific curricula and projects. The foundation courses team will explore ways
to teach mathematics so it is more relevant to science and engineering, to
introduce technology-based instruction into the classroom; and to improve
academic advisement. The general education and teacher preparation team will
explore the feasibility of an integrated lower-division communication course
tailored to the needs of SME majors and examine ways to align science and
mathematics content with national standards and to encourage SME majors to
consider teaching careers. The interdisciplinary enhancements team will explore
ways for SME majors to study business and communication and will expand
opportunities for experiential learning. The initiative will create an
infrastructure designed to produce students who are more literate in science,
mathematics and technology and better-prepared for their careers and their
responsibilities as citizens. It will direct the university away from rigid,
discipline-driven departmentalization and toward a more seamless curriculum.
Finally, it will help transform the campus culture, helping faculty to become
more receptive to change and to embrace connections with other disciplines.