* 9652061
* Institutionalization of Innovative and Effective            Instructional Reform at the University of Michigan-Dearborn
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Margaret Hoft, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

This project is addressing the issue of how to disseminate successful reforms in
instruction throughout the university and then to other similar urban
universities. Traditionally, useful techniques tend to remain with one
instructor instead of finding application in other courses. The project
institutes a process for institutionalizing effective, innovative instructional
changes originating in mathematics at the University of Michigan-Dearborn, as
well as for institutionalizing other reforms. The process includes establishment
of a "Pedagogy Forum" for all faculty and support of faculty as they adopt/adapt
new pedagogical methods ranging from non-technical changes such as use of
cooperative learning and group projects to technical use of computer software
for in-class demonstrations and "real-life" homework. Leadership that has been
provided in terms of "Commuter 26", a forum for public, urban, universities
which typically have high minority enrollments, and MDAMP, a metropolitan
Detroit Alliance for Minority Participation created with the support of NSF, is
extended to this project. The specific changes being promulgated include
integration of the software program Mathematica into the sciences beginning with
chemistry and physics, adoption of cooperative learning strategies throughout
the sciences, creation of a computer based statistics course in economics
followed by a similar course for science majors, and development of a
constructivist, hands-on sequence of laboratory experiences for non-science
concentrators which, with the addition of more material in the earth science, is
being converted to a three semester sequence of science courses for future K-12
teachers. An opportunity is being created for talented undergraduate students to
serve as facilitators of learning in introductory course recitation sections.