* 9652170
* A Team Approach to the Reform and Standardization of Core   Courses in Science and Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Constance Churchill, Oakton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/1999
* USD 199,920.00

The science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) faculty of Oakton
Community College are seeking solutions to four problems: (a) approximately one
third of students enrolled in core SMET courses do not complete the first
semester; (b) pedagogy is not always sensitive to the needs of an increasingly
diverse student audience; (c) effective strategies and resources are not always
institutionalized; and (d) core courses are frequently taught using traditional
approaches with limited use of multimedia or group activities. The project is
building on successes in the humanities, nursing, and honors courses. Oakton is
developing a team approach to examine, revise, identify, and develop objectives,
resources, activities, teaching strategies, and assessment tools for core
courses in chemistry, biology, and mathematics. Each sequence of courses is
being studied by an interdisciplinary team of 7 to 11 members comprised of full
and part time faculty and assisted by students, business representatives,
alumni, and students. The team approach to curriculum development is
establishing an institutional process to extend course reform across multiple
sections taught by diverse faculty. The new pedagogy includes more attention to
the interdisciplinary nature of science, the needs of traditionally
underrepresented groups, the use of technology, discover approaches to learning,
critical thinking, and problem solving skills. The teams are each preparing a
core sequence Guide that defines the reformed courses. Team members are
implementing the reforms and then fine-tuning the Guides. They then serve as
mentors, working with other faculty members to implement the reforms. This
project is resulting in improved core courses in science and mathematics.
Because the problems being addressed are widespread, particularly in the
community college sector, the project is significantly impacting the way science
and mathematics is taught at Oakton and serving as a national model.