* 9652883
* Antarctic Science and Policy:  Interdisciplinary Research   Education (ASPIRE)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Rosanne Fortner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/2001
* USD 269,548.00

Science education should be designed to promote critical thinking, problem-
solving skills and creativity. In this context, Antarctic Science and Policy:
Interdisciplinary Research Education (ASPIRE) will involve students in a
creative educational environment where they will learn by refining questions;
designing and implementing self-directed projects; and contributing to group
decision-making efforts. ASPIRE will be developed over 2 years as a model
capstone course for Earth system science curricula which are emerging in
universities across the nation. Each student in ASPIRE will become an
"ambassador" for the purpose of developing and negotiating recommendations which
will be presented in writing and orally in Mock Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meetings. Interactive multi-media courseware will be designed to help students
enhance their inquiry skills. Additional student-teacher interactions will be
facilitated through the World Wide Web site which will be upgraded at the Byrd
Polar Research Center. An Advisory Committee will be established to ensure that
ASPIRE will be successfully designed, implemented, evaluated and disseminated.
Evaluation will be ongoing throughout the project to ensure that ASPIRE (1)
employs appropriate pedagogical theories and practices, (2) contributes to
student knowledge gain, and (3) fosters creative information seeking and
decision-making. Beyond introducing the unique fusion of international and
interdisciplinary science in Antarctica, ASPIRE will help students develop the
Socratic skills which are inherent to learning and thriving in our increasingly
complex society.