* 9652955
* Engineering and Science Modules in First Year Calculus      Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Paul Ossenbruggen, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 08/31/1999
* USD 28,895.00

The calculus curriculum is being augmented with a series of self contained
engineering and scientific modules into the laboratory sections of the first
year calculus course. These modules are specifically designed to challenge
students and require them to apply basic principles and develop mathematical
descriptions of physical systems. These modules are unique in that they will be
presented by engineering and scientific faculty with the purpose of
demonstrating how calculus is a vital aspect of the curriculum. The advantage of
the proposed approach is that it offers a method to present real applications
and be able to accommodate large student to faculty ratios. The exercises
associated with each module are designed so that students are required to employ
spreadsheets on computers in the resulting analysis. This allows the use of real
data (with noise), but it also requires a minimal amount of technological
sophistication on the part of the students. The proposed method is specifically
designed to accommodate large student to faculty ratios. While many programs
have been designed to introduce applications and modeling to students, a vital
component of any addition to the curriculum is the ability to be effectively
implemented with a minimal amount of resources. Each module consists of an
introduction into a basic physical system and concentrates on the application of
a basic principle (for example, conservation of energy or momentum). By design,
the modules offer an effective method to present open ended, applied problems
and do so with a minimal amount of resources.