* 9652147
* The New Science Project: An Introductory Science Reform     Effort
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Charles Duke, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 07/31/1999
* USD 196,883.00

The New Science Project was developed by a team of faculty and administrators in
response to the recognition that too large a number of students from
traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences were entering Grinnell
stating a desire to have science majors, but ultimately leaving science. These
students were academically talented; they graduated, but not in science. There
was also strong advisory support in developing and encouraging these efforts
from the Trustees and a special Presidential advisory committee of alumni. This
group of Trustees and alumni, who are science graduates, have actively supported
these activities by coming to Grinnell and speaking with students, as well as
with financial support. A clear indicator of the support received by the
Trustees is their decision to go forward with the $15.3 million renovation and
the expansion of Grinnell's science facilities, which they agreed was necessary
in order to physically accommodate the curricular and pedagogical changes in the
science division. The New Science Project is an integral part of a larger
division-wide reform effort by Grinnell's science faculty and administration
which includes making significant changes in teaching methodologies and the
curriculum, coupled with the renovation and expansion of the science facilities.
The larger science program reforms promote collaborative learning and foster the
communication and the interchange of ideas central to a vital community of
learners. In order to achieve this Grinnell's science faculty are introducing
significant change in both pedagogy and in content. By coupling creative thought
with experimentation, we hope to make the study of science an intrinsic part of
the liberal arts education at Grinnell. The New Science Project seeks to make
the study of science accessible to all students and to increase their chances of
success. While the reforms which the Project has and will introduce are
options/services available to all students, we have targeted those students who
are traditionally underrepresented in the sciences. To encourage these students,
we have developed a multi-disciplinary program that includes curricular reform
experiments in all five science departments, a pre-orientation program for
invited students prior to their freshman year, and opportunities for early
research experiences. Curricular reforms consisted primarily of one-credit
workshop/laboratory courses parallel to the four-credit introductory courses.
Now in its third full year of operation, assessment of the program has
identified directions for further improvement. Workshops and seminars in
Biology, Chemistry, and Mathematics were definitely needed, but were not
affecting enough students, and needed better coordination with the introductory
course; and students needing extra assistance in introductory courses had
limited resources. Curricular reform projects, have emerged to meet these
curricular needs and supplementary student assistance resources will be
provided. This proposal to the NSF seeks support for the second generation of
reforms as part of Grinnell College's New Science Project. We propose
development of completely revised introductory courses in Biology, Chemistry,
and Math. The Physics Workshop series, introduced under the first phase of the
New Science Project, will continue throughout the project. We also propose the
coordination and expansion of student tutoring and mentoring services through a
new Science Learning Center.