* 9652051
* Mathematics-Engineering-Science Core Program for Students inNon-Technical Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Brad Osgood, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 200,000.00

All college students today need a broad baseline of science and mathematics to
become full contributors to U.S. society. For students with concentrations
outside the technical areas, being cut off from scientific knowledge undermines
their ability to understand important aspects of the modern world and to act as
responsible citizens. Stanford University proposes to develop a core course in
Engineering, Mathematics and Science for students in the non-technical majors.
The goal is for students to have a serious encounter with essential processes
and ideas in mathematics, engineering, and science, with an emphasis on process.
The program will consist of several year-long tracks taught by interdisciplinary
teams of faculty. Each track will have a lab component. The tracks allow for
disciplinary focus, but will have in common a collection of key ideas from
science and technology. The mathematics in the course will be developed in
context and to support the study of scientific and technical problems. Computer
technology will also be incorporated as an important tool. To elicit faculty
interests a (university) RFP describing the course and inviting proposals to
design and teach a track was sent to the faculty last year. As a result there
are now three tracks under development to be offered next year for a period of
at least three years. The tracks are: Planet Earth, The Heart, and Light in the
Physical and Biological World. The RFP process will be repeated to bring new
faculty and new tracks into the program.