* 9652861
* Engineering Interfaces
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Byron Gottfried, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 11/30/1999
* USD 150,000.00

Our goal is to better prepare engineering and business undergraduates for the
highly technical professional challenges of the 21st century. We wish to
instill, from the start, a broad-based understanding of the profession they are
about to enter, a spirit of entrepreneurship, and an ability to adapt to a world
where intense competition will require changing career paths. We will do this by
developing a two integrated courses which focus on engineering's interfaces with
society and the professional workplace. These courses will utilize active
learning methods and will be broken into modules to facilitate export. These
courses will both fill gaps in the engineering curriculum and provide students
from other disciplines with the core of technically oriented concentrations
which should serve them well in future endeavors. They are in response to
deficiencies that we and others have identified and which parallel needs laid
out in recent landmark reports on engineering education's future by the ASEE,
NRC and NSF, and which are epitomized in ABET 2000. We build upon our prior NSF
sponsored projects, augmented by the results of other NSF funded studies to: 1.
Develop Engineering Interface Courses: a. The Essence of Engineering: The
Relationship between Analysis and Design: In this first year course, students
will learn how to apply the principles of engineering analysis to engineering
design problems. Each design problem will be practical in nature and require
substantial analysis to resolve. b. Balancing Cost, Schedule and Risk: This
third year course will provide an appreciation of risk and ethics in order to
resolve trade-offs among technical effort, time and risk. An emphasis will be
placed on examining well-known engineering failures to understand why they
occurred and how future potential malfunctions might be avoided. 2. Assess and
Evaluate: Conduct a rigorous assessment and evaluation of these courses through
development, pilot and implementation stages, with particula r attention devoted
to reducing attrition by better meeting students' expectations of educational
value, relevance, and quality. 3. Disseminate: A primary form of dissemination
will be the preparation of text books and materials which to facilitate export
and adaption at other engineering settings. Material will also be disseminated
via conference presentations and the internet.