* 9652063
* Creating a Research-Rich Curriculum:  A Model for Lifelong  and Continuous Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* William Rauckhorst, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 200,000.00

Miami University proposes a systemic project to convert current research-based
educational initiatives into an expanded and comprehensive model program of
`research-rich`' undergraduate education at the University. The proposed project
is part of the national undergraduate research movement, and will contribute
important concrete outcomes to the growing base of that movement. Specifically,
the project will produce: 1) a model science curriculum in which research-rich
inquiry-based learning permeates the curriculum, and in which students are
encouraged in a mode of learning appropriate for their lifelong learning, 2) a
model infrastructure in which students and faculty are carefully prepared for,
and supported within, a variety of undergraduate research experiences, and 3) an
expanded set of undergraduate research opportunities, including
interdisciplinary group projects. These aspects of a model program will be
disseminated to other institutions through presentations at national meetings
and publications. In addition, the project will initiate an ambitious
longitudinal study of student research participants' development as independent
learners. We propose to measure the latter development, and believe that the
results will be of national importance and interest. This project builds upon
significant research-intensive educational undertakings at the University,
namely: 1) a distinctive new undergraduate research initiative, the Miami
Undergraduate Summer Scholars Program; 2) an academic-year undergraduate
research grant program; 3) numerous inquiry-based learning projects; 4) honors
program thesis projects; 5) `capstone experiences` required by our new liberal
education program; and 6) summer research participation funded by the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute and NSF. In the Undergraduate Summer Scholars Program,
one hundred students from twenty-five departments participated in full-time
summer (1995) research with faculty mentors. An evaluation has shown that the
program produced educational experiences which were rated overwhelmingly by
participants as `more significant than other educational experiences`. This
proposal to the NSF would enhance and evaluate research-intensive education
throughout the science curriculum within the Departments of Physics, Chemistry,
Microbiology, Botany, Zoology, Psychology, and Geology. In view of the
centrality of the project to the University's mission, substantial cost sharing
is committed.