* 9652782
* Efficacy of Active Learning in Remediating Misconceptions in Undergraduate Physiology
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Harold Modell, Physiology Education Research Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 59,331.00

How can physiology faculty best help undergraduate students correct
misconceptions and master physiology? This one-year pilot project is the first
step in a broader research program that involves faculty at 11 institutions and
is designed to examine three elements critical to answering this question: 1)
the entry state (i.e., misconceptions held and the knowledge and skills base of
entering students); 2) methods that promote active learning (i.e., help students
test and modify their mental models); and 3) the definition of mastery. This
pilot project is examining the entry state and the active learning environment
of the student laboratory. The context, respiratory physiology, is a subject
known to be difficult for students. Our undergraduate student population is
science and non-science majors taking introductory physiology at 2- and 4-year
institutions. To study the entry state, we are: 1) determining the actual
knowledge and skills that entering students have and examining how these match
faculty expectations; 2) identifying common misconceptions and determining their
prevalence among entering students; and 3) determining the extent to which
students view physiology from a teleological perspective. We will also determine
if the design of student laboratory protocols is important in helping students
correct misconceptions and adopt a mechanistic approach to physiology. Students
will participate in a traditional "wet lab", in which they do spirometry on one
another, or in a computer laboratory, in which they manipulate a mathematical
model of respiratory function. For each lab format, students will follow either
the common "observe and record" type of protocol or one requiring them to
predict the results of a perturbation before conducting the experiment. Our
hypothesis is that the "prediction" design will be more effective than the
"observe and record" design. This project will yield essential information about
the actual entry state of students in a prototypical science course and w ill
provide information about the most effective way to remediate misconceptions and
teleological thinking in a student laboratory setting.