* 9653438
* Faculty Scholarship:  Combining Excellence in Research and  Innovation in Physics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/1999
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1999
* USD 131,000.00

The project is holding a Summer Conferences on Faculty Scholarship: Combining
Excellence in Research and Innovation in Physics Education. This two-week long
conference will be held in the summers of 1998 at Harvard University and be open
to about 35 participants. Priority will be given to young faculty, faculty who
teach (or will be teaching) introductory physics, and women and minority
faculty. The goals are to: 1. Help narrow the gap between the research and
education communities in physics; 2. Introduce faculty to educational
innovations that can be readily implemented; 3. Develop curricular materials for
a new approach to teaching introductory physics. The conference will include
presentations on leading edge research and educational innovation, workshops on
educational technologies, and group work on curriculum development. Research
talks will be by members of the faculties of Harvard University and MIT, with a
preference for faculty who are not only active in research but also have an
interest in education. For the presentations on education we will draw from a
broader national pool of speakers. An important criterion for these talks will
be that the pedagogies, innovations, or educational technologies presented must
be ready and easy to implement at the participants' home institutions. The
participants will receive detailed materials to take home. Lastly, to make the
participants stakeholders in the process of educational innovation, they will
collectively work on the development of tutorial worksheets, conceptual
questions, and a variety of problems for a new conservation-law based curriculum
for introductory physics. A number of activities are planned to evaluate, and
follow up on, the conference.