* 9653733
* Quantitative Reasoning Across a Core Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Louise Hainline, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/2002
* USD 200,000.00

Brooklyn College is uniquely qualified to revitalize undergraduate education
with bold initiatives in mathematics and science learning. It has developed a
number of successful math/science programs for majors in teacher education and
in the sciences. The goal of this project is to build on these past initiatives
to promote the development of quantitative reasoning skills in the undergraduate
population at large. The College's nationally-recognized, ten-course Core
Curriculum requires that every student complete 4 semesters of laboratory
science (physics, chemistry, biology, geology), in addition to mathematics and
computer science; nonetheless, we find that many students are unable to transfer
quantitative concepts from one discipline to another. Faculty in such diverse
areas as the physical and biological sciences, economics, business, computer
science, psychology, sociology, and linguistics observe that exploration of
higher levels of knowledge in their disciplines is diminished as a result of
students' lack of quantitative reasoning skills. Our solution to this problem is
an "across the curriculum" project in which quantitative concepts are being
systematically linked through core courses in mathematics, natural sciences, and
social sciences. The method of freshman block programming is being used to
facilitate coordination among cohorts of students who are being exposed to
hierarchically structured quantitative material. Faculty meet to develop and
refine curricula that emphasize constructivist principles of teaching, including
hands-on laboratory experiences. Peer tutoring provides an essential academic
support network. The overall aim is to create an institutional culture which
affirms the central importance of quantitative learning not only to the
sciences, but to the entire liberal arts curriculum. Evaluations concentrate on
performance outcomes and changes in faculty and student attitudes. To facilitate
the program serving as a model we will disseminate curricular materials, p
rogram descriptions, and evaluation results through a capstone conference,
professional meetings and publications, and the World Wide Web. The results will
be of wide interest to those concerned with science and mathematics education at
all levels.