* 9653193
* A New Paradigm for Curriculum Development and Dissemination:The WWW Earth Resources Educational Site (ERES)
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* James Myers, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Ridky
* 12/31/1999
* USD 181,067.00

In light of the World Wide Web's unique capabilities, this project proposes to
create the Earth Resources Educational Site (ERES). This site will incorporate:
1) multimedia presentations (virtual field trips, interactive Java models, 3D
interactive models) that illustrate resource mathematical concepts, scientific
principles and issues; 2) interactive "real-time" case studies; 3) teacher notes
illustrating successful ways of incorporating these case studies in Earth
science classes; and 4) Web bulletin boards for resource and instructional
discussions. To create this active Web site, a Development Team is assembled to
create the interactive Web programming. Web components will be tested by a Beta
Team consisting of college Earth science instructors from around the nation.
These instructors will attend workshops on ERES, use the site in their classes,
conduct beta testing of the site components for the Development Team and help
create the case study teacher notes. By disseminating knowledge about ERES and
creating a Web network of users, the ERES project intends to: 1) illustrate the
importance of Earth resource issues for modern societies; 2) promote
communication between Earth science instructors; 3) use WWW multimedia
presentations to enhance the learning experience; 4) promote the use of case
studies in Earth science classes; and 5) improve the critical thinking, problem
solving, quantitative reasoning and computational skills of a wide range of
students. On a more general scale, it hopes to show that the World Wide Web is
an effective means to disseminate course and curriculum development efforts.
This proposal represents an attempt to explore the many possibilities of the WWW
with respect to education. Although teaching resource sites are available on the
Web, they do not utilize a large portion of the Web's capabilities. ERES is
being designed so that it is engaging and informative and competes with the best
business and entertainment sites on the Web. Some of the techniques proposed
have been tested in a preliminary but limited manner at the University of
Wyoming and Lewis-Clark State College. An expanded test of the effectiveness of
Web instruction will be accomplished through a compelling Web site, developed by
a team with the necessary design skills, technical abilities, dedication as well
as time and resources. Techniques being developed for Web instruction during
this project are intended to be readily transferable to other sciences. The
socially relevant nature of the topic, abundant opportunities for engaging
multimedia presentations, potential for wide-spread and ongoing dissemination
and adaptability suggest that this project could have important implications for
the way the Web is used in future course development projects.