* 9653397
* Digital Signal Processing and Applications
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1997
* Rulph Chassaing, Roger Williams University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1997
* USD 31,000.00

Digital signal processors, made possible through advances in integrated
circuits, have added a new element to the environment of digital signal
processing (DSP). They have found their way into a number of applications
including communications and controls, graphics, instrumentation, speech, and
image processing. These processors are found in cellular phones, modems,
automotive and security/identification systems, noise cancelers, etc. They have
emerged as a response to the ever-increasing number of real-time DSP
applications. This workshop addresses the need to add or integrate DSP
techniques into courses such as Digital Signal Processing, Controls, Signals and
Systems, etc. It will combine both the lecture and laboratory components of DSP,
with a special emphasis on the laboratory component to provide the participants
valuable hands-on experiences. While a theoretically oriented DSP course can be
found at a more convenient location to the participant, the strength of this
workshop is derived from its laboratory emphasis. The faculty participants will
implement a wide range of experiments and mini-projects such as finite and
infinite impulse response filters, adaptive filters, and the fast Fourier
transform using both simulation and real-time techniques. DSP tools and
techniques will be provided to the participants who will quickly realize how
software and hardware experiences can be used to motivate their students. They
would then be able to integrate these software and hardware experiences at their
home institutions.