* 9653381
* Broadening Horizons in Mathematics Instruction through      Technology and Applications
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* William Jaco, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1999
* USD 203,156.00

This proposal is broadening the horizon of mathematics educators in the region
and in the nation through the production of twelve workshops, four during each
of the summers from 1997 through 1999, for college faculty. The workshops are
focusing on technology and applications in undergraduate mathematics. Each
summer features a one-day overview workshop, a three-day workshop on calculators
in undergraduate mathematics emphasizing applications in entry level
mathematics, a three-day workshop on computer algebra in undergraduate
mathematics with participation by professional engineers showing working
applications of mathematics, and an Internet workshop which enables participants
to learn about all forms of electronic communication and facilitates
establishment of their own presence on the Internet. Each of the three-day
workshops accommodates 25 participants. Of particular note is the involvement of
secondary school teachers in the workshops, and recruitment strategies and
workshop activities that target faculty involved in pre-service teacher
preparation courses and programs. Additionally the project is hosting two three-
day conferences during the summers of 1998 and 1999 on the applications of
computer algebra systems to education and research in the mathematical sciences.
The research portion of the conferences is supported by Oklahoma State
University. These conferences feature a strong interaction among mathematics
educators and researchers.