* 9653266
* Introductory Course on Earth Science and Environmental      Justice
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Jill Schneiderman, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 05/31/2000
* USD 80,474.00

This proposal requests support for development of an introductory course on
earth science and environmental justice. The goals of the new course will be 1)
to interest African American and other students of color in earth science and to
attract them to a geology major, 2) to help all students in the course
understand the relevance of earth science to social justice issues, and 3) to
offer all students in the class the opportunity to partake of a rigorous, hands-
on science course in which students really "do geology." This new course, "Earth
Science and Environmental Justice," will be part of both a geology major and a
major in African Studies at Vassar College. Furthermore, it will be developed
into a five-week intensive summer course for the Exploring Transfer program at
Vassar College. A group of 3 students, African-American, white and Hispanic-
American, will work with the PI during the summer of 1997 to design the course,
which will be offered for the first time during fall semester 1997. Students who
helped develop the course will become teaching assistants and tutors during the
first year that the course is taught. One of the goals of the course will be to
develop a nucleus of minority students who are well-trained and interested in
geology. The course will be evaluated and revised during the summer 1998 and
offered again during the fall of 1998. The intensive summer course for Exploring
Transfer, a program to transition community college students into four-year
colleges, will be taught during June and July 1998. Students who take this
course will not simply memorize facts related to earth science and environmental
justice. Both the semester-long course and the summer intensive will be designed
as a laboratory- and field-based experience; it will offer prospective geology
majors and non-science majors alike a rigorous, hands-on experience in science
and an opportunity to think creatively about the underlying geologic context for
environmental justice issues. T he semester-long course will be designed to have
a maximum enrollment of 30 students.