* 9653029
* Looking Into Mathematics: A Visual Invitation to            Mathematical Thinking
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1997,05/31/1999
* Wallace Feurzeig, BBN Systems & Technologies Corporation
* Continuing grant
* Richard S. Martin, Jr.
* 05/31/1999
* USD 204,275.00

Many undergraduates are turned off by mathematics. Their feelings about
mathematics veer between negative and hostile, between overwhelmed and
dismissive. As a consequence, they are not only missing something in their
private lives: as citizens, they are less equipped to evaluate many significant
developments in humanity's changing relationship to the physical and social
world. Our objective is to engage and sustain students' interest in mathematics
by genuinely involving them in mathematical thinking. If some go on in
mathematics or science, so much the better. We do not, however, seek so much to
recruit mathematicians as to make friends of mathematics. We will develop
instructional materials, activities, and software tools in an interactive,
visual, experimentally-oriented curriculum that conveys the spirit and flavor of
modern mathematics emphasizing a variety of key and central perspectives (such
as local/global, intrinsic/extrinsic, dynamic/static, discrete/continuous, and
algebraic/geometric). We will enable semi-rigorous interactive experimentation--
both manual and virtual--with a rich variety of complex, interesting
mathematical objects like curves, surfaces, linkages, knots, and braids.
Students will explore these areas using new visual tools that are both powerful
and empowering. The audiences targeted by the project include, especially,
first-year college students who do not intend to major in mathematics or
science, and future mathematics teachers. Pilot sections will be taught at
Brandeis Universitiy, Harvard University, Clark University, and the University
of Massachusetts, Boston. We will develop materials with a view to their use in
a wide variety of colleges and universities, either in introductory mathematics
courses or for enhancement of existing courses. Both text and software will be
made freely available for adoption and dissemination.