* 9653034
* Interactive Multimedia for Developing Ciritical Thinking in Biology Based on the New Benchmarks Curriculum Model
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Daniel Lemons, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 10/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

Human Anatomy and Physiology (A&P) education today is constrained by three
realities: 1) the area of coverage as defined by the standard texts is large and
expanding, 2) in- depth understanding of even one body systems takes
considerable time and skill to develop and 3) most students are poorly prepared
for the kind of learning that generates in-depth understanding. In our current
CCD project we have developed a new Benchmarks Curriculum which addresses these
facts. It has become apparent that there is significant interest in our
curriculum, but many instructors find departing significantly from the standard
A&P curriculum difficult because they cannot offer adequate forms of support to
their students. Commercial text books have tended to set the de facto curriculum
standard in A&P because they are the major learning support resource. This
standard entails extensive but superficial coverage. Now, multimedia CD-ROM's
are emerging as the central ancillary resource to the textbooks. Their design,
however, is heavily influenced by the curricular model of the textbooks. We are
proposing a new multimedia resource because we would like to use the power and
appeal of this new medium to help instructors break away from the traditional
curriculum and choose an alternate pathway. Our new Benchmarks Curriculum is
such an alternative, fostering the development of in-depth content mastery along
with the critical thinking and problem solving skills students need to
successfully apply their A&P knowledge. Without good multimedia support, many
students will probably be unable to obtain those skills. We believe this project
has the potential to greatly amplify the impact of our new NSF supported
Benchmarks Curriculum. The project has developed formal ties with the CUNY
project in teacher preparation, an NSF Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher
Preparation. Workshops will be conducted for faculty to help them incorporate
modules produced into courses designed for or including students who are
preparing to be teachers. NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)