* 9653194
* Environmental Science, Technology and Decision Making
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Indira Nair, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2002
* USD 174,622.00

The general objective of this curriculum development project is to prepare
material and a curriculum for teaching environmental issues to a wide range of
undergraduate engineering and science students. The curriculum will include: a)
modules that can be incorporated into individual disciplinary courses, and b) a
complete curriculum for a self-contained course including a text. The specific
components of the project have the following objectives: 1. To develop teaching
material that uses a project-based approach to understand the principles in
science, engineering and policy that affect environmental decision-making. The
materials will include: a) case studies using decision-making contents, b) team
projects of realistic environmental issues, c) role-playing exercises that
emphasize decision-making. 2. To demonstrate - teach and evaluate - the
materials at two institutions: These institutions are Rose Hulman Institute of
Technology (RHIT) and Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). The courses and student
groups will include: a required course for all civil engineering juniors as a
first introduction to environmental engineering (at RHIT); science and
engineering students pursuing an environmental engineering minor (at CMU); and,
a core course for environmental studies minors (students from all majors,
including fine arts, humanities and social sciences, science and engineering at
CMU). 3. To evaluate the outcome of this project-based teaching approach. This
demonstration will include detailed evaluations by students as to benefits of
the approach for learning and interest, changes needed for future courses of
this kind, and what the possible effects may be on future careers/lives. Both
formative and summative evaluations will be conducted during the project. We
will also conduct evaluations pre-course, and post-course, and continue the
evaluations after graduation for those students who took the demonstration
courses - 2 years, and 5 years after graduation. A pilot workshop involving a
few fa culty will be used as part of this evaluation. 4. To prepare a handbook
of the methods used in this curriculum for dissemination. In addition to the
curricular materials, we will prepare a handbook of methods including the use of
team projects and cooperative learning, concept maps and influence diagrams.
This will be used and revised during the pilot faculty workshop