* 9653692
* Institution-wide Reform of SME&amp;T Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Frederick Humphries, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract: requested in this proposal will allow Florida A&amp;M University to
initiate institution-wide reform of the SME&amp;T curricula. The President of
the University will serve as the principal investigator. Day-to-day activities
will be directed by the project director, who will be an Associate Vice
President for Academic Affairs. The project director will interface with the
Deans, department chairs and faculty and students for the implementation of the
proposed activities. The principal investigator will receive advisory directives
from the curriculum reform committee, consisting of the faculty representatives
from various sectors of the university community. The specific activities to be
implemented with funds from this project include: 1. the development of a multi-
disciplinary general science course that uses an integrated cooperative
instruction model incorporating an inquiry format. This course will be developed
initially as a one semester sequence, and expanded in the second year to a two
semester sequence. This two semester sequence will satisfy the general science
education requirement for the core curriculum (for non-science majors), 2. the
implementation of a structured faculty professional development program that
will enable faculty to utilize the current technological advances to enhance
their teaching skills, 3. the development of innovative methods of delivery of
SME&amp;T instructions that include ample use of current technology to transform
the learning process from a passive activity to one in which the students are
active participants, 4. the implementation of the experimental reform activities
that are initiated in this effort as a wedge to modify current teaching
practices of all faculty at the university. Upon completion of the reform
described in this proposal, it is expected that FAMU graduates will: 1.
understand the uniqueness of the natural world and appreciate the relationship
between life and the universe, 2. b e technically informed citizens who can
engage in intelligent discussions about science and technical topics, 3.
understand and utilize science related processes and principles to navigate the
throws of everyday life, 4. adapt to and become comfortable with the constant
changes that result from the development of a more technological society, 5.
become talented and creative scientists and engineers for the 21st centry, and
serve as creative enthusiastic teachers who convey the excitement of science to
the next generation of citizens.