* 9653261
* The CAES Strategy for an Urban University
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Carlos Robles, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 04/30/2001
* USD 153,394.00

The proposed work would expand the implementation and dissemination of a
successful strategy to foster interdisciplinary research perspectives among
undergraduates at an urban university. Results from a prior NSF CCD award showed
how to respond to challenges from 1) nontraditional students with weak academic
skills, 2) widespread environmental degradation, 3) employers seeking graduates
with multidisciplinary and highly technical skills and 4) a compartmentalized
university curriculum. This program is called Cognitive Apprenticeships in
Environmental Studies (CAES) as students practice their understanding in the
content of its professional use. A series of exercises are placed throughout the
traditional science curriculum. Although in disparate courses, the exercises are
unified by 1) a focus on a specific, local environmental catastrophe and 2) the
exchange of samples and data collected by students. In effect, students in
different courses become part of the same, interdisciplinary research team
investigating problems that potentially affect their lives. To these experiences
are added student participation in internship programs, advisement services and
other activities that build a student community aware of environmental science.
Proposed activities emphasize 1) development of more course materials, 2)
broader implementation in the curriculum, including modules in courses for
nonmajors and future teachers, and 3) wider dissemination of the CAES strategy
through presentations at professional societies and Internet publications. A
strategy is devised to address changes in the social, academic and biological
communities of Los Angeles, but many other institutions of higher education are
experiencing similar changes and would benefit from wider dissemination of our
efforts.