* 9653114
* Development and Assessment of Multimedia for "Motor         Workshop"
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Sheri Sheppard, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 02/29/2000
* USD 100,000.00

A multimedia-based title and curricular plan that supports learning about DC
motors across a range of learning stages will be designed, developed, and
assessed. The multimedia piece will be called Motor Workshop. Prospective users
range from freshman physics students to masters-level engineering students. The
subject matter will be sub-fractional horsepower DC electric motors. This
subject is relevant in a variety of technological fields including physics
students learning about electricity and magnetism, electrical engineers learning
about circuit analysis and design, and mechanical designers seeking the proper
motor to drive a particular device. We have begun working with the instructors
of the Stanford courses that introduce engineering undergraduate students to DC
motor to define the learning objectives related to motors in their particular
course. All are enthusiastic about the prospect of enhanced materials being
available to them and their students on motors. The next step in our work with
the course instructors is to develop a preliminary curricular plan. The
resulting understanding of the particular needs of the various courses and a
vision of how multimedia-based curriculum might be used in each course will in
large part form the basis for designing and developing the multimedia title.
Other major sources of input during this planning phase will be recent work in
the Education, Human Computer Interface Design, and Cognitive Science
communities. The resulting software title, Motor Workshop, will be a
comprehensive and scaffolded information resource pertaining to all aspects of
small, DC motors. By scaffolded we mean that concepts will be presented in a
graduated manner so that they build in depth and complexity. The architecture of
Motor Workshop will allow a more mature student to enter at a more advanced
level, but will allow her to return to more basic materials if she finds the
need for review. Motor Workshop will include terminology and first principles of
physics which will explicate the basic function of motors, concepts of torque,
speed and power, issues of circuit design, explanations of the basic function of
motors and circuit design, determination of critical motor specifications and
the choice of a motor based on these data, and recommended subclasses of motors
for particular applications, possibly with catalog data embedded into the
software. Motor Workshop will be developed with input from the core instructors
at Stanford University. In addition, it will be distributed to engineering
faculty at Arizona State University (Prof. D. Evans) and University of Texas
(Prof. K. Wood) for them to evaluate its portability to other institutions.
Using a variety of assessment techniques that we have had experience with,
including pre- and post-test performance comparisons, questionnaires and
videotaped observation (VIA), we will attempt to prove our hypothesis that
computer-based information resources can be developed which will have a positive
effect on the learning environment of a wide developmental range of students.
This is not the first multimedia title that this group has created. Three other
titles (Bicycle Dissection, The Electric Drill Stack, Linkages) were developed
in order to enhance the resources and points of view scripted into the
curriculum. These title are consistently being used in our undergraduate
curriculum. The proposed DC motor title will built upon the lessons we learned
from assessing students working with Bicycle Dissection, The Electric Drill
Stack, Linkages over the last two years.