* 9653736
* The Integration of Science and Mathematics Laboratories intoa Humanities Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Helen Lang, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 190,093.00

In collaboration with nine members of the Departments of Biology, Chemistry,
Engineering and Computer Science, Mathematics, Physics and Psychology, the
Philosophy Department at Trinity College is currently developing laboratories
attached to philosophy courses and modeled on those traditionally found in
science departments. These laboratories develop specific problem-solving skills
and techniques in mathematics and science associated with philosophy, including
problems in physics, astronomy, biology and engineering as well as mathematics,
including geometry, algebra, and calculus. Our goal is to develop literacy in
mathematics and the sciences within a humanities setting and for humanities
students, who will not otherwise achieve such literacy. These laboratories
provide an excellent means of achieving this goal. (1) Historically, philosophy,
mathematics and science have always been intrinsically related, e.g., physics
was often called "natural philosophy" and current work in theories of
consciousness is closely related both to developments in neuroscience and in
A.I. (2) A major part of philosophy's task as a discipline is to account for the
successes and failures of mathematics and science. Laboratories, jointly
designed by philosophers, scientists and mathematicians, develop specific
problem-solving strategies central to mathematics and science, while philosophy
classes examine the theoretical accounts and justifications of these strategies.
Thus, laboratories and courses each retain their disciplinary integrity while we
develop the intrinsic relation between them.