* 9653203
* Multilayered Learning Program for Problem-Based Learning    Classrooms
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Harold White, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2000
* USD 56,876.00

Problem-based learning (PBL), an effective educational strategy mainly used in
medical and professional schools, can address many of the perceived deficiencies
in undergraduate education. By working on real-world problems in small groups,
students learn content in a context that motivates the higher order thinking
skills often neglected in traditional pedagogy. Furthermore, the PBL approach
accommodates a variety of learning styles, backgrounds, and abilities. In the
medical school model, each student group has a dedicated expert tutor - a
student to faculty ratio impractical at most colleges and universities. To deal
with this challenge, and as part of a more general program of curriculum reform
to introduce PBL into undergraduate classrooms, we propose to extend our pilot
experiences with use of upper-class undergraduates as tutors/group facilitators
for the problem-solving process. We plan to develop and document a new course in
Tutorial Methods of Instruction to support this middle layer of a multilayered
program (the overlapping contributions of faculty, graduate and undergraduate
peer tutors, and students) for PBL. In addition to providing the means for using
problem-based instruction at the introductory level (where it can have the
greatest impact in subsequent learning) the program will provide a natural
progression for attracting good students to teaching careers, and will allow
them to gain an overview of their chosen major as a culminating experience prior
to graduation. For students in the PBL courses, these upper-class tutors will
assist with the often difficult transition between the learning culture and
expectations of the high school versus college experience, particularly as they
relate to the novel challenges of PBL. Documentation of the program will include
an instructional manual, a professionally produced teaching video, and both
short and long-term evaluation at each layer of the program. Dissemination will
be achieved through publication in education journals, presentati ons at
professional meetings, and workshops at our established annual conference on
problem-based learning that includes precollege teachers.