* 9653121
* Making Biology Laboratories Effective Learning              Environments For Students With Disabilities: A National     Model For Undergraduate Instructors and Grades 7-12 School
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2002
* Michele Wheatly, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 04/30/2002
* USD 585,000.00

This proposal addresses the problem that students with disabilities in grade 7
through university do not have equal access to biological laboratories leading
to under representation in life sciences. The goal is to develop resources that
can be used nationally to assist biological educators in designing appropriate
laboratory exercises for students with disabilities. The objectives are: (i) to
develop a Source Book to assist educators in creating effective learning by
students with disabilities in any latural/physical science laboratory (ii) to
develop adaptive laboratory manuals in Biological Sciences (iii) to train
biological educators (college and grades 7-12) in the use of the Source Book and
adaptive laboratory manuals. The proposed methods are: (a) Resources will be
developed by project coordinators, educators, students and external consultants.
Resources will be tested by educators in the field, and refined before
dissemination. (b) Biological educators will be trained in the use of the
resources by attending a 2 week summer workshop and participating in a Field
Test year at their home institution. Selected educators will develop leadership
skills to enable them to train other educators. The special audience targeted by
the project are educators of students with disabilities from 7th grade onward.
The significance/impact of the proposed project is that students with
disabilities will be better prepared in laboratory biology starting in 7th grade
which will increase their representation in life science. Disseminable products
of this grant will be the Source Book (applicable to any experimental science),
subject specific adaptive laboratory manuals for Biological Sciences, and
trained human resources. The project will be evaluated internally, externally
and within the academic community.