* 9653262
* An Innovative Modeling Approach at the Freshman/Sophomore   Level
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1997,11/30/2001
* Silvia Heubach, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 11/30/2001
* USD 121,366.00

This is an innovative project establishing an interactive modeling course at
the lower division level for culturally diverse students. The course will focus
on the modeling process using examples based on (systems of) difference and
differential equations. The first part of the course will introduce basic
terminology and background necessary for continuous models: the notions of
derivative as rate of change and as slope of the tangent line. With this
background students can derive model equations and qualitatively analyze the
solution using slope field and phase plane graphs created by Mathematica. The
course will be taught in the Macintosh laboratory, using Joy of Mathematica as a
user-friendly, menu-driven interface to Mathematics. In the second part of the
course, students will work on applications from biology, chemistry, economics
and physics. Collaborators from these disciplines will identify "standard
models" based on difference and differential equations with interesting
applications from their area of expertise. These models will be implemented as
interactive Mathematica texts; a library of models will thus be created for
student exploration. Students will present their final projects at a poster
session. The emphasis of the proposed course on visual components for
understanding will make it possible to offer the course as a lower division
course. The course will be aimed at students with weak mathematics background
who would not take the advanced courses needed for a traditional modeling
course, science majors in preparation for modeling applications in their
disciplines, and prospective teachers in preparation of a curriculum based on
the NCTM Standards. Students should leave the course with a solid understanding
of the modeling process, improved critical thinking and writing skills, and an
appreciation of the importance of mathematics for modeling across the
disciplines. It is our hope that they will be less intimidated by mathematics,
and view mathematics as an integral part for their understanding of the world.