* 9653140
* Formation of a Claremont Colleges Intercollegiate Program   in Neuroscience
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Richard Lewis, Pitzer College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 03/31/2001
* USD 209,862.00

The Claremont Colleges propose to develop a six college intercollegiate,
interdisciplinary neuroscience program. At the core of this program, a new
interdisciplinary, introductory neuroscience course will be developed that
focuses more on the fundamental neuroscientific issues from a philosophical,
historical, and methodological point of view than is typically the case. We
argue that this approach will be mutually beneficial to the general education
student, the potential major in neuroscience, and individuals who have been
underrepresented in science. Students will emerge from this course with a better
understanding of how science progresses and will be better prepared for a
general understanding of future scientific developments, if they do not major in
neuroscience, or for advanced coursework in neuroscience, if they decide to
major in neuroscience. In addition to the introductory course, new upper
division courses will be developed within two tracks, representing the principal
division in neuroscience today: cellular-molecular and cognitive neuroscience.
Students selecting to major in neuroscience will elect to specialize in one of
the two tracks, which will include several courses in common. We will also
develop a senior capstone course that will include seniors from both tracks.
This course will bring faculty and students together to reconsider fundamental
issues raised in the introductory course, but from a more sophisticated vantage-
point. A significant part of the proposed program will involve opportunities for
students and faculty to work with pre-college students and teachers to develop
science education in elementary and secondary schools, which we expect will also
encourage college students to consider careers in education.