* 9660075
* SBIR Phase I:  Mitigation of Coke Deposits on Heat Transfer Surfaces Via Ion Implantation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* David Warren, Harvest Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,028.00

*** 9660075 Warren This project investigates ion implantation for modifying the
properties of commercial metal alloys to mitigate the growth of catalytic coke
which forms on critical heat transfer surfaces during many important high
temperature processes including ethylene cracking, heavy oil refining, partial
oxidation and substoichiometric combustion. These coke deposits are generated as
byproducts of thermal cracking reactions and diminish heat transfer rates,
thermal efficiencies, and reactor product yields. Work will focus on ion
implantation of selected periodic elements, such as alkali/alkaline earth,
phosphorous and aluminum, into commercial alloys to suppress coke formation by:
( I ) promoting the gasification of carbon, (2) altering the catalytic activity
of metals for the formation of carbon radicals, and (3) impeding the process of
carburization. Ion implantation offers a more durable method for treating
critical heat transfer surfaces competed to conventional coating techniques such
as electroplating and plasma spraying because it is less prone to cracking and
delamination under extreme thermal environments. In Phase I, the coking rates of
ion beam implanted metal coupons will be compared against data for conventional
alloys under industrial thermal cracking conditions to assess the effectiveness
of this technique. Phase II work will focus on use of emerging ion implantation
techniques to allow application to more complex geometries including the inside
of commercial furnace tubes. Ion implantation of selected elements to mitigate
coke deposits on high temperature metallic surfaces can significantly improve
the operating economy and life of heat transfer equipment subjected to thermal
cracking conditions. Commercial applications will include treatment of thermal
cracking furnace tubes and burner components. ***