* 9660520
* SBIR Phase I:  Application of Hybrid Foil-Magnetic Bearings for High Speed Turbomachinery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Vladimir Polyshchuk, CHO-BRA Engineering, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research phase I project will develop a new type
of `hybrid foil/magnetic bearing` with associated control systems. The concept
is based on the combination of the technology of the magnetic bearing with that
of the foil bearing, the latter acting in an auxiliary or enhancement role.
Actuators incorporated in the foil bearing will allow active control of the foil
to: (a) retract during normal magnetic bearing operation, (b) increase the load
capacity of the entire support system during operational transients or peak load
situations, (c) assist the magnetic bearing in passing through rotor critical
speeds during start-up and coast-down while still maintaining small clearances,
(d) act as a stand alone during magnetic bearing failure , and (e) lock-up the
shaft to avoid damage to the magnetic bearing when the system is not powered.
Other innovative features of this research are: the use of either gas (e.g. air)
or liquid fuel as a bearing lubricant, (b) the use of similar control action in
both the magnetic and foil bearings, (c) the use of piezoelectric actuators for
high bandwidth control of the motion of the foil. Phase I of the research will
be a feasibility study using both numerical simulation and experimental testing
on the existing components. A test rig will be constructed and run for testing
and verification of the concept. The results from this phase will be a) a
reliable simulation and design algorithm, b) experimental knowledge base
regarding the operation of the foil and magnetic bearings in tandem, as well as
individually, c) the design of a preprototype, for experimentation in Phase-II,
and d) the initiation of strategic alliances with industrial partners. If
successful, the hybrid bearings should find wide market applications in jet
engines, compressors, turbopumps, and other rotating machinery. In addition to
its capability of reducing power loss and wear, the hybrid bearing also has
excellent potential for supporting systems that experience repeated extreme
transient loadings.