* 9660752
* SBIR Phase I:  Tunable Tailored Filters for High-SensitivityChemical Detection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Robert Lieberman, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,994.00

This project will demonstrate a new class of optical devices that will form the
heart of a low cost, versatile, field usable environmental monitoring system to
be developed in Phase II. Specifically, Physical Optics Corporation will
fabricate and test a solid state filter tailored to precisely match the spectral
characteristics of target compound(s), either gaseous or liquid, in the near
infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The filter will be easy to mass
produce, small, and quite durable, and it will be capable of having its optical
spectrum modulated in a straightforward, cost effective, way. The use of such
novel devices will allow the near infrared `overtone` optical absorbance bands
of many gases of environmental and industrial importance, including so called
`greenhouse effect gases` and primary air pollutants, to be monitored remotely
with rugged, compact systems either in situ or remotely via optical fibers.
These detectors will have the extremely high specificity and sensitivity of
systems based on modulation/correlation spectroscopy but without the need for
expensive wavelength tunable laser diodes or bulky `reference cells` filled with
target compounds. Chemical detectors based on tailored modulatable solid state
filters will be of great commercial value in remote monitoring of environmental
contaminants, chemical process control, oil exploration, mine safety, and other
applications where high sensitivity detection of target compounds must be
accomplished under less than ideal conditions. Tailored filters can also be used
for a wide variety of other applications, from instrument calibration to custom
illumination.