* 9660101
* SBIR Phase I:  Design of a New and Improved Print Reading    Machine for the Blind
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Deane Blazie, Blazie Engineering, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 960101 Blazie This Small Business Innovative Research Phase 1 project will
test a new design of a print reading machine for the blind and ultimately
replace the 25-year-old Optacon reading device for which manufacturing and
support has been discontinued. Blazie Research, Inc., together with its
consultant team, responding to extensive interest among blind consumers, will
investigate the feasibility of a new reader improving on Optacon functionality
through the application of current technologies. The research target is a
reading aid that is easier and quicker to learn to use. Such a reading aid will
also make feasible faster reading speeds, be less expensive, and have an
expanded range of uses. This research effort has the potential of creating a new
hybrid audio/tactile/haptec tool to allow students, especially in the sciences
and mathematical studies, to explore and understand symbols and graphics and
spatially arranged text. The research plan will test modifications to the
tactile images to make them easier to read, using image processing algorithms
for improving letter quality and letter spacing. The work plan will apply new
technologies for building the tactile array envisioning the "comb" array
structure of Piezo Systems, Inc. as a promising development for lowering the
cost of manufactured goods. Strategic advantages for blind readers will be
tested by Blazie Research, Inc. through accessorizing the reading aid for the
classroom and the market place. The proposed new reading aid for the blind will
facilitate improved reading speeds, and has expanded potential as a new hybrid
audio/tactile/haptec tool to enable reading mathematical symbols and graphics.
The reading aid fills the void for immediate access to print materials by the
blind reader in a variety of settings and in almost any language. Blazie
Engineering, Inc., in concert with the newly formed research company, Blazie
Research, Inc., expect to test, productize, and manufacture the new device and
present it for sale to a worldwide market of visually handicapped consumers. ***