* 9660670
* SBIR Phase I:  Design of a Spatial Decision Support System  for the School District Planning Problem
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* David Lemberg, Isera Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,862.00

*** 9660670 Lemberg In an era of decreasing funding for school construction and
increasing student enrollment, school district administrators are faced with
many complex and sensitive decisions. For example, in California alone, it is
estimated that the deficit in school-related funding necessary to provide
adequate classroom space that meets the minimum state standards has risen to $12
billion. The School District Planning Problem (SDPP) may be defined as how to
manipulate school district site capacities and attendance boundaries to
optimally manage school district resources over the long term. The problem
becomes more complex when further constrained by the fact that district
administrators must deal with the political feasibility of alternative
solutions, evaluating parameters such as cost, travel distance, student
disruption, class sizes, class scheduling, diversity, contiguity, etc. Each
school district has a set of objectives, constraints, and priorities unique to
the community. To assist school districts with this complex problem, this Small
Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be carried out by Isera Group,
Inc. proposes to develop a comprehensive Decision Support System (DSS) for the
generation of alternative feasible solutions to the SDPP. The DSS will provide a
platform by which both the decision makers and interested parties (teachers,
parents, students, and community members) may collectively formulate parameters
and models, generate alternatives, and evaluate potential solutions. To
complement such functionality, the proposed DSS will support protocols for
communication or integration with existing geographic information systems (GIS),
computer aided design systems (CAD), and student information systems (SIS). The
aim of this project is to implement a Decision Support System for school
district facility planning and enrollment management. The system will allow
groups of school district decision makers across the nation to generate locally
feasible long-rang e alternatives for district enrollment and site management,
provide large cost savings in construction and/or building leasing costs, and
reduce the frequency and severity of politically unpopular boundary shifts. ***