* 9660207
* SBIR Phase I: Modern Design and Engineering Education in the Agile Engineering World
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* David Japikse, CONCEPTS ETI, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9660207 Japikse This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to
be carried out by Concepts ETI, Inc. seeks to enhance teaching effectiveness for
the design process in mechanical engineering education. Effective teaching of
design poses a problem for universities. Advanced design is an object-based
discipline, whereas conventional courses are subject -based. The skill of the
designer lies in applying knowledge and creating something which did not exist
before. A designer must be able to judge the technical and economic worth of a
design. Class problems, however, that test or reinforce knowledge have a unique
solution. Design skills are required by industry because it is only by means of
continuous design improvements that industries can remain globally competitive.
The investigator, three other university partners and a 12-university advisory
panel will cooperatively introduce realistic design features into engineering
education via the development of an advanced product for environmentally
friendly transportation applications. The manifest goal is to design a hybrid-
electric gas turbine automotive power plant. The project creates an advanced
design-based learning environment at a variety of universities; educational
tools and methods not currently available; a template for similar programs for
other disciplines; a viable engineering product of social and environmental
value; and a bridge for education and design between universities and industry.
This project proffers new computer based courseware design teaching tools for a
variety of U.S. engineering universities in an historically strong, but
currently weak, engineering field; namely, turbomachinery. The project will
result in the development of a new hybrid electric gas turbine power plant with
production in the commercialization phase of the project, and the approach lays
the groundwork for a teaching model applicable to other design disciplines. ***