* 9660335
* SBIR Phase I:  Fast Flow Control in High Speed              Communications Networks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* ChiMan Kwan, Intelligent Automation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,637.00

*** 9660335 Kwan This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
describes a new approach to flow control in high speed communication networks
which can significantly reduce the packet delays. In many networks, even the
traffic is routed optimally, there are situations where the total traffic into
the network is much larger than the network can handle. If no control strategies
are present to limit the traffic into the network, queue sizes at bottleneck
links will grow and packet delays will increase which may violate some maximum
delay specifications for voice and video signals. The flow control problem is
first treated as a fluid-flow dynamic system with time delay. Based on the
model, we propose a flow controller that can generate some predictive
information about the future queue length in the system. This predictive
information is crucial to the success of the flow control scheme since it
guarantees that the time delay of packets will not go unstable. Thus the maximum
time delay performance criterion can be assured. In addition, the new flow
control method can also maintain certain throughput of the system which is very
important in applications such as video distribution. A new type of neural
network called Fuzzy CMAC (Cerebellar Model Arithmetic Computer) is also
proposed to predict the total information delay and the channel disturbance. The
outputs of the Fuzzy CMAC will be passed to the flow controller to enhance the
performance even further. The new flow control method can guarantee the maximum
packet delay criterion and can also maintain a desired minimum throughput of the
system which is very important in applications such as video distribution.
Another advantage is that the controller is very easy to implement. The proposed
algorithm should find many applications in broadband ISDN and ATM networks. ***