* 9660570
* SBIR Phase I:  Synthesis of New Conjugated Polymers for     Stimulated Emission of Light
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Qibing Pei, UNIAX Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,932.00

*** 9660570 Pei Recently, stimulated emission from polymer light-emitting
materials and devices has also been of considerable interest. Based on new
results demonstrating both polymer light emitting diodes ( LEDs) in microcavity
geometries and photo-pumped stimulated emission using luminescent conjugated
polymers, attention has now focused on efforts to realize electrically pumped
polymer laser diodes. These efforts are hindered, however, by the fact that the
luminescent conjugated polymers which have been the subject of the most intense
investigation lack either sufficiently high photoluminescent efficient or
carrier mobility (or both). In other candidate polymers, self-absorption, photo-
induced absorption, or electro-induced absorption at wavelengths in the emission
region prevents any stimulated emission. In this Phase I proposal, the synthesis
of a series of luminescent conjugated polymers as candidates for evaluation
against well-defined criteria is outlined. The polymers will be processed into
high quality thin films for use in the fabrication of polymer light-emitting
devices or to investigate photopumped stimulated emission. Optoelectric devices
based on "plastic" semiconductors promise efficient, low cost devices which
mimic the function of inorganic semiconductors but enjoy the benefits of being
made of plastic: easy processing , mechanically flexible and durable. The market
for the compact coherent light sources is large and growing. ***