* 9660741
* SBIR Phase I:  Solvent Production from CO, CO2 and H2 in    Waste and Synthesis Gases
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* George Sperl, Bioengineering Resources Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1997
* USD 74,999.00

*** 9660741 Sperl It is expected that the Clean Air Act of 1990 will
significantly restrict, and perhaps prohibit, the use of many industrial
solvents. The emphasis thus shifts to the production of environmentally benign
or "green solvents", which may be synthesized from current petrochemical sources
or derived from renewable resources. Solvents may be produced biologically from
the components of synthesis and waste gases. Preliminary studies in the
laboratories of Bioengineering Resources, Inc. have resulted in the
identification of bacteria which produce butanediol and n-butanol from CO and
H2. The purpose of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be
carried out by Bioengineering Resources, Inc. is to obtain CO-utilizing bacteria
from natural sources capable of producing solvents form CO, CO2, and H2. The
project will focus on bacterial cultures that produce individual ketones or
diols, but also will include alcohols, such as isopropanol or isobutanol, if
superior cultures for alcohol production are found. Isolates from natural
inocula will then be developed for the ability to produce ketones and diols. The
best organisms will be studied in continuous culture to define reaction
kinetics. The design and economics of a commercial facility will be projected to
determine technical and economic feasibility. The next phase of the project will
seek to optimize the biological process by performing advanced culture
screening, reactor, and process analysis studies. The proposed technology has
commercial potential because it would simultaneously constitute a response to
environmental pressures and meet the solvent demand. That is, if this technology
for the production of "green solvents" from waste gases or from municipal solid
waste (MSW) by gasification and fermentation is successful, it could help to
alleviate the problem of MSW disposal while at the same time producing
industrial solvents such as butanediol and n-butanol. ***