* 9660085
* SBIR Phase I: Municipal Waste Fuels for NOx Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* William Seeker, Energy and Environmental Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,994.00

*** 96-60085 Seeker This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will study utilization of waste fuels for effective control of nitrogen
oxides pollutants. For many years, municipal solid waste (MSW) has been
typically landfilled or combusted with emission of toxic compounds. The problem
of MSW utilization is twofold: a huge waste stream and the loss of the fuel
energy content. Another environmental problem faced by the power generation
industry involves controlling flue gas emissions from coal fired boilers.
Specifically, the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments mandate a 2,000,000 ton per year
decrease in nitrogen oxide emissions. An innovative technology for utilizing MSW
as a means of control would provide solutions to the environmental problems of
waste disposal and air pollution. Furthermore, the net cost of waste fuel is
low, and thus such a technology would have great economic benefits. Phase I will
investigate firing carbonized refuse derived fuels, specially prepared from MSW,
by utilizing innovative advanced reburning (AR) technologies. Based on kinetic
modeling and experimental studies with natural gas, novel concepts are available
to improve the conventional reburning process to over 90% nitrogen oxide
emissions control. The integration of AR technologies with waste fuel will offer
electric utilities a low cost option for effective control of these emissions.
Other commercial utilization is expected in the MSW disposal industry where
salable by-product fuels will alleviate some of the economic burden imposed by
this massive waste stream as well as reduce landfill requirements. ***