* 9660272
* SBIR Phase I:  High Efficiency Diamond Micro-Cold Cathode   for Electron Field Emission
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Chenyu Pan, Materials and Electrochemical Research Corporation (MER)
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** ABSTRACT 9660272 Pan This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will develop a novel and high efficiency diamond micro-cathode and micro-cathode
array by synthesizing and depositing nanocrystalline diamond thin films on
conductive micro-fiber ends through a unique chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
process. Diamond has recently emerged as a promising electron field emission
cathode due to its unsurpassed electron field emission properties of low voltage
and room temperature operation, operation robustness, simple design, and
reproducibility. However, the present diamond cathodes are microcrystalline
diamond thin films deposited on macrosubstrate (mm to cm size) by a conventional
diamond CVD process. These microcrystalline diamond cathodes have been recently
identified to have the following drawbacks. Only 1-10% or less of the diamond
cathode surface is active and contributes nearly all the current produced,
resulting in an overall low emission efficiency. The distribution of the
minority populated active emission sites is also random and uncontrolled. The
electron emission from each individual emission site can not be independently
controlled either. These drawbacks are expected to be overcome by the
development of this novel nanocrystalline diamond micro-cathode by the
demonstration of significantly improved field emission efficiency, very high
current density at low operation field, controlled emission performance and
emission pattern. The successful completion of the Phase I program will result
in the development of a new generation diamond field emission cathode. The
significantly improved efficiency, high available current density at low field,
flexibility in emission control and emission pattern, operation robustness, and
simple fabrication are expected to benefit a large variety of vacuum-electronic
applications ranging from flat panel displays, TV and computer screens, aircraft
vision displays to high energy accelerator physics. Because of the high
efficiency, the cost of the new diamond cathodes will also be substantially
reduced. ***