* 9660475
* SBIR Phase I:  Recovery of Platinum Group Metals from Spent Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,10/31/1997
* William Hughes, Dakota Alpha, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 10/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

This program addresses the feasibility of a process to recover three platinum
group metals including platinum, palladium and rhodium, and rhenium from spent
catalysts. The catalysts to be treated will include spent automobile catalytic
converters and petroleum refining catalysts. The technology is based on a
hydrometallurgical technique using halogen salts. The process is inherently
environmentally benign since the reaction takes place in a completely enclosed
autoclave. Furthermore, the chemicals used in the process will be continuously
regenerated and recycled resulting in very little solid or liquid disposal. In
Phase I the following key factors essential to the success of the new process
will be evaluated: (i) the optimum extraction conditions, (ii) solid liquid
separation after dissolution, and (iii) separation of individual metals after
leaching. The results will be related to Phase II (continuous pilot tests for
handling of 20 kg a day process) and Phase III (commercialization for handling
of 1 2 ton a day process operation). The proposed technology is designed to be
compatible with existing technologies by saving energy by 80% and also by an
environmentally benign process. The number of units using this technology
operated in the U.S. by the year 2010 is estimated to be 56 and the calculated
energy savings by this technology would be over $100 million. The estimated
waste savings in the same year is 300 million pounds and the estimated job
savings would be over $100 millions.