* 9660255
* SBIR Phase I: Optical Pattern Recognition and Phase-        Encoded Biometerics Data
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Zeinab Sabri, Technology International Incorporated of Virginia
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** ABSTRACT 9660255 Sabri This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project involves research on development and application of optical data
acquisition system, I/O devices, optical data analysis and recognition, derived
from basic concepts in optical physics in innovative ways to problems in
security, credit cards, identification cards, protection of computer chips, etc.
Specifically, an optical security system embodying phase-encoding will be
conceptualized as encryption means in conjunction with biometric measurements,
with the general objective of production of an automatic tamper-proof security
system, which cannot be defeated by application of the rapidly advancing
computers, charged coupled device (CCD) technology, image processing hardware
and software, printers, scanners, and copiers, which can provide real-time
validation and security verification of individuals, and which can be extended
to verification of objects, documents, etc. In Phase I, various concepts will be
developed with emphasis on the use of retinal scanning. A trade study will be
performed to select a feasible concept for future implementation. The concept
will be rapidly prototyped for a proof-of-concept experiment, for feasibility
evaluation of the proposed concept, and for providing a preliminary design and
demonstration plan for Phase II, which will involve development, building, and
testing of a brass-board model of the optical security system. The commercial
market is desperately in need of a simple, inexpensive scheme to stem the $2
billion fraud rampant in this sector. In addition, there are ample military uses
in entry into secure or sensitive areas, and the verification of parts, such as
computer chips purchased by the government. It is very likely that phase-encoded
encryption schemes could solve both these problems. ***