* 9660769
* SBIR Phase I:  Computerized Algal Identification System     (CAIS)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Ann St. Amand, PHYCOTECH INC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,990.00

*** 9660769 St. Amand This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will implement a novel Computerized Algal Identification System (CAIS) to
automatically identify, measure and enumerate algal taxa. Algae are sensitive
indicators of stress in our national waters, yet algal data is difficult and
expensive to obtain. Producing reliable data requires experienced technicians to
spend hours per sample with results varying widely due to differences in
methodology and training. The approach for this project unites an experienced
algal ecologist with experts in image analysis to build a system initially
capable of differentiating 11 genera. CAIS will incorporate automated microscopy
and image analysis to analyze cell shape, color (pigment), texture (cell
content) and size. Permanently mounted samples provide physical archives, solve
orientation problems and retain characteristics necessary for identification and
enumeration. Digital image and data archives enable process monitoring, strict
classification accountability, and interactive expert evaluation. CAIS will
significantly reduce processing time over current methods and ultimately
increase laboratory capacities while decreasing measurement costs, and thus
overcoming existing cost barriers to algal monitoring. CAIS is versatile and
extensible to other taxonomic groups as well. Universities, government agencies,
municipalities and consulting firms comprise a market conservatively estimated
to generate over two million samples annually. ***