* 9660948
* SBIR Phase I:  Thermal Atomic Nitrogen/Hydrogen Source      for Molecular Beam Epitaxy Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,10/31/1997
* James Greer, PVD Products, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 10/31/1997
* USD 74,989.00

*** 96660948 Greer This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will
investigate the efficacy of a thermal source of atomic nitrogen and hydrogen for
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) applications. Both of these species are useful in
the deposition of many electronic, optical, and tribological materials.
Presently plasma sources produce about 1% N1 or H1, but also yield an equal
number of energetic ions which can be undesirable during the growth of materials
like GaN by MBE. Furthermore, the ability to monitor the atomic gas flux would
allow closed-loop feedback control greatly improving the deposition process. The
project will characterize the efficiency of our thermal source for producing
both N1 and H1 and this source should yield up to 10 % N1 and over 60 % H1 with
atomic fluxes at the substrate surface in excess of 1 and 5 x 1015
atoms/cm2/sec, respectively. We will incorporate this source into an MBE system
to grow and then characterize high quality GaN films. Finally, we plan to
conduct a study of potential techniques which might be used as an in-situ
monitor for N1. Our thermal N1/H1 source has many advantages over conventional
plasma sources including a higher atomic flux, lower contamination, and does not
produce ions. A high flux thermal N1/H1 source will increase the growth rates of
high quality MBE GaN material by about an order of magnitude. GaN will be used
in a variety electro-optic applications including blue lasers and LEDs and will
create many new opportunities itself. Furthermore, it is also expected that this
source will be quickly incorporated into many other physical vapor deposition
processes for the growth of cBN, C3N4, and/or low temperature diamond materials,
to name a few. Each of these materials themselves may enable new or emerging
technologies and generate opportunities for many US companies. ***