* 9660631
* SBIR Phase I:  Preparation of Ultrapure Aluminum Nitride    from a Preceramic Lewis Acid-Base Adduct Synthesized in an  Ambient Temperature Chloroaluminate Molten Salt
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Michael Carter, Eltron Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,995.00

*** 9660631 Carter This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project
addresses the bulk synthesis of aluminum nitride (A1N) precursors utilizing
acid-base chemistry in an ambient temperature chloroaluminate molten salt. The
molten salt is composed of a mixture of aluminum chloride (AlCl3) and
trimethylphenylammonium chloride (TMPACl) which forms a liquid
tetrachloroaluminate below room temperature. AlN precursors will be formed as
Lewis acid-base adducts containing 1:1 ratios of Al to N. Precursor
stoichiometry will be fixed by the inherent nature of the Lewis acid-base
interaction between nitrogenous bases such as ammonia and hydrazine and
heptachlorodialuminate, the predominant Lewis acid in acidic melts. The proposed
approach differs from those relying on formation of a polymeric precursor in
that it will result in easily handlable solid preceramic materials of the exact
stoichiometry required in the final product. The preceramic material is prepared
such that no carbide or oxide contamination is introduced into the final
product. The proposed technology for production of bulk aluminum nitride in
highly pure form will find use immediately in electronics applications, where
A1N is used as a heat dissipation medium and substrate material. It is also used
in non-electronic applications, e.g., evaporation boats. Annual production of
A1N was approximately 120-130 tons in 1993. A substantial driving force exists,
therefore, to find alternative, cost-effective methods to produce this material.
***