* 9660306
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Calcium Phosphate             Microcarriers as Suspendable, Mitogenic Substrates for      Mammalian Cell Culture Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* L. Brian Starling, Advanced Materials Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 96-60306 Starling This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will develop a method for producing a novel form of a calcium phosphate (CaP)
ceramic microcarrier for use in anchorage-dependent mammalian cell culturing
applications. The developed microcarrier will be biomimetic in substance and
will be fabricated in the form of a hollow microsphere in the size range of 1.0
to 3.0 mm. with wall thicknesses that result in a sintered density in the range
of ~ 1.02 to 1.04 gins/cc. The CaP microcarrier beads must be sintered to
function as a suspendable microcarrier for anchorage dependent cell cultures.
The proper mixture of ceramic hydroxylapatite, tricalcium phosphate, and
porosity phases in the microstructure provides the mitogenic and non-toxic
property of the CaP substrate as unique features for mammalian cell culturing
applications. Specialized fabrication methods will be explored for developing
hollow microspheres. The use of mitogenic CaP substrates can offer several
advantages for mammalian cell culturing applications. As a result of this
program, the availability of mitogenic CaP substrates in a suspendable form has
great potential to revolutionize the production of high volume cell cultured
products of significant commercial value. Suspendable microcarriers for
anchorage-dependent mammalian cell cultures will be used in large quantities for
the production of cell-derived pharmaceuticals in bioreactors. This product
addresses the rapidly expanding markets for monoclonal antibodies and
genetically engineered bioproducts. This form of CaP substrate affords the
opportunity of growing multi-cell thick layers of cells that maintain their
phenotype over extended time periods for harvesting high volume biological
products. ***