* 9660146
* SBIR Phase I: Investigation of Novel Genetic Resource for   Rootworm Resistance in Corn
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,07/31/1997
* Mary Eubanks, SUN DANCE GENETICS
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/1997
* USD 58,951.00

*** 9660146 Eubanks This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
investigate transfer of rootworm resistance to corn via novel germ plasm. Corn
rootworm, Diabrotica spp., is the most expensive insect pest of corn. Combined
yield loss and pesticide treatment costs exceed $1 billion annually. Larvae
hatch from eggs deposited in soil and feed primarily on corn roots. Root damage
from larval feeding causes lodging, affects water uptake by the plant, and
frequently causes up to 50% reduction in grain yield. Tripsacum dactyloides, a
wild relative of Zea mays, is resistant to corn rootworm larvae. However, plant
breeders have not been able to utilize resistance from Tripsacum effectively
because corn-Tripsacum hybrids are male sterile and almost completely female
sterile. This problem can now be circumvented by a hybrid between eastern Gama
grass and diploid perennial teosinte (Tipsacum dactyloides Xzea dipoloerennis),
that is fully fertile and cross fertile with corn. Developed by the principle
investigator and referred to as Zea indiana, this hybrid is a genetic bridge
that provides unprecedented opportunity to utilize beneficial Tripsacum genes in
corn improvement. Preliminary bioassays testing corn lines pollinated by Zea
indiana indicate: (1) rootworm resistance is transferred to corn via this novel
hybrid; (2) the effect is a combination of antibiosis and tolerance; (3) there
is a gene for resistance that segregates in accordance with Mendelian ratios.
Statistical analysis in bioassays to verify resistance inheritance and DNA
analysis to characterize molecular markers associated with resistance will
provide necessary data to document feasibility of this novel genetic bridge to
confer rootworm resistance to corn. Results will further elucidate the mode of
action and mechanism for inheritance of rootworm resistance. If results confirm
preliminary findings, a new approach to utilize genes from the wild relatives of
corn for improvement of commercial corn line s will be confirmed. The
introduction of a high level of resistance to corn rootworm, a major pest of
corn, will have significant commercial potential in reducing the need for
chemical pesticides and increasing corn production. This approach promises to be
broadly effective, economically advantageous to farmers, and environmentally
safe. ***