* 9660681
* SBIR Phase I:  An Ultra-Fast Signal Integrity Analyzer for  Multi-Layer Electronic Packages and Boards
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Raymond Chen, Sigrity Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 96-60681 Chen This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
determine scientific, technical, and commercial merit and feasibility of
developing an ultra-fast signal integrity analyzer for multi-layer integrated-
circuit chip packages and printed circuit boards. Ever increasing integrated-
circuit transition speed and packaging density have posed severe challenge to
electronic packaging designs. Accurate signal integrity analysis necessitates
electromagnetic field simulations to be performed together with circuit
simulations. Existing general-purpose commercial electromagnetic tools are
unable to provide timely and cost effective solutions for practical electronic
packages. This project will investigate a novel method that would be orders of -
magnitude faster than conventional general-purpose tools in performing
electromagnetic simulation in electronic packages. With the new technique,
three-dimensional electromagnetic fields in multi-layer electronic packages are
decomposed into several most significant modes, and each mode of field is solved
with special fast algorithms. The proposed signal integrity analyzer integrates
the fast electromagnetic field solver with transmission line and circuit solvers
so that interactions between packages and IC chips are automatically taken into
account. Applicability of the technique and feasibility of the proposed signal
integrity analyzer for real-world packaging structures are to be investigated in
this project. It is anticipated that the technique described in this proposal
can dramatically reduce the electromagnetic field simulation time and lead to
commercial signal integrity tools that can provide timely and cost effective
means for the evaluation and design of electronic packages and printed circuit
boards. Such signal integrity tools are crucial for emerging high-speed
electronic systems, and should have significant and immediate impacts once they
are commercially available. ***