* 9660598
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost High Quality Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* T. Jan Hwang, NGIMAT CO.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 08/31/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** ABSTRACT 9660598 Hwang This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will demonstrate the ability of Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition
(CCVD) technology to inexpensively deposit high quality reproducible YSZ, doped-
LaGaO3 and other thin films for use in fuel cells, oxygen sensors, and other
applications. Candidate solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) materials, such as YSZ,
doped-LaGaO3, doped-LaCrO3, LSM and Ni-YSZ, have been deposited by thin and
thick film techniques. However, many traditional thin film technologies are
subject to certain limitations, such as the requirement for high vacuum chambers
and line-of-sight limitation, which restrict their commercial viability for
SOFCs. The ability to address these limitation and deposit low cost, high
quality, fuel cell thin films at moderate substrate temperatures without post
deposition treatment is essential for the wide spread commercialization of fuel
cells. With the CCVD technology, high quality SOFC materials can be deposited at
a 90% cost reduction and at twice the deposition rate of traditional CVD.
MicroCoating Technologies (MCT) has shown that CCVD processing does achieve
epitaxial, phase pure, dense, smooth coatings of YSZ and DLC materials, and
porous, conductive, columnar Ni-YSZ and LSM. Additionally, BaCeO3, Pt and
multilayered YSZ have been deposited by MCT. During this Phase I research, thin
films of SOFC materials will be grown and the processing apparatus will be
scaled up. In Phase II a small scale, commercial prototype for stacked SOFCs up
to 20 cm across, with power density near 1 watt/cm2, will result from this
effort. Low cost, high quality YSZ, DLC, Ni-YSZ and LSM films for SOFCs stacked
cells producing power densities of 1 watt/cm2 are desired. The commercialization
of stacked SOFCs in vehicles and portable power generation would be achieved by
utilizing thin films to increase power density 10 times per units volume and
mass. These high power densities position SOFCs to capitalize on a potential
mult i-billion dollar industry, and at the same time offer significant
environmental advantages. ***