* 9660827
* SBIR Phase I:  Connecting to Data
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1997
* William Finzer, Key Curriculum Press
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/1997
* USD 74,954.00

*** 9660827 Finzer This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be
carried out by Key Curriculum Press proposes to prototype and test software
tools and curriculum resources for teachers and students to engage in data
exploration, collaborative data gathering, and analysis among remote sites. The
new curriculum materials and Internet-based software tools will be integrated
with the DataSpace (TM) computer learning environment for data analysis and
statistics. The new software will give learners direct access to data on the
Internet, eliminating the downloading and importing processes. With DataSpace,
teachers and students will be able to publish new data sets on the Internet with
a defined level of access read, add--to, or modify--by others. The prototype
curriculum materials will provide classroom-based examples of how to use these
new capabilities. Finally, the project will draft standards for storage of data
sets on the Internet and begin discussion of such standards among interested
organizations. The proposed research will lead to significant enhancements to
the DataSpace Software and additonal curriculum materials, all of which will be
of great utility in the rapidly expanding secondary school statistics market.
The new curriculum materials based on networked collaboration and exploration of
timely, remote data sets will be very attractive to teachers as they will
provide highly motivated methods for teaching mathematics and statistics. ***