* 9660771
* SBIR Phase I: Novel Nanomagentic Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* John Steinbeck, NANOSCIENCES CORP
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 96-60771 Steinbeck This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project
will produce a new magnetic materials system which would revolutionize
integrated magnetic and magnetoelectromechanical devices. The materials system
uses the shape anisotropy of nanorods to engineer the magnetic properties of
bulk magnetic materials. Using the shape anisotropy the magnetization of
Supermalloy nanorods can be made to lie normal to the plane of a thin film.
These vertically magnetized films can be used for a wide range of applications
as planar integrated inductors, transformers, microwave circulators and
electromagnetic cores. The nanorods are buried in an insulating matrix which
will allow metallic nanorods to be useful in applications at rf frequencies by
dramatically reducing eddy current losses. By adjusting the aspect ratio of the
nanorods the coercive force of the rods may be varied by several orders of
magnitude while leaving the remnant magnetization unaffected from the bulk
material value. Phase I will demonstrate that Supermalloy nanorods can be made
with the desired magnetic properties. Phase II will demonstrate that this novel
materials system can be used to build engineered magnetic laminates with
properties superior to bulk magnetic materials for device applications. The
proposed magnetic materials have a wide range of applications in rf and power
transformers as well as microwave circulators. Laminates of these materials
could build a new generation of high performance magnetic components. ***