* 9660334
* SBIR Phase I: Using Multimedia and Communication to Promote Conceptual Change
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Michael Hillinger, LexIcon Systems
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,564.00

9660334 Hillinger A sizable body of research has shown that students at all
grade levels often hold views of the physical world that are inconsistent with
scientific observations. Once acquired, these misconceptions are difficult to
overcome and can persist even after the student has been given the "correct"
explanation in class. For learning to occur, students must be made aware of
these misconceptions and confronted with the discrepancy between the
misconceptions and reality. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project to be carried out by LexIcon Systems will design and develop a prototype
system that enables students to actively explore problems using multimedia
simulations and provides integrated writing and communication tools as an avenue
for highlighting and refuting any misconceptions. This prototype will utilize a
series of interconnected Quicktime videos to provide a simulated space for
exploring mirror reflections and virtual images. LexIcon will develop, test, and
refine this prototype by including classroom teachers as an integral part of the
instruction process. Components of the system will be evaluated to determine
whether the system provides a significant advantage over more conventional
instructional methods and, if so, whether it is possible to partition the effect
according to different system capabilities. The feasibility of easily
integrating the system into the middle school classroom as it exists today will
also be determined. The project has the potential to give some of the emerging
capabilities of instructional technology a strong role in resolving
misconceptions by giving students opportunities to explore and confront these
discrepancies between how they think the world works and the reality of how it
actually does work. The product would be a series based on high-quality
multimedia simulations on CD-ROM with a common set of communication tools.
Ultimately, some or all of this product could be distributed on the internet.