* 9660321
* SBIR Phase I:  Probabilistic Assessment for Embedded        Underground Hazardous Facilities Subjected to Dynamic Loads Induced by Extreme Environmental Events
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Dan Ghiocel, Stevenson & Associates, Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an applied
technology that can be utilized by design engineers to perform risk and
reliability assessments for hazardous facilities. The research is focused on
dynamic soilstructure interaction, a complex phenomenon with large randomness
and modeling uncertainties. Most of hazardous facilities include heavy and stiff
concrete structures, partially embedded, embedded, or even buried, where the
soil-structure interaction effects are essential for accurate predictions of
their structural behavior under dynamic loads. Emphasis will be given to risk,
reliability, and environmental hazard associated with external blasts,
explosions and earthquakes. Probabilistic models will include uncertainties
stemming from randomness and incomplete knowledge related to load parameters,
soil properties and soilstructure interaction effects. Advanced stochastic
finite element techniques will be developed to ensure the suitability of the
resulting algorithms for assessment tasks. Probabilistic algorithms will be
implemented in the state-of-the-art commercial computer code SUPER SASSI
developed by the firm based on the original SASSI code of University of
California, Berkeley. This will enhance its advanced dynamic soilstructure
interaction capability with probabilistic and risk assessment capabilities for
decision making support. For evaluating the external explosion pressure effects
the program BLAST developed in-house by the firm will be used. The reassessment
of existing massive commercial and defense hazardous facilities remains a
significant engineering challenge with high priority for the U.S. The proposed
research will make an essential step for developing an accurate probabilistic
risk assessment (PRA) engineering tool for embedded/buried hazardous facilities
under dynamic loads induced by environmental extreme events including soil-
structure interaction. The existence of a probabilistic computational tool will
expedite these analyses and will drastically reduce the high costs of PRA
studies. Rapid commercialization of the new development for a large number of
civil engineering applications is expected.