* 9660943
* SBIR Phase I: An Automated Adaptive Cartesian/Prism Grid    Flow Simulation Methodology for Arbitrary Moving Boundary   Problems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Z.J. Wang, CFD RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9660943 Wang This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
develop a new scientific-computation methodology for arbitrary moving-boundary
problems. In the immediate vicinity of boundaries adaptive prism grids will be
used in order to exploit their ability to provide surface-conformal spatial
discretization, enabling accurate and efficient computational resolution of
viscous and thermal boundary layers. These grids will move and deform with the
boundaries around which they are built. Away from boundaries, a stationary,
adaptive Octree-based Cartesian grid will be used to exploit its efficiency and
flexibility. The Cartesian grid will be overlapped with the moving and deforming
prism grids. Both types of grid will be adapted according to the physics of the
unsteady flow field. For the coupling between the two grids, both conservative
(expensive) and non-conservative (efficient) interfacing algorithms will be
developed and demonstrated in the Phase I research. A second order flow solver
based on a recently-developed all-speed flux splitting method capable of handing
dynamic grids will be implemented, enabling highly-resolved solution of both
incompressible and compressible flows. The unsteady flow fields will be
displayed as they develop, through an on-line visualization capability. The
overall system seamlessly integrates grid generation, flow solver, grid
adaptation and post-processing to obtain maximum solution accuracy, efficiency
and user friendliness. In Phase I, the methodology will be implemented and
demonstrated in two dimensions. Extension to three-dimensions will be made in
Phase II. The accurate modeling of flow phenomena involving moving boundaries is
the key to a understanding, to improvement of performance, and to the cost-
effective, rapid investigation of new designs. If successfully demonstrated in
Phase I, the methodology will provide a reliable, computationally-efficient
design and analysis tool that will have an immediate and far-reaching scient
ific and economic impact in many distinct industries such as materials
processing, aerospace engineering, and bioengineering. ***