* 9660873
* SBIR Phase I:  An Antimonide Laser-Based Formaldehyde       Detector for Combustion Emissions Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,09/30/1997
* Daniel Oh, Southwest Sciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 09/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at research
and development of a new formaldehyde detector using recently introduced
antimonide based near infrared diode lasers operating in the 2 3 micron region.
The targeted specifications are a sensitivity of 0.1 part per million and an
accuracy of 10% (at 1 ppm) for real time (1 second response time) measurement of
formaldehyde in combustor exhaust. This sensor technology is readily adaptable
for high sensitivity measurement of other key combustion pollutants including CO
and NO. As a known carcinogen and contributor to air pollution (especially in
urban air), formaldehyde emissions from automotive exhaust are now regulated in
California. Formaldehyde emissions from combustors in electric power plants and
municipal incinerators are also being targeted for regulation. In Phase I, the
feasibility of the proposed diode laser based formaldehyde monitor will be
demonstrated by constructing a prototype sensor and measuring trace
concentrations of formaldehyde in turbulent combustor exhaust. The formaldehyde
detection sensitivity in the combustor exhaust will be determined and the
feasibility of commercially developing such a sensor will be evaluated. Direct
commercial applications of the research are expected to include improved
instrumentation for real time measurement of numerous pollutant gases, including
formaldehyde, carbon monoxide, and nitric oxide. Additional applications include
toxic gas detection for gases used in semiconductor fabrication.