* 9661412
* SBIR Phase I: A New Course of Experiments Based on an       Inexpensive, Nanometer Resolution Interferometer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,09/30/1997
* Shrenik Deliwala, Science Research Laboratory Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1997
* USD 74,937.00

*** 9661412 Deliwala This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to
be carried out by Science Research Laboratory (SRL) proposes to develop a
rugged, inexpensive, alignment-free, optical interferometer that will be
integrated with a course of experiments illustrating both the basic concepts of
wave interference and the application of high-precision measurements in many
disciplines. The instrument will be capable of optical path resolutions of
better than 1 nm, which is one to two orders of magnitude more sensitive than
typical instruments used for instruction. The scope of possible experiments is
vast, ranging from measurement of position to nanometer precision to the
photoacoustic detection of trace constituents for environmental monitoring. The
interferometer may be used by high schools or science and engineering
departments at the under graduate level. The inherent flexibility and rich
history of the device will make it an ideal tool for bringing excitement of
modern science and engineering to students. Phase I will develop the design of a
laboratory interferometric instrument as well as a coherent strategy for
experiments, curricula and pedagogic methods. In the next phase of the research,
SRL will construct a prototype instrument and produce a large database of
experiments together with guidelines to integrate them into curricula. The
instrument is primarily targeted at the educational market proffering to
students what is not now available; namely, an affordable research-grade
instrument. Variations on the instrument will be developed for dedicated
commercial applications such as high-frequency measurements of gas density
fluctuations, electron density of plasmas, detection of trace chemical species,
and femtosecond spectroscopy. ***