* 9661382
* SBIR Phase I:  Prototype of Health Care Quality Assurance   Software for an Internet Environment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Jerry Kogan, CK Software, Incorporated (CKSI)
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1997
* USD 74,992.00

*** 9661382 Kogan This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project offers
a new information strategy for addressing the need for quality and efficiency in
the health care industry. Using Internet tools and techniques, CK Software, Inc.
will develop a Protocol Engine to provide nurses and physicians with access to
health care rules and guidelines at the time of treatment, when these are most
effective in improving quality and cost effectiveness of health care. During
Phase I, the Protocol Engine will be prototyped as a Web-Server application.
Tools and techniques of accessing current data on mainframe and mini computers
will be investigated. Server/browser notification techniques will be developed
so that users can be informed of the actions they need to take. Processes for
integrating standard Lab and Chart notes applications will be demonstrated to
take full advantage of the network and Web-Server environment and to display the
full power of this approach for future customers. The fully functional Protocol
Engine which CK Software, Inc. intends to develop in the second phase of the
project will be a valuable tool for insurers, government agencies, health
management organizations, clinics, and payors of all types that are pressing to
limit costs and improve quality by standardization and managed care. ***