* 9661470
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Functionalized Polymer-Trivalent       Lanthanide Metal Ion Complexes for Advanced                 Electroluminescent Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* K. Chittibabu, Molecular Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 73,857.00

**** 9661470 Chittibabu This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project
will synthesize and develop novel polymeric materials and their trivalent
lanthanide complexes and process them as thin films employing layer by layer
deposition technique for advanced electroluminescent devices. Organic material
based electroluminescent devices have recently attracted much interest, due to
their potential applications as flat panel displays. Significant achievements
have been made, including low driving voltages, excellent brightness, and full
color displays. The crystallization of the small electroluminescent/charge
transporting molecules, degradation of the charge injecting contacts due to the
production of heat and oxidative degradation are the key problems associated
with such devices. Employing high mobility electron and hole transporting
polymers, cross-linking them by complexation with highly florescent, lanthanide
metal ions during the device fabrication is expected to minimize the
crystallization and degradation, and will make the electroluminescent devices
quite stable. The synthesis and characterization of the ligand functionalized
polymers, and the complexation of the lanthanide ions with these polymers
employing layer by layer deposition technique will be addressed. Experiments to
evaluate the performance, on the novel polymer/lanthanide complex based
electroluminescent devices will be carried out. Stable and high performance
electroluminescent devices are expected. The approach of utilizing novel layer
by layer cross-linking of the luminescent electron and hole transporting
polymers using highly flourescent lanthanide metal ions will minimize the
degradation of the electroluminescent devices and will enhance the
electroluminescence efficiency of such devices. White light can be achieved by
using the proper choice of electron and hole transporting polymers. The
successful development of the functionalized polymer-metal complexes will result
in more practical organic mat erials for electroluminescence based flat panel
display applications.