* 9661290
* SBIR Phase I: Photocatalytically Active Filters for Volatile Organic Compound Removal from Gas Streams
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Vladimir Zamansky, Energy and Environmental Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1997
* USD 74,999.00

*** 9661290 Zamansky This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to
be carried out by Energy and Environmental Research Corporation is a feasibility
study of utilizing photocatalytic filters for effective volatile organic
compound (VOC) removal from gas streams before discharging them to the
atmosphere. The US EPA list of 17 high-volume and high-release toxic industrial
chemicals includes 6 chlorinated organics. These compounds are more resistant to
oxidation than most other organic species. Advanced technologies should be
developed for destruction of VOCs which include chlorinated organic compounds.
The proposed photocatalytic filters will use a specially prepared surface to
oxidize toxic contaminants at ambient temperature and pressure and
simultaneously will separate the solid particles present in the gas stream. The
objectives of the research are to: (1) synthesize and characterize the novel
catalytic filter with exceptional properties for decontamination of air and
industrial exhaust gases and (2) measure the photocatalytic oxidation activity
of this filter in the mineralization of selected VOCs . Phase I study will
deliver the reaction rate expression that enables prediction of the oxidation
rate of the contaminants as a function of humidity and contaminants
concentrations. Also, this project will obtain data to develop the most
effective and economic size of the system for exhaust gas stream cleaning
processes. This project proffers a technology of utility to the industries of
air pollution control and waste destruction. The proposed photo-oxidation filers
can remove toxic VOCs and particulate matter at ambient temperature and
pressure. The process is simple, inexpensive, and has the potential to be widely
used in the industry for VOC removal from air and industrial gases. The process
combined with advanced air conditioning systems can also be used for indoor air
cleaning. The photocatalytic filer will oxidize chlorinated toxic compounds to
form H20, CO2, as well as HCl which can be easily removed by passing the exhaust
gas through a water bubbler. ***