* 9661025
* SBIR Phase I: Evaluation of Ternary Carbide Compounds that  Exhibit Unique Characteristics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Thomas Mroz, Advanced Refractory Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 74,998.00

*** 96-61025 Mroz This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will
investigate a new family of ternary carbide compounds which have initially shown
an interesting combination of ceramic and metallic characteristics. These
materials exhibit a set of characteristics that blends the ductility, shock
resistance and machinability of metals with the refractoriness, oxidation
resistance and strength of ceramics. These new compositions have been initially
evaluated, however they have not been reproduced elsewhere. In order to learn
more about these materials, and at the same time, further evaluate
structure/properties relationships, a research program based on compositional
variations is suggested. The project will evaluate the specific lattice sites
within the structure as they relate to the material characteristics by
exchanging specific elements with related elements. This will provide changes in
atomic size and or valence potential. The formation of extensive solid solutions
in this composition range, which will allow for determination of characteristics
as they relate to changes made in atomic composition is anticipated. These
materials will be characterized and compared to earlier work from the original
researchers responsible for discovering these materials. In addition, the
project will begin to evaluate and prioritize commercial opportunities for this
material as they relate to the properties and characteristics obtained from
sample materials. Applications for this family of materials are expected to be
wide ranging. Early analysis suggests that replacement for graphite parts will
be a large market that can be satisfied by the improved electrical and wear
performance of these materials. Other applications might include electrodes,
heaters, seals and wear parts, and engine components. The total value of the
markets that may be serviced by this material is quite large due to the
pervasive nature of the technology. ***