* 9661397
* SBIR Phase I:  A Geographic Information System (GIS) Based  Community Transit Information System (CTIS)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* John Sutton, GIS/Trans, Ltd
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/1997
* USD 74,587.00

*** 9661397 Sutton This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I proposal to
be carried out by GIS/Trans, Ltd. will research and develop the user
requirements for a modular design for a Community Transit Information System
(CTIS) using off-the-shelf geographic information system (GIS) technology. The
innovation in this project stems from the proposed modular design of the system
components and the integration of these with off-the-shelf GIS. While existing
transit information system products are designed for single modes, such as mass
transit, they generally have poor graphics and spatial intelligence for routing
or trip planning. None are presently GIS based, a major weakness given the
emergence of use and power of this technology. The project will research the
necessary GIS spatial intelligence for a comprehensive CTIS and analyze the
network integration and multimodal network representation problems that have
constrained product development to date in this field. The project will review
current user needs by conducting an information systems analysis of a range of
community transit services (e.g., rideshare, shuttle bus, dial-a-ride,
paratransit). Following the identification of the system components, these will
be modeled to produce a concept design and functional specification. The data
modeling will employ established software engineering methodologies and
techniques. It is anticipated that the design will include recommendations on
how to tie the transit related attributes to multiple network representations
and display these on maps for travel information or trip planning purposes. The
research will investigate the feasibility of designing a system that can work
with real-time data and provide the needed routing and scheduling information
on-line. Linkage to technologies such as Global Positioning by Satellite (GPS)
and Automated Vehicle Location (AVL), and the potential for access to the CTIS
on the Internet will also be researched. The proposed design for a Community T
ransit Information System is a timely response to the Transportation Demand
Management program supported by the US Department of Transportation to combat
traffic congestion and environmental pollution. The technology will assist
planners and users to meet transportation mobility needs in a more efficient and
environmentally conscious manner. The proposed product will be useful to all
public transportation providers, including transit agencies, metropolitan
planning organizations, local governments, cities and towns. It will be
compatible with leading GIS vendor products in order to take advantage of the
spatial analysis tools and network analysis programs that these provide. It will
also be compatible with industry standard database technology. Another feature
of the approach taken by GIS/Trans, Ltd. is the integration with the firm's
existing GIS and transportation products, so that users will be able to select
their specific requirements from a suite of programs. ***