* 9661459
* SBIR Phase I:  Elastomer Bed Technology for Arctic Heat     Recovery Ventilation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Anthony DeGregoria, ElasTek, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,791.00

*** 96-61459 DeGregoria This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will investigate the use of elastomer bed heat exchangers to improve
indoor air quality and occupant comfort for arctic structures. It will
investigate the use of a heat recovery ventilator based on a novel, patented,
regenerative heat exchanger, the elastomer bed, which is compact, efficient, and
robust in icing conditions. The regenerative approach provides fresh air
ventilation while controlling the loss of moisture, leading to a more
comfortable interior humidity level. A novel, proprietary ventilator design
overcomes the seal icing problem of existing regenerative wheel designs. The
regenerative heat exchanger is constructed out of thin elastomer sheets, stacked
and stretched into the theoretically optimum, parallel-channel, laminar-flow
heat exchanger geometry. Combining accessible, open channels with flexible
elastomer sheets makes it possible to de-ice the heat exchanger mechanically,
leading to an energy efficient, continuously available, compact ventilator for
arctic regions. Its compact size allows the unit to be installed practically
anywhere, providing local heat recovery ventilation at the point where it is
needed. It would be well suited for both fixed site and modular, transportable
structure ventilation, enhancing arctic worker's health and comfort. Commercial
applications are thought to be found across a wide range of building ventilation
systems and personal comfort products. Applications include home and commercial
heat recovery ventilators and personal cold weather protective masks. ***