* 9661274
* SBIR Phase I:  VLE - A Virtual Learning Environment to      Support Group Learning in the Sciences
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* James Leone, Analysis and Simulation, Incorporated (AnSim)
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,651.00

9661274 Leone This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be
carried out by Analysis and Simulation, Inc.(AnSim) proposes to develop a
Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) system to support collaborative learning and
case-study instruction in the sciences and mathematics. The environment is a
windows-based implementation of the table top shared by the group during face-
to-face meetings. It would support real-time interaction between groups of
students, with or without their instructor, allowing verbal and graphical
interchanges, via chat channels and graphics whiteboard and web browser. The
system integrates a unique search facility, Human Memory Extension (HME), and
analytical engine to support the group's case study research efforts. The VLE
extends the groups capacity to hold meetings and share retrieved research data
while working on a case study thereby having a synergistic effect on the group's
cohesiveness. The complete VLE supports a group-learning/case-based studies
approach to learning and should be of general interest to college educators in
the sciences, engineering and mathematics. The VLE design is modular and capable
of spin-off products: (1) the HME search facility could assist students to make
their information retrieval from digital sources be more efficient; (2) the
virtual meeting room with chat facility and white board would give teachers the
ability in effect to meet with students outside the class room. High schools
educators may choose to focus more on the HME search facility for use with their
growing digital libraries.