* 9661351
* SBIR Phase I:  A New Chemically Heated Catalytic Converter  to Reduce Cold-Start Emissions in Automobiles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Rajesh Kukreja, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9661351 Kukreja This project is concerned with a novel chemically heated
catalytic converter to attain ultra-low emissions from vehicles.. The
development of technology for meeting California Air Resources Board (CARB)
Ultra-low-emission vehicle (ULEV) regulation has now become a main focus for
vehicle manufacturers worldwide. Quick catalyst light-off temperature is a key
part of being able to reduce HC and CO emissions. The use of an electrically
heated catalytic (EHC) converter has been proposed to alleviate the problem, but
the associated cost, and weight penalties are inadmissible. The technical
feasibility of a new scheme for heating a catalytic converter was demonstrated
through preliminary experiments. The proposed process utilizes energy released
from the flameless chemical reaction between certain organic compounds and
oxygen from air. This approach based on chemically heating the catalytic (CHC)
converter offers an economical, energy-efficient and cleaner way to reduce
pollutant emissions during cold-start of the vehicle. The current proposal aims
at developing the CHC converter by optimizing and assessing the effects of
design and operating parameters influencing the performance of the catalytic
converter. The Phase I research will culminate with a database needed for the
design, development and implementation of CHC converter in Phase II. . ***