* 9661112
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Artificial Life Lab for Life      Science Instruction
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,09/30/1997
* Thomas Carter, ADA Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9661112 Carter This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be
carried out by ADA Technologies, Inc. addresses the need for innovative methods
for instruction of life science topics on biological evolution, interdependence
of organisms, and behavior of organisms. The objective of the research program
is to develop an innovative artificial life simulation for implementation on
personal computers and the Internet. Artificial life is a field of study devoted
to understanding life by attempting to abstract the fundamental dynamic
principles underlying biological phenomena and recreating these dynamics in
other physical media--such as computers--making them accessible to new kinds of
experimental manipulation and testing. The simulation is innovative since it
employs concepts from the relatively new field of artificial life as used for
synthetic biology, and uses the concepts as a complement to traditional analytic
biology. The objective of the Phase I program is to quantify technological
limits for the simulation imposed by the limits of personal computers and the
Internet and to perform preliminary classroom testing of the simulation using
instructional support materials conforming to national science education
standards for content and teaching. Lessons learned in Phase I will provide the
foundation for full-scale development of the software in the next phase of the
project and commercialization and dissemination in the third phase. The team
assembled for the program consists of persons with skills and experience in
innovative technology and sound education principles. The outcome of an
artificial life simulation will contribute to fulfilling the great need for
innovative instructional resources. The commercial applications of the
artificial life lab include classroom instruction, home-schooling, Internet
implementation, science and technology centers and sale as a general
entertainment product. ***