* 9661015
* SBIR Phase I:  Terabit/sec, Ultra-Broadband Free-Space      Optical Interconnect
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Sanjay Tripathi, Reveo Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 71,132.00

*** 9661015 Kane The This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will investigate a novel Tbit/sec, all-optical crossbar interconnect. The full
potential of all-fiber networks is not fully exploited owing to the lack of
high-bit-rate switches and interconnects; state-of-the-art electronic crossbars
cannot accommodate bit rates higher that several hundred Mbit/sec.
Commerciallyavailable all-optical interconnects (capable of handling high bit
rates) exhibit slow reconfiguration speeds, are not easily scaled to route large
numbers of input signals, and are often fragile and sensitive to environmental
disturbances. Reveo has invented a unique polarization-based all-optical
interconnect which overcomes the limitations of existing technology, and
features Tbit/sec capacity, fast (microsecond to nanosecond) reconfiguration
speed, ultra-broad spectral bandwidth, low insertion loss, low crosstalk, robust
all-solid-state construction, low power consumption, and simple scaleability.
This crossbar interconnect utilizes powerful network architectures, including
Benes, shuffle-exchange, omega, PM2I, and Reveo's PM2K design. Our unique
hardware arrangement will allow for the development and commercialization of
crossbar switches which can be operated in any wavelength regime. Phase I
research will focus on proof of concept, and characterization of a small
crossbar device. In Phase II we will develop materials for the interconnect
optics, and will develop larger (8X8) switches. Phase III will focus on
commercialization and manufacturing of this novel technology. The proposed
technology will have immediate applications in telecommunications, networking,
and back-plane interconnections, as this crossbar interconnect will be
compatible with the existing telecommunications infrastructure. It has been
estimated that the market for optical interconnects will continue to grow at an
annual rate of 29% per year through 1998, and 23% per year from 1998-2003 (Laser
Focus World, 1994). ***