* 9661572
* SBIR Phase I:  Oxidation of Organic Compounds in Water      with Cavitating Jets
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Kenneth Kalumuck, Dynaflow Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,999.00

*** 9661572 Kalumuck This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to
be carried out by Dynaflow, Inc. is aimed at the development of an efficient
cost-effective technology for treatment of water polluted with organic wastes
including volatile organic compounds (VOCs) by complete oxidation. Such
materials pose a major environmental health hazard at numerous industrial sites
and laboratory facilities threatening air pollution and ground water
contamination. Complete oxidation by conventional means entails costly chemical
treatment and often leads to carcinogenic end products, however. The proposed
research will apply hydrodynamic cavitation to induce oxidation in the bulk
solution. The novelty of this approach lies in the use of resonating cavitating
jets to trigger wide spread cavitation. The Phase I research will address the
feasibility of the technique. A detailed experimental investigation will be
performed to assess the effects of jet type, operating conditions, and
cavitation enhancement devices on the oxidation process. The oxidation products
will be chemically analyzed to provide a quantitative measure for the oxidation
efficiency based on the power required. Results will be compared with those of
more conventional ultrasonic cavitation oxidation. In the next phase of the
research, scale up, optimization, and prototype issues will be addressed. In
response to a major national and international concern, the proffered technology
for water treatment will provide a reliable cost-effective means for toxic waste
handling and elimination of hazardous organic compounds such as dissolved VOCs
resulting in safe end products. ***