* 9661583
* SBIR Phase I:  Exhaustive Oxidation of Indoor Air           Contaminants via an Ozonated, Ultra-Violet Irradiated       Flurocarbon/TiO2 Dispersion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Christy Crowe, Surfactant Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9661583 Crowe The loss of productivity and the associated worker illness and
discomfort due to poor indoor air quality caused by VOCs, dust, and biologicals
such as microorganisms and dander have now been recognized. This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project to be carried out by Surfactant Associates,
Inc. proffers an enhanced process for a solution to this problem by means of the
exhaustive oxidation of air contaminants. The process involves ozonation of a
fluorocarbon fluid possessing extremely high solubility for ozone. The
fluorocarbon is completely oxidation resistant and biologically inert and its
high solubility for gases has allowed its use as an artificial blood substitute
in thousands of surgical operations. The fluorocarbon has demonstrated the
preferential ability to extract a variety of both gaseous and liquid hydrocarbon
and chlorocarbon contaminants from air streams. It has a low viscosity and an
even lower volatility while being a superior solvent for gaseous contaminants
relative to all hydrocarbon solvents. The fluid is an excellent medium for
oxidation reactions and poses no contamination risk itself. For such reasons its
has been previously used with dispersions of TiO 2 particles for the ultraviolet
(UV) catalyzed photooxidation of air contaminants. Exhaustive oxidation was
achieved in such UV irradiated dispersions due to the air contaminants
collecting at the solid/liquid interface of the TiO 2 particles and their
intermediate oxidation products being unable to escape. The intermediate
oxidation products themselves physically adsorbed at the solid/liquid interface
until completely oxidized to C02. It is proposed that this effect would also be
seen for ozone catalyzed oxidation in such fluorocarbon/TiO 2 dispersions. It is
also proposed that, by using a high surface area TiO 2 aerogel dispersion, the
physical adsorption capacity for air contaminants would be enhanced by an order
of magnitude. The proposed process offers to significantly improve indoor air
quality. The initial target markets for the proposed process are small
confinement areas such as passenger aircraft and nuclear submarines where indoor
air quality is particularly poor. Other markets are hospitals, nursing homes,
hotels, office buildings, shopping malls and restaurants to mention a few. The
superior oxidation potential of the proposed system could be utilized for the
treatment of indoor air of any structure occupied by humans. ***