* 9600766
* Cell-Cell Communication and Gene Regulation by Quorum       Sensing in the Symbiotic Nitrogen-Fixing Bacterium Rhizobium leguminosarum
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Kendall Gray, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 07/31/2001
* USD 285,334.00

9600766 Gray The purpose of this research is to characterize the quorum sensing
regulatory system of the symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacterium Rhizobium
leguminosarum. Quorum sensing is a conserved mechanism of population density-
dependent gene activation in Gram-negative bacteria. In quorum sensing, a self-
produced extracellular signal molecule called autoinducer interacts with a
transcriptional activator protein to activate the expression of specific genes.
R. Ieguminosarum produces a unique autoinducer that, together with the
transcriptional activator RhiR, activates an operon of rhizosphere-expressed
genes (rhiABC) and an unidentified locus that causes an inhibition of cell
growth. Both rhiR and rhiABC are encoded by Sym plasmids unique to pea-
nodulating biovars of R. Ieguminosarum. The growth-inhibiting function appears
to be unique to one specific isolate of the Sym plasmid, pRLlJI, which also
encodes a repressor function that blocks normal production of autoinducer. We
have recently discovered two additional R. Ieguminosarum autoinducers, the
production of which is unaffected by this pRLlJI-encoded repressor. The newly-
identified R. Ieguminosarum signals activate rhiABC with RhiR, but do not
activate growth inhibition. We have also discovered a unique autoinducer
produced by the related species R. meliloti, for which no function is currently
known. The specific objectives of this research are: 1) to characterize the
molecular structures of the two newly-identified R. Ieguminosarum autoinducers,
as well as the autoinducer produced by R. meliloti; 2) to identify the pRLlJI-
encoded gene that blocks autoinducer synthesis and elucidate its mechanism of
action; and 3) to investigate the role of quorum sensing in the conjugal
transfer of pRLlJI. This research addresses fundamental questions of
intercellular communication, environmental sensing, and gene regulation in
Rhizobium. Due to the extreme conservation of quorum sensing regulators, the
results of this research may have direct ap plications to other symbiotic or
pathogenic bacterial systems as well. The results of this work will be
integrated into an existing course in Microbial Physiology &amp; Genetics, and
represent an essential component in the development of a new course on the
biology of Bacteria as Multicellular Organisms. As part of a career commitment
to innovative instruction, the P.I. is also developing an independent research
exercise as part of the laboratory curriculum for Microbial Physiology &amp;
Genetics. %%% Bacteria of the genus Rhizobium are of considerable ecological and
economic importance as a biological source of fixed nitrogen. These bacteria
typically form complex symbiotic associations with the roots of specific host
plants such as peas and alfalfa. This research project is an investigation into
the molecular aspects of intercellular signaling, cell-cell communication, and
gene activation in one species of Rhizobium, R. Ieguminosarum. The molecular
structures of specific gene-activating signal molecules produced by the bacteria
will be determined, and the genes that regulate production of these different
signals will be studied. The possible role of these signal molecules in
mediating genetic exchange among populations of bacteria will also be
determined. The results of this work should increase our understanding of the
regulatory biology of these important bacteria and provide new insights into the
effects of extracellular signals on their symbiotic lifestyle. ***