* 9600471
* U.S.-European Symposium on Numerical Algebra; June, 1996;   Pontresina, Switzerland
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1996
* Dianne O'Leary, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 11/30/1996
* USD 16,800.00

This award supports the participation of ten U.S. graduate students and recent
PhD's in an Trans-Atlantic mathematics workshop to be held in Pontresina,
Switzerland, in June 1996. The workshop is co-organized by Professor Diane
O'Leary of the University of Maryland and local host organizers Walter Gander
and Martin Gutknecht of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich,
with the assistance of a program committee comprised of several other European,
US and Canadian experts. The topic of the meeting is recent advances in
numerical algebra, with particular attention to applications in signal
processing and control, parallel computation, image processing and various
industrial problems. The purpose of the meeting is to bring together some of the
world's most active researchers in the theoretical as well as applied aspects of
numerical algebra, together with promising newcomers, in order to foster close
personal interaction and exchange of ideas at the leading edge of the field.
Graduate students will be included among those invited to talk about their work.
Meeting organizers emphasize the creation of an informal atmosphere in an
isolated location in order to facilitate small group and personal discussions
among the participants. Ensuring the participation of promising junior US
researchers in this dynamic field through this NSF award will enable them to
establish personal contact with leading minds in the field outside of the US,
and gain international contacts that should prove to be professionally valuable
in their careers.