* 9600840
* Integrative Biology of Insect Muscle:  Molecular Through    Ecological Investigations of Locomotor Performance
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* James Marden, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 12/31/1998
* USD 180,000.00

9600840 Marden This research investigates the locomotor physiology of a model
organism at molecular through cellular, organismal, and ecological levels, and
will demonstrate how effects at one level interact with effects at other levels.
In so doing, the research would lead to a novel understanding of mechanistic and
evolutionary processes that govern performance physiology of muscle. Dragonflies
(Libellula pulchella) undergo a dramatic change in flight performance and
thermal sensitivity of muscle function during adult maturation. Preliminary data
suggest that the mechanism underlying this developmental transition is a tenfold
increase in calcium sensitivity of muscle activation, which appears to be caused
by a change in isoform expression of the calcium regulatory protein troponin-t.
The investigators will use recombinant troponin-t to perform isoform
extraction/replacement experiments that will experimentally demonstrate the role
that age-specific troponin-t isoforms play in determining calcium sensitivity of
muscle activation. These experiments will provide some of the first data that
address the specific cellular role of troponin-t isoform variation. Troponin-t
isoform shifts occur during muscle development in many types of animals
(including humans), as well as human heart muscle during cardiac arrest and
recovery from cardiac arrest. Mutations in troponin-t cause, by mechanisms
presently unknown, an inherited heart disease in humans (hypertrophic cardiac
myopathy). Thus, the results will have general andpotentially even clinical
value. Preliminary data also indicate that changes in calcium sensitivity of
muscle activation affect the timing and force generation of muscle twitch
contractions, which in turn may cause changes in the energy efficiency of
locomotion. The researchers will test this prediction by determ ining how energy
efficiency of flight varies with age and muscle maturation. They will perform
parallel experiments with distantly related dragonflies that show similar and
dissimilar patterns of muscle maturation in order to determine if the results
allow accurate predictions that can be extended to other species.