* 9600280
* Japan JSPS Program:  Internal Measurement of Magnetic Field on the FIX Experiment
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Adam Martin, CA Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 06/30/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9600280 Martin This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Adam Martin at the Plasma Physics
Laboratory, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. Dr. Martin will work with Dr.
Shigefume Okada, professor in the Faculty of Engineering, on a research project
entitled, "Measurement of the Internal Magnetic Fields on the FIX Experiment."
The proposed research will examine the various problems involved in the
development of controlled fusion as an energy source. The central challenge is
to use magnetic fields to confine a hot plasma long enough to produce a
sustained thermo-nuclear reaction. One of the most promising avenues for
accomplishing this is the Field Reversed Configuration, or FRC, a innovative
device that makes the most efficient use of its magnetic field and is the
simplest cold fusion mechanism to build and maintain. To better understand the
FRC it is important to ascertain the internal structure of the magnetic field
that confines the hot plasma. The research will measure this magnetic field in
the FRC Injection Experiment (FIX) at Osaka University in Japan, using an
innovative technique called Localized Faraday Rotation (LFR). The results of the
analysis will provide insights into theoretical and applied research questions
relating to controlled fusion as a practical, reliable, and clean energy source
for the international community. ***