* 9600732
* Expanding the Interpretation of Oldowan Archaeofaunas with  Comprehensive Bone Modification Studies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Salvatore Capaldo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 59,716.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Salvatore Capaldo will study
archaeological materials stored in the National Museum of Kenya. He will examine
faunal remains which date to between 1.6 and 1.8 million years in age and were
excavated from the site of Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania. Because the first physical
byproducts of human behavior date to just over 2 million years ago, the Olduvai
materials are important because they document an early stage in the development
of humans. At Olduvai archaeologists have uncovered numerous areas in which
stone tools and animal bones have been found in close spatial association. For
many years scientists believed that these concentrations constituted `sites`
where hunters brought the bodies of prey animals and then butchered and ate
them. However careful study of the faunal remains revealed toothmarks of hyenas
and other animals and the `hunter` model became difficult to support. It is
possible, for example that the prey were first killed by non-human carnivores
and that humans scavenged the bones for the remaining scraps of meat and marrow.
It is also possible that many of the carnivore toothmarks post-date hominid
intervention. In experimental work, Dr. Capaldo and his colleagues have
developed techniques for distinguishing between hominid and non-hominid bone
modification and to reconstruct the order in which these took place. He will
apply these procedures to a series of Olduvai assemblages. Archaeologists wish
to understand when distinctively human behavioral traits emerged for this will
shed light on the processes which led to the observable range of human
behaviors. Some believe that hominids of early Olduvai times possessed a
behavioral repertory which shared much with recent humans while others disagree.
Archaeologists want to know whether these early people were able to hunt large
animals on their own or whether they were dependent of meat scavenged from
carnivore kills. Dr. Capaldo's research should help to answer this question. The
results will be of interest to many archaeologists. The work will also assist in
refining analytic techniques of potential wide applicability.