* 9600386
* International Research Fellow Awards Program:  Synthesis,   Characterization and Theoretical Band Structure Calculationsof the New Misfit-Layer Selenides
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Jason Cody, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1997
* USD 44,780.00

9600386 Cody The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty- four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. Jason A. Cody to work with Professor Jean Rouxel at the Institut
Universitaire de France in Nantes, France. Their project is entitled,
"Synthesis, Characterization, and Theoretical Band Structure Calculations of the
New Misfit-Layer Selenides USe m NbSe2 n 1.0<m<1.25; n=1,2 ." Dr. Cody plans to
focus his research on the hydrothermal synthesis and characterization of new
transition-metal chalcogenides. There will be a strong interaction with
theoretical band-structure calculations in an effort to understand the physical
properties of the new compounds. The vast array of naturally occurring
chalcogenide minerals provides a starting point for this research. The Rouxel
group brings their theoretical and computational expertise together with Dr.
Cody's experience in solid-state synthesis. This collaboration will help Dr.
Cody add theoretical calculations to his offerings as a research advisor. He
plans on conducting research with undergraduates as a professor of chemistry at
Lake Forest College, a small liberal arts college in Illinois. ***