* 9600932
* Molecular and Genetic Characterization of a Class II        Flagellar Operon in Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1996,12/31/2001
* Leticia Marquez-Magana, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 12/31/2001
* USD 547,885.00

Marquez-Magana 96-00932 The overall objective of this Career Development Plan is
to create a balanced (50/50) effort between research and teaching. In this way
the principal investigator (P.I.) intends to serve the community as a role model
for students considering a career in science. The proposed research activities
focus on the molecular and genetic characterization of the fla/che operon, a
large flagellar transcription unit in Bacillus subtilis, and the regulation of
its expression. Although much of the DNA that makes up the fla/che transcription
unit has been cloned, sequenced, and characterized genetically, the promoter
element(s) that initiates its transcription has not been identified.
Additionally , the 3' end of the operon has not been characterized. Molecular
and genetic analysis of the fla/che operon will not only increase our knowledge
of flagellar gene expression in B. subtilis, but will contribute to our
understanding of flagellar regulons in many different organisms where homologous
regulons appear to exist. Part of these research activities have been
incorporated into a course that the a P.I. has developed. As a faculty member,
the goal of the P.I. is to foster the excitement of scientific discovery in
undergraduate and graduate students at San Francisco State University (SFSU),
and to empower them with the tools to pursue a successful career in science. The
specific objectives are to: Utilize microbial genetic techniques for the
molecular analysis of the fla/che operon of Bacillus subtilis: Characterize
transcription initiation sites Clone and study the 3' end of operon Screen for
and analyze regulatory mutants of the fla/che operon Empower undergraduate and
graduate students with the knowledge and technology of molecular genetic
approaches: Introduce undergraduate students to the power of genetic engineering
Train graduate students in microbial genetics methodology 3. Recruit and mentor
minority undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of microbial genetics
and molecular biology: Participate in institutional and community programs that
reach out to minority students Mentor minority students undertaking independent
research These objectives are firmly supported by both the Department of Biology
and tip-level administrators at San Francisco State University. Faculty in the
Department of Biology believe strongly that an active research program provides
students with the opportunity to gain first hand experience in how science
operates and gives them skills not attainable in a traditional classroom
setting. Additionally, the university at large is committed to the eduation of
the ethnically diverse Bay Area population.