* 9600547
* Lomako Forest Pygmy Chimpanzee Project:  Female Behavior,   Ecology and Genetics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Frances White, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/1999
* USD 25,219.00

The pygmy chimpanzee or bonobo, Pan paniscus, is of great interest to
anthropologists studying early human evolution. Studies of pygmy chimpanzees are
of special interest in this regard, in light of the dramatic differences between
the social organization of this species and its close relative, Pan troglodytes,
and the close relationship of both chimpanzees with humans. The absence of
friendly associations among females in most apes together with the strong
friendships among related male chimpanzees suggest that social groups of human
ancestors consisted of strong ties among related males and weak ties among
unrelated females. In pygmy chimpanzees, however, the most important social
bonds are among females so that this species introduces new possibilities of
social bonding that need to be considered in studies of our hominid ancestors.
Female sociality in pygmy chimpanzees is unique among primates. Not only is it
the only ape with female-bonding, this bonding appears to be among non-
relatives. Female pygmy chimpanzees also gain feeding priority over males
without being aggressive: a social strategy yet to be found in any other primate
species. The objectives of this pilot project are to determine the level of
habituation of the two communities of Pan paniscus at the Lomako Forest site, to
evaluate the proposed methods of data collection including the efficiency of
collection of DNA samples from the study population and to establish an improved
infrastructure for field work at the site, improve logistics and methods of
supply to the site. It will focus on the uniqueness of female sociality of pygmy
chimpanzees by examining three major questions of behavior, ecology, and
genetics. Research on behavior will focus on the evolution of the ability of
females to gain food over males without aggression, research on ecology will
focus on the key ecological features of the pygmy chimpanzee habitat important
to the evolution of the female-based social system, and research on genetics
will focus on the degree of relatedness among bonded females in two adjacent
communities.