* 9600775
* CAREER:  Inheritance and Maternal Effect of Parental        Care Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1996,09/30/1998
* Edmund Brodie, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 09/30/1998
* USD 175,457.00

ABSTRACT PI: Brodie Proposal Number: 9600775 CAREER Award: Inheritance and
Maternal Effects of Parental Care Behavior Evolution is necessarily a genetic
process. While much insight into behavioral ecology has been made without
consideration of patterns of inheritance, there is much to be gained from a
genetic perspective. In particular, parental care behavior is a category of
trait that is likely to have complex effects on offspring characters and
fitness, and thereby on the evolutionary process. Understanding the importance
and origin of parental care in species as diverse as insects and humans depends
on a knowledge of the underlying genetics of the behavior. Mothers and other
relatives often influence the expression of traits in offspring through the care
they provide. The importance of these so-called 'non- genetic maternal effects'
in determining offspring traits is well known. However, maternal effects have
generally been considered evolutionarily uninteresting, because only genetic
components of traits respond to natural selection. In the last 5-10 years,
theoretical advances have changed this view, suggesting that non-genetic
maternal effects can drive evolution. Because many maternal effects are thought
to stem from parental care behavior, this new body of theory suggests that the
evolutionary origins and consequences of behavior may be more complex than
previously imagined. Despite these exciting implications, maternal effects of
behavior have rarely been studied in natural systems. Strawberry arrow poison
frogs (Dendrobates pumilio) present a unique and fascinating system in which to
quantify parental care behavior and its effect on offspring characters. Male
frogs attract females to a territory, where 3-6 eggs are laid on land. For the
next 10-15 days, the male guards and periodically waters the eggs until tadpoles
emerge. The female then returns and individually transports ea ch tadpole to a
separate rearing site, usually a water-filled plant axil. For the next 3 months,
the female visits each tadpole every few days, and lays unfertilized eggs for
her offspring to eat. Tadpoles have specialized mouth parts and can only eat
eggs. This specialized parental care lends itself to simple quantification. D.
pumilio are easily bred and raised in captivity. The proposed work combines
studies of inheritance and maternal effects under captive conditions with
studies of fitness consequences of parental care in nature to address the
evolutionary consequences of parental care behavior. Complex breeding designs
that include cross- fostering offspring among unrelated parents will be used to
quantify the maternal effect of both male and female parental care on offspring
traits including development and morphology. Two generations of frogs will
reared in the laboratory so that the inheritance of parental care behavior
itself can be understood. A separate field project will investigate how paternal
and maternal care influence offspring phenotypes and survival under natural
conditions. The three phases of this study - inheritance, maternal effects and
fitness consequences - will combine to offer new insight into the evolution of
parental care. The proposed research will generate and maintain a large captive
colony of strawberry arrow poison frogs at the University of Kentucky that will
be a valuable resource for formal undergraduate education and public outreach. A
small walk-in rainforest room will be constructed to generate a hands-on
learning experience. The frog colony also will be used in exercises incorporated
into several large upper level courses. The use of this colony in undergraduate
classes will also provide a direct example of the kinds of biodiversity present
in tropical rainforests to students who would otherwise never be exposed.
Additionally, undergraduate students will be heavily involved at all levels of
this research. A number of undergraduates will be employed by this project to
assist with data collection and colony maintenance. Regular laboratory meetings
will involve students at every step of work, so that they experience the full
process of science from the generation of hypotheses to the design and execution
of experiments to the tedium of behavioral data collection.The Dendrobates
colony also provides a rare opportunity for undergraduates to conduct
independent research on behavior.