* 9600306
* Evaluating Models of Attitude Change in the Period of       Transition to Democracy and Free Markets in Hungary
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Raymond Duch, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* John P. McIver
* 07/31/1999
* USD 115,380.00

Does the general public experience sharp discontinuity in their attitudes and
behavior as a result of political changes initiated at the elite level? The
possibility that mass attitudes are quite stable during periods of tumultuous
change can have two very different implications for the success of political and
economic transitions. In one instance, mass attitudes might be perfectly
consistent with the success of the new institutions. In this case, education and
diffusion of information produce a citizenry well-versed in the norms of
democratic capitalism. On the other hand, mass attitudes could be out of synch
with the political and economic revolution, in which case attitude stability may
well undermine the changes in the long run. This project evaluates the role
played by attitude change in the transition from communist societies to
democracy and free markets. Specifically, the project will examine attitudinal
change and stability in Hungary between 1989 and 1996. To answer these questions
about the public's role, analyses of survey data along with macro-level social
and economic indicators collected previously will be subjected to secondary
analysis. Based on this work, the principal investigator together with his
Hungarian collaborators will develop and field a national probability survey of
current attitudes. The final phase of the project will bring together Eastern
and Western scholars investigating democratic transition in a series of
conferences to examine the state of knowledge about transition processes.