* 9600284
* International Research Fellow Awards Program:  Late         Quaternary Changes of Vegetation and Climate in Northern    Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Beverly Johnson, DC Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/1998
* USD 42,180.00

9600284 Johnson The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a fifteen-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. Beverly J. Johnson, which will consist of a twelve-month research project
working with Professor Allan R. Chivas at the University of Wollongong in
Australia, and a three month re-entry award at the University of Colorado to
work with Professor Gifford H. Miller. Vegetation in northern Australia is
heavily influenced by the intensity of the monsoon and appears to have the
potential to influence the intensity of the monsoon. An evaluation of the
vegetation regimes responding to variations in the monsoon both prior to and
after human arrival in conjunction with the fire-history of this area will allow
for an evaluation of the role humans played on vegation and subsequent climate
change in the continental interior. Dr. Johnson will analyze the stable isotope
geochemistry of organic compounds extracted from core material in the Gulf of
Carpentaria. The techniques proposed in this study provide some of the most
powerful methods for tracking paleovegetation in marine vegetation currently
known. If the predicted vegetation changes are measured, they will provide
evidence linking the effects of human burning on vegetation and climate change
in the Australian interior. Paleovegetation records reconstructed from the
sediments in the Gulf will provide the ground truthing data necessary to verify
the paleoclimate models. Upon her return to the United States, Dr. Johnson will
complete any remaining analyses and write up the results of her research. She
will receive additional support for her re-entry period through a grant from
NSF's ATM program. ***