* 9600661
* The Late Guangala Phase and the Origins of the Coastal      Ecuadorian League of Merchants
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Maria Masucci, Drew University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 4,850.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Maria Masucci will conduct neutron
activation analysis of archaeological ceramic materials collected in the
southwestern portion of Ecuador. She will focus on sherds which date from the
Late Guangala Phase (A.D. 600-800) and conduct a complementary series of
analyses. These include petrographic thin section analysis in combination with
neutron activation and elemental electron microprobe analyses to provide
complementary textural, mineralogical and elemental data. The results of these
studies will then be compared and integrated with previously collected data.
This work will shed light on details of the ceramic manufacturing process and
also allow the clay in finished vessels to be traced back to raw material source
areas. This information in turn will permit Dr. Masucci to reconstruct the
economic and political interactions among individual Guangala Phase communities
and determine how they changed over time. The Andean region was home to one of
the world's great civilizations which saw the incorporation of large numbers of
individuals into a state comparable in size to those which exist in the region
today. Centralized authorities commanded enough labor to erect monumental
constructions and maintain an extensive road system. Archaeologists wish to
understand the processes which lead to the rise of complex societies and many
believe that trade, and relative inequities which developed through it may have
played an important part. While much is known about the prehistory of Peru,
relatively less information is available for Equador, its northern neighbor. The
Guangala Phase appears to mark a period of incipient political centralization
and therefore the results of Dr. Masucci's work should shed light on the state
development process. This project will produce data of interest to a large
number of archaeologists. It will also help to develop analytic techniques which
may be applied in many archaeological situations.