* 9600119
* Mathematical Sciences: Diffusion in Fluid
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Albert Fannjiang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 51,144.00

960019 Fannjiang This project concerns the large scale behavior of particle
dispersion in incompressible fluid flows. On large scales, particles evolve
diffusively or nondiffusively depending on the fluid flows. One of the focuses
of this project is the sharp criteria for the diffusive regime. Novel
variational methods have been employed to obtain such criteria for steady flows.
The extension of the variational methods to unsteady flows and weakly
compressible flows are proposed. Furthermore, within the diffusive regime, the
influence of fluid velocities on the transport coefficients, the effective
diffusivity, is of both practical and theoretical importance, particularly when
the molecular diffusivity is small. As such, the fluid velocities typically
enhance the effective diffusivity by orders of magnitude. The variational
methods have been successfully applied to obtain nontrivial power laws for
convection enhanced diffusion in two-dimensional steady flows. It remains to be
extended to analyze turbulent diffusion in three dimensional random flows and
chaotic diffusion in two dimensional unsteady flows. The variational methods
also provide naturally a framework for numerical computations of the transport
coefficients to which the well established numerical methods for symmetric
problems can now be applied. In the non-diffusive regime, being an effective
tool for analyzing physical quantities for finite volume, the variational
methods are potentially useful in studying anomalous diffusion in the infinite
volume limit. Finally, it is of enormous interest to understand the diffusion
time scale and other transient time scales. The martingale method and the
extension of the contractivity estimates (for symmetric processes) to the
singularly non-symmetric convection-diffusion processes are proposed to study
the time scales problem. %%% Since the great scientists A. Einstein and N.
Wiener laid the theoretical foundation for the study of the Brownian motion,
great effort has been made to understand the combined effect of the Brownian
motion on the molecular scale and the fluid motion on the ordinary scale. Such
problem is also of enormous practical importance since most of the mass and heat
transfer processes in chemical engineering, ground water contamination and
global change in the atmosphere involve both kinds of motion. As it turns out,
the typical smallness in size of molecular Brownian motion, and chaos and
randomness in convective motion give rise to numerous interesting phenomena on
large scales such as convection enhanced diffusion where the size of the
Brownian motion is greatly enhanced, multiple scales where the transport
processes behave differently on different scales, and anomalous diffusion for
which an appropriate description is yet to be found. This project proposes a
rigorous framework and effective methods for studying the convection- diffusion
problem, which has yielded many important results. This and other hopeful
research outcomes will add to our fundamental understanding of one of the most
basic transport processes affecting our lives. ***