* 9600308
* Japan JSPS Program:  The Wealth and Income Distributions of Saving:  A Comparative Study of Japan and the US
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1997,03/31/1998
* David Campbell, MA Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1998
* USD 13,750.00

9600308 Campbell This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. David Campbell at the
Institute for Social Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Dr. Campbell
will work with Dr. Masahiro Kawai, professor of economics, on a research project
entitled, "The Wealth and Income Distribution of Saving: A Comparative Study of
Japan and the United States." The proposed research will identify the socio-
economic groups which drive aggregate saving in Japan and the United States and
assess how these groups acquired their wealth. Substantial empirical evidence
exists that suggests that the wealthy dominate aggregate saving in the United
States and that much of this wealth results from inheritances. If this result
can be generalized to Japan it would represent a major difference in how we view
aggregate saving. Using micro-data from the two wealth surveys previously
conducted in Japan, Dr. Campbell will compute the wealth and income
distributions of saving for the period 1988 to 1994 and undertake a comparative
analysis of the results with those from the US. The results of the analysis will
provide insight into current economic theory as it relates to saving and
practical suggestions for the creation of institutional structures that
encourage higher saving rates. ***