* 9600521
* Characterization of the Interactions of Eukaryotic          Initiation Factors, Ribosomes, and MRNA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Dixie Goss, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1998
* USD 108,000.00

Goss 9600521 The long term goal of this project is to understand the mechanism
of eukaryotic protein synthesis. Eukaryotes initiate translation differently in
normal cell and in viral infecled cell or cells under stress conditions such as
heat shock. The overall scheme of protein synthesis has been described, but the
details and particularily the kinetics of this process remain to be elucidated.
A detailed study of the equilibrium and kinetics of the interaction of
eukaryotic initiation factors with mRNA and oligonucleotides is proposed. Direct
fluorescence measurements will be used to elucidate the interaction of
initiation factors and mRNA or oligonucleotides. The interaction of several
initiation factors that bind to the 5' noncoding region have been previously
analyzed. The kinetics of these interactions will now be determined. These
multiple interactions will be analyzed to determine if the binding interactions
are cooperative, anti-cooperative, or independent. Kinetic results will
determine the rate limiting steps and the probable pathway of interactions.
These results will aid in formulating a detailed molecular mechanism for the
assembly of the eukaryotic initiation cornplex. %%% This project will elucidate
the mechanism for protein synthesis in plant systems. Regulation of protein
synthesis is important in regulation of cell growth and development as well as
in biotechnology applications. Plants provide possible hosts for production of
vacines and other proteins of commercial interest without the contaminants that
may be present from a bacterial or other host used for gene cloning. lt is
therefore important to understand the regulation of protein synthesis in plants.
These studies will determine the rate limiting steps for interactions that
determine the production of proteins. Fluorescence spectroscopy will be used to
measure these interactions and determine the details of this process. By
elucidating the rate limiting steps one can then determine the possible
intervention points t o increase or decrease the rate of the overall protein
synthesis process. ***