* 9600233
* Japan STA Program:  Effect of Stress on Osteoblast/         Hempatocyte Cell Regeneration
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,11/30/1997
* Frank Espinosa, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 11/30/1997
* USD 9,600.00

9600233 Espinosa This award supports a 12 month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Frank Espinosa at the National
Industrial Research Center of Nagoya, Nagoya, Japan. Dr. Espinosa will work with
Dr. Takahiro Suzuki, Senior Researcher at the Center, on a research project
entitled, "The Effect of Stress on Osteoplast/Hepatocyte Cell Regeneration." The
proposed research will elucidate how mechanical stress from fluid flow
influences bone regeneration related to cases of chronic rheumatoid arthritis
and osteoarthritis. Biocompatible materials are currently used in an array of
implant devices; in particular, bioceramics are used in joint replacement in
patients with the aforementioned problems. Recent technology has provided better
control over mechanical strength and solubility of these materials in the body,
the latter advancement promoting the regeneration of natural bone and permitting
bioceramic devices to be implanted permanently. This in turn allows patients to
forego secondary surgery (required with other medical materials) for removing
implanted material once healing of the skeletal structure has occurred.. One of
the main goals of the research is to better understand the natural bone
regeneration process, leading to better implementation of implanted materials
and potentially reducing imflammation of surrounding tissues. An apparatus and
data acquisition system to measure stress and to monitor bone cell growth will
be built and used in this study. This analysis will provide substantial insight
as to how bone regenerates as well as suggestions for the development of
artificial transplant materials for other body organs. ***