* 9600331
* NSF-CGP Fellowship: The Role of Myogenic Regulatory Factors in Controlling Skeletal Muscle Development in Avian Species
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Kimiaki Maruyama, USDA ARS INHL
* Interagency Agreement
* Gerald Edwards
* 12/31/1997
* USD 42,700.00

9600331 Maruyama This award supports the collaboration of Dr. Kimiaki Maruyama
of the Gene Evaluation and Mapping Laboratory at Beltsville Agricultural
Research Center and Dr. Mitsuru Naito of the Department of Animal Breeding and
Genetics, National Institute of Animal Industry (NIAI). Project funding will
enable Dr. Maruyama to spend one year in Japan, resident at NIAI, to determine
cellular functions of myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs) in chicken embryonic
cells and whole embryos. Dr. Maruyama has previously studied muscle protein gene
expression and the expression of genes encoding MRFs which are implicated in
directing embryonic cells to muscle cell lineage and activating muscle protein
genes. Dr. Naito has successfully cultured chicken embryos in vitro to open an
avenue to study gene functions in developing embryos. Dr. Maruyama will combine
his expertise with that of Dr. Naito to pursue the research objectives. This
proposal brings together research scientists from two countries working in the
area of avian embryo development. The U.S. scientist will have the opportunity
to become familiar with research techniques, equipment, and facilities at NIAI
while contributing to the overall research effort. Therefore, this proposal
fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of
scientific knowledge through international collaboration.