* 9600404
* Japan JSPS Program:  Prevention of Intimal Hyperplasia by   Controlled Release of Cyclosporin
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Tracy Richey, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 06/30/1997
* USD 7,700.00

9600404 Richey This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Tracy Richey at the Research
Center of Biomedical Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. Dr. Richey
will work with Dr. Yoshito Ikada, Professor at the Research Center of Biomedical
Engineering, on a research project entitled, "Prevention of Intimal Hyperplasia
by Controlled Release of Cyclosporine." The proposed research will examine
techniques to reduce intimal hyperplasia in vein grafts using a controlled
release device containing cyclosporine, an immunosuppressant drug. A major
chronic complication of vein grafts used for heart bypass surgery involves the
continued thickening of the vessel wall, termed intimal hyperplasia, that
decreases blood flow and can eventually lead to graft occlusion. The specific
causes of intimal hyperplasia are poorly understood, but likely involve a
combination of hemodynamic, growth and immunological factors. During the
project, a controlled release device will administer the required amount of
cyclosporine at the implant site, the intention being to reduce or check the
harmful side effects of the aformentioned factors. As a further step,
biodegradable films will be prepared from polyesters using a solvent casting
technique, and the release rate and physical state of the incorporated drugs
will be determined. Long term improvement of bypass graft techniques using a
controlled release device would be immediately beneficial to patients and the
health care industry alike, with the facilities at Kyoto University offering a
unique combination of technology and equipment required for this project. ***