* 9600721
* Cultural Construction of Female Aging in Lebanon and        Morocco
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Carla Obermeyer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/2000
* USD 131,516.00

This award supports the research of a cultural anthropologist studying the
process of women's aging in the Middle East. The aim of the project is to
measure the prevalence and determinants of menopausal symptoms, and to
investigate patterns of health care use among women in Casablanca, Morocco and
Beirut, Lebanon. The perceptions and meanings of menopause among women and
health professionals will be studied as well as government policies which affect
the definition and management of the condition in the two countries. Methods
will include in depth interviews with a sample of women to design an appropriate
survey questionnaire, which will be administered to a random sample of 300 women
in each country. The aim will be to measure the discomfort and incapacitation
experienced by the women as well as the factors which influence the symptoms,
their reasons for seeking both biomedical and traditional health care, as well
as their general notions of reproduction, aging, and health. Interviews and
observations will also be carried out in doctors' offices. This research is
important because it will advance our understanding of this condition of aging
which affects an increasing proportion of society's population given the fact
that people in many societies are living longer. The regional comparison will
suggest rich hypotheses for studying what part of menopause is culturally
conditioned and what part biologically given. The study seeks to understand the
multiple meanings of menopause, explore the forces that shape the extent to
which it is medicalized, and gain insight into underlying ideas about health,
gender and aging across these two societies and ultimately, to advance theory
covering the world's population.