* 9600772
* Molecular Basis of the Distinct Absorbance Spectra in       Salamander Rods
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Jian-xing Ma, Medical University of South Carolina
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2001
* USD 229,432.00

9600772 Ma Rhodopsin is a light-absorbing protein residing in the outer segments
of rods and mediates dim light vision. Amphibian photoreceptors are widely used
models in vision research as they provide several advantages over mammalian
cells. Salamanders have two types of rod cells in the retina: red rods and green
rods, which have distinct absorbance spectra. The proposed research focuses on
the molecular basis underlying the distinct absorbance peaks in the red and
green rods, with the hypothesis that there exist two distinct rhodopsins (red
and green) which are responsible for the distinct absorbance peaks. The first
objective of this project is to clone and sequence the red and green rod
rhodopsins in order to elucidate the primary structures and divergent residues
of these two rhodopsin molecules. The second objective is to express the red and
green rod rhodopsins in COS cells, regenerate pigments with a given chromophore,
and measure the absorbance of the resulting pigments. The measurements using
pure forms of the opsins and chromophores will provide precise determination of
the absorbance spectra. The third objective is to identify amino acids
responsible for the absorbance difference of the red and green rods using site-
directed mutagenesis techniques. The long term goal of these studies is to
understand the visual transduction system at a molecular level, which is of
broad biological significance in that the visual receptor rhodopsin is the
prototype of the large family of G protein-coupled receptors. %%% A career
development program is proposed for integrating research that focuses on the
molecular mechanisms of visual transduction with educational activities that
bring molecular biology techniques into pre-college classroom settings. Dim
light vision is mediated by a class of photoreceptor cells called rods.
Salamanders provide a good source of rods for vision research because they have
two types of rod cells, green rods and red rods, which mediate vision at
different wavelength s. The molecular basis accounting for the difference has
not been discovered. The goal of the research project is to clone the proteins
responsible for the distinct color sensitivities in the two types of rods, and
determine the structural difference of these two molecules. By changing the
structure of the proteins at selected locations by site-directed mutagenesis,
the part which is critical in controlling the function and color sensitivity of
the molecules will be determined. An innovative education plan is also proposed
using the MUSC Summer Institute for precollege teachers as a platform for
bringing molecular biology and molecular genetics into South Carolina's high
school classrooms. The Principal Investigator will serve as an instructor in the
laboratory activities of molecular biology which include DNA sequencing, PCR,
restriction enzymatic digestion, Southern blot analysis and site-directed
mutagenesis. ***