* 9600923
* Characterization of Coronin Mutants in Dictyostelium
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,03/08/1999
* Eugenio de Hostos, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/08/1999
* USD 200,000.00

9600923 de Hostos The objective of this project is to define the function of the
protein coronin. The Principal Investigator discovered coronin as a component of
a complex of actin and myosin prepared in vitro from a cytoplasmic fraction of
Dictyostelium discoideum. The protein is associated with the cortical actin
cytoskeleton of Dictyostelium cells. It contains a sequence motif known as WD-40
repeats (or beta-transducin), which was first identified in the beta-subunits of
trimeric G-proteins. Mutants lacking coronin are impaired in their ability to
undergo cytokinesis and ameboid locomotion. A similar protein was subsequently
identified by a Japanese group from human and bovine sources, suggesting that
the significance of coronin extends beyond merely the biology of slime molds.
Dictyostelium is an ideal model system for studying coronin, because the cells
perform a variety of actin-based motile processes, and they are amenable to
molecular genetic manipulations. Mutant cells will be examined by
immunofluorescence, video, and electron microscopy in order to more precisely
formulate a hypothesis that coronin is involved in the dynamics of extension or
retraction of cortical processes during locomotion. In addition, the coronin
mutants will be used to investigate the function and structure of the WD-40
repeats and to attempt to clarify the role of this sequence motif in general.
These repeats are being found in a growing number of proteins and are thought to
be involved in protein-protein interactions. The ability to genetically
manipulate coronin expression in Dictyostelium cells makes this a particularly
good system in which to investigate this problem. ***