* 9600697
* Research in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Boris J. Kayser
* 06/30/1999
* USD 409,728.00

Research in theoretical physics will be aimed at furthering our understanding
of the laws governing the interactions of the elementary particles at very small
distances. These interactions include the force of gravity and three other
fundamental forces. For the non- gravitational forces (electromagnetism, the
strong nuclear force, and the `weak` force responsible for certain radiation
processes), we have the powerful `standard model,` which nevertheless leaves a
number of questions open. Foremost among these questions are the issue of the
origin of the masses of the elementary particles, and the fact that free quarks
are never seen. These problems, and in particular the puzzle of the very large
mass of the recently- discovered top quark, will be addressed. A major effort
will be made to understand the basic forces of nature when they become strong,
and the time-honored techniques, which depend on these forces being weak, fail.
This effort will include the use of ideas centering on the concept of `duality`
between electricity and magnetism, and extensions of this concept. Related
concepts arise when, to include gravity, one pictures the elementary particles
as the excited states of extremely small strings. Duality within string theory,
and other aspects of sting theory, will be pursued. The studies to be included
in the research program are very important to improving our understanding of the
elementary particles and the fundamental forces.