* 9600539
* Cellular Mechanisms of Wingless/Wnt Signaling Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Amy Bejsovec, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9600539 Bejsovec The Wnt gene family encode secreted growth factor-like
molecules that regulate cell behavior through cell-cell communication.
Inappropriate expression of Wnt-l in the mammary glands of adult female mice
results in mammary tumors, or breast cancer. Normal expression of Wnt-1 in
developing mouse embryos regulates cell proliferation and specifies cellular
identities. This proposal exploits the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster, as a
model system to study the cellular mechanisms of Wnt gene action. The Drosophila
wingless (wg) gene is highly homologous to the mouse Wnt-1 gene and performs
similar signaling functions that influence cell behavior during development. The
powerful genetic system of Drosophila has revealed that wg specifies different
aspects of embryonic pattern at different times during development. These
temporally distinct signaling activities are separately mutable within the Wg
protein, suggesting that structural features of the signaling protein influence
the cellular response. Furthermore, secretion and transport of Wg protein within
and between cells appears to be essential to Wg function. The nature of the
distinct Wg signaling activities and the role of intercellular Wg transport will
be examined through the directed expression of mutant transgenes in living
embryos. Mutant Wg molecules that possess defined subsets of the normal Wg
signaling activities will be expressed either ubiquitously, under the control of
the heat shock promoter, or in defined domains, using the GAL4-UAS binary
expression system. The phenotypic consequences on embryonic pattern and on
molecular markers of wg signaling activity will be assessed to determine the
cellular basis for the distinct Wg signaling activities observed. In addition,
molecules that interact with Wg protein during signaling and transport will be
identified by characterizing mutations that modulate wg signaling function. A
small collection of mutations that modify the wg mutant phenotype have been
isolated and several mutations show features that strongly suggest a direct
involvement in the wg signaling pathway. These modifier mutations will be
characterized genetically and molecularly to determine the nature of their
interaction with Wg. These two approaches, in the genetically tractable
Drosophila system, will provide insight into the cellular machinery through
which Wg/Wnt molecules specify cell fate and control cell proliferation.