* 9600614
* Computer Technology and Instructional Reform: A National    Survey of Teachers and Their School Contexts
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Henry Becker, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 02/28/2001
* USD 1,112,648.00

9600614 Becker Recent research on human cognition suggests that students'
conceptual understanding of a subject does not occur by reception of information
and explanations but through a "construction of meaning" that comes from a
thoughtful reconciling of new information and prior beliefs. This research
project examines to what extent beliefs and teaching practices consistent with
constructivist theory are both affecting and, in turn, being affected by the
availability of new computer technologies in schools,, including CD-ROM
databases, hypertext and multimedia authoring environments, worldwide digital
communications, desktop publishing software, and laboratory instrument probes.
Specifically, the project will... * determine the prevalence of different uses
of computer technology by teachers and their students; * determine the
prevalence of constructivist perspectives and constructivist-compatible
instructional practices among those teachers; * determine the relationship
between the extent and types of teachers' computer use and their instructional
beliefs and practices; * specify the differences in school contexts and personal
backgrounds between technology-using teachers with a constructivist perspective
and other teachers-including those who teach with an understanding of
constructivism, but without technology supports, and those who use technology
but without a constructivist approach; * specify the temporal order between
changes in teachers' orientation towards constructivist goals and methods and
changes in their use of technology, and * develop and validate methods for using
self-report survey instruments to investigate teacher beliefs and practices. The
above purposes will be addressed through a national survey of elementary and
secondary teachers in mathematics, science, social studies, and other subjects.
The survey includes a national probability sample of 900 schools and more than
3,100 teachers and two targeted samples of schools and their teachers-210 high-
end technology-using schools and 210 schools that are known for their
involvement in educational reform activities. Including some teachers included
through principal nomination, approximately 4,000 teacher surveys are expected
to be completed. A separate validation sub-study will be conducted with 92
teachers from 23 schools in which survey responses are compared with extensive
classroom observation and personal interviews with the teachers. If we are to
know the value of computer technology for accomplishing instructional reform, it
is not sufficient to know whether carefully designed computer-based activities
can result in constructivist teaching in carefully monitored settings taught by
exemplary technology-using teachers. It is equally important to document to what
extent current technologies are being exploited by constructivist-oriented
teachers operating in more typical circumstances and to learn how much those
technologies are helping those teachers change how they teach. ***