* 9600457
* CAREER:  Predator Inspection Behavior and the Evolution of  Cooperation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Lee Alan Dugatkin, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* stephen vessey
* 08/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

ABSTRACT PI: Dugatkin Proposal Number: The study of cooperative behavior is
hardly a recent endeavor. Great thinkers - Aristotle, Hobbes, and Darwin, to
name a few - have pondered over the existence of cooperation in both humans and
non-human animals. Although there are many different categories of cooperative
behavior, reciprocal altruism has received, by far, the most attention. In order
to model reciprocity, researchers have adapted the mathematical theory of games
and added an evolutionary element to this technique. It has, however, been
difficult to test models of reciprocity . Part of the difficulty, no doubt, was
finding a reasonable ecological scenario in which animals were hypothesized to
use reciprocal altruism, and then devising controlled experiments to examine
which strategies animals invoke in such systems. Without question predator
inspection behavior has become the paradigmatic case for systematically
examining reciprocity and the evolution of cooperation. Predator inspection in
animals is essentially analogous to guard duty in the army and an ideal system
within which to study cooperation. I will employ field studies, laboratory
experiments, and the creation of new mathematical models to examine: 1) the
costs of predator inspection and how such costs relate to reciprocity and the
evolution of cooperation, 2) how assortative interactions favor the evolution of
cooperation, 3) cultural transmission, predator inspection and the evolution of
cooperation, and 4) the evolution of cooperation in large groups. An
incorporation of 'natural selection thinking' into human behavioral experiments
could have a large impact on studies of human cooperation. Before such bold
statements can be supported, however, animal experiments should be undertaken to
test evolutionary models of cooperation. If such experiments are successful,
there is great reason for optimism with respect to human co operation, because
strong precedence exists for incorporating evolutionary models designed to
examine cooperation in non-humans into the human realm. The experiments I
outlined above are the first step in this direction.