* 9600056
* Mathematical Sciences:  The Schrodinger Equation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Ira Herbst, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 62,499.00

Abstract Herbst The basic objective of this project is to shed light on the
mathematics and physics of quantum mechanical systems. Three basic areas are
singled out for research: magnetic fields in quantum theory, the quantum theory
of constrained systems, and embedded eigenvalues. The magnetic field problems of
interest involve large magnetic field and the existence of a limiting behavior
of the Hamiltonian operator (in particular its spectrum) in this limit. Spin
zero as well as spin 1/2 particles will be considered. In classical mechanics,
constraints in configuration space can be imposed by a limiting procedure, and
as this limit is taken the orbit of the system in configuration space approaches
the orbit of the constrained system. In quantum mechanics, this is far from
clear. This research project is aimed at clarifying the situation. Many
researchers have shown that embedded eigenvalues of quantum mechanical
Hamiltonians are unstable. They tend to disappear under perturbation. Part of
this project is to understand the manifold of perturbations which prevent the
disappearance of these eigenvalues. When a spinless quantum mechanical particle
interacts with a magnetic field, it acquires a zero point energy just by virtue
of its being in a non-zero field. This zero point energy is large for large
field and has the effect of excluding particles with reasonable energies. Thus,
the geometry of the regions where the magnetic field is zero is very important
when the field is large. This situation will be investigated in the spin zero
case as well as the spin 1/2 case (electrons) which is much more difficult.
Confining a particle to a surface in quantum mechanics can be a difficult
procedure since the uncertainty principle would predict infinite momentum
fluctuations perpendicular to the surface. Yet constrained systems seem to
exist. This problem will also be investigated. Finally, if a channel to freedom
is open for a particle (even if it requires tunneling through a ba rrier), then
only in very special situations will a particle be bound. It is the purpose of
part of this project to understand the structure of those barriers which will
nevertheless bind a particle.