* 9600915
* RAS Proto-Oncogene Function in Corpus Luteum Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Laura Goldsmith, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/1999
* USD 213,000.00

9600915 Goldsmith The most important function of the individual in contributing
to the maintenance of any biological species is reproduction. In fact, all organ
systems of any vertebrate organism function to maintain life to enable
reproduction to occur. In all mammalian species, reproductive success is
critically dependent upon normal function of the ovary. Normal production and
secretion of specific steroid and protein hormones. In the mammalian ovary, the
oocyte is encased in several layers of cells which secrete the female sex
steroid hormone estrogen. At ovulation, the oocyte is extruded from the ovary
and the calls which previously surrounded the oocyte are changed into a
structure called the corpus luteum The cells of the corpus luteum, the luteal
cells, secrete the female sex steroid hormone, progesterone. The secretion of
progesterone from the corpus luteum in the proper amounts for the proper time
period is required for successful reproduction. If circulating progesterone
levels are too low or if secretion of the proper amounts occurs for too short of
a time period, implantation of the fertilized oocyte will not occur or if
implantation does occur, the pregnancy will not be maintained. In the case of a
nonpregnant cycle, if progesterone levels are too high, or secretion occurs for
too long a time period, a subsequent ovulation will not occur. Thus,
progesterone secretion from the corpus luteum is a critical determinant of
reproductive success. The cells of the corpus luteum respond, through
biochemical mechanisms, to blood born hormonal substances which control the
normal secretion of progesterone. The specific biochemical mechanisms which
allow the luteal cells to respond to those hormones which control progesterone
secretion are at present unknown. It is, in fact, these mechanisms that are
responsible for normal luteal function. The PI has recently discovered that, in
the rat, the amounts of a particular protein, the K-ras p21 protein, contained
in the ovary mirror the pattern of secretion of progesterone from the corpus
luteum. Furthermore, when an antibody against this protein was incorporated into
luteal cells in vitro, progesterone secretion from these cells was significantly
decreased, thus demonstrating that this protein plays a role in the
production/secretion of progesterone by the luteal cell. It is the objective of
this proposal to determine the specific way in which the K-ras p21 protein
affects luteal progesterone secretion and to determine whether this p21 protein
plays a role in the secretion of other hormones from the corpus luteum. The
K-ras p21 protein is present in all mammalian cells. Thus, the results of the
proposed studies will have a significant impact upon the understanding of
ovarian hormone secretory mechanisms as well as understanding of the ways in
which all mammalian cells respond to hormones and growth factors.