* 9600466
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  Mechanics of Granular Material
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Morteza Mehrabadi, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1999
* USD 59,891.00

9600466 Mehrabadi This award supports the collaboration of Professor Morteza M.
Mehrabadi of the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Tulane University and
Professor Yuji Kishino of the Department of Civil Engineering at Tohoku
University in Sendai, Japan. Project funding will enable Dr. Mehrabadi to spend
six months in Japan, resident at Tohoku University, in order to study topics in
mechanics of granular materials including a study of the influence of
microstructure on their macroscopic behavior. Tohoku University which has been
the site of two U.S.-Japan seminars on the continuum and statistical approaches
in the mechanics of granular materials, has had a traditionally strong research
program in this field. Professor Mehrabadi and his coworkers have previously
developed important analytical results and algorithms for the description of
stress, fabric, and strain in granular materials. He and his students have also
developed a unique method to simulate granular media using the Linear
Programming. Professor Kishino has developed his own numerical simulation model
and has many interesting ideas with regard to modeling of the granular material
response. Using his simulation model, he has characterized the dissipation
mechanism in a granular assembly by means of a set of geometrical and
statistical quantities. He has also developed micromechanical models of the
liquifaction phenomena and strain localization. In this project, Professor
Mehrabadi will combine his expertise with that of Professor Kishino to develop
and validate an improved simulation model for studying the influence of
microstructure on the mechanical response of granular media. This proposal
brings together research scientists from two countries working in the area of
mechanics of granular materials. The U. S. scientist will have the opportunity
to become familiar with the experimental facilities and research methods
provided by the Tohoku University while contributing to the overall research
effort. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its
exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international
collaboration. ***