* 9600664
* The Upper Paleolithic Settlement of the Transbaikal, Siberia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Frank Goebel, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1999
* USD 28,545.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Ted Goebel, in collaboration with
American and Russian colleagues will conduct archaeological excavations at the
site of Masterov Kliuch' which is located in the Transbaikal region of Siberia.
Previous test excavations have revealed five stratigraphically separate
archaeological components. The lowest three contain Upper Paleolithic materials
and span the period from ca. 40,000 to 10,000 years ago. In addition to
excavation, the team will apply a number of specialized techniques that will
enhance the capture of archaeological information. The entire stratigraphic
profile will be chronometrically dated through multiple procedures including
accelerator radiocarbon, luminescence and electron spin resonance. All excavated
artifacts and ecofacts will be precisely provenienced and orientations will be
noted to reconstruct site formation processes. Fauna will be studied in detail
and lithic artifacts analyzed and refitted to trace technological manufacturing
processes as well as site spatial patterns. Humans first penetrated Siberia
during Upper Paleolithic times and the Northern Eurasian region constituted the
last major habitable area to be settled. Based on available information it
appears that groups expanded from West to East and the stone blade tools
characteristic of these groups appear to stop in the Transbaikal region. The
reason for this is not known and the phenomenon is interesting because it may
shed light on basic processes of human adaptation. This research is significant
for several reasons. It will add to our understanding of the origins and
dispersal of modern humans, especially attempts to explain the pattern of human
global colonization. It will significantly increase our knowledge of the Upper
Paleolithic of the Old World. Through the application of paleoecological and
paleogeographic perspectives, the research will add to a growing body of
knowledge addressing past human adaptive strategies and associated environmental
limiting factors affecting past and present population distributions. Finally,
the project will offer unique research experiences for undergraduate students.