* 9600523
* Protein Folding Studied by Pressure Perturbation
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Catherine Royer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1998
* USD 178,674.00

9600523 Royer The overall goal of the proposed research is to provide
fundamental, new knowledge about the physical mechanisms by which small globular
proteins of particular sequence adopt a particular three-dimensional structure
characterized by a particular fold, stability and function. The proposed
research will take advantage of the slow folding kinetics and depressed freezing
point of water which are unique to the pressure perturbation approach. High
hydrostatic pressure will be combined with a variety of physical chemical
measurements (fluorescence, infrared spectroscopy and small angle x-ray
scattering) on two model proteins, staphyloccocal nuclease and apomyoglobin, to
address the following issues fundamental to protein folding. i.) The nature of
the transition state in protein folding ii.) Molten globule intermediates of
protein folding iii.) Characteristics of cold denaturation. %%% These high
pressure studies using a combination of spectroscopic techniques will provide
unique and fundamental information about protein folding unavailable from
alternative perturbation approaches. This is because the effect of pressure is
to slow down the folding and unfolding process by several orders of magnitude.
Given such slow kinetics, measurements of structural properties can be made on
the timescale of minutes rather than nano to microseconds, providing kinetic
profiles using techniques which are extremely difficult to apply to the much
shorter timescales that characterize folding at atmospheric pressure. This
approach will yield structural information about the transition state and
kinetic information about the multiple states in the folding pathway of
apomyoglobin. A second unique advantage of high pressure stems from the unusual
phase diagram of water, which remains liquid to -20 C at 2kbar of pressure,
allowing for the direct observation of cold denaturation at high pressure using
all of the above mentioned physical techniques. The phenomenon of co ld
denaturation, the kinetics and characteristics of molten globule intermediates
and the nature of the rate limiting step in folding remain among the least well
characterized aspects of protein folding and stability. ***