* 9600108
* Dissertation Research:  Variation in Diet and Functional    Morphology Among Populations of Cyprinodon variegatus in    the Everglades National Park
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Nelson Hairston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1999
* USD 12,777.00

9600108. HAIRSTON Organisms have a wide range of adaptations to life in a
changing environment. Among fish, jaw morphology is often related to diet, which
varies between seasons and populations. Linking environmental variation with
morphological variation can provide insights into the causes of character
variation observed in nature. In research funded by this award, killifish
(Cyprinodon variegatus) populations on mangrove islands in Florida Bay will be
studied to assess the ways in which temporal and spatial variation in diet
produce and maintain differences in jaw shape and size. Environmental variation
in food resources and food utilization by populations of killifish inhabiting
two distinct habitats (bay and island pools) will be documented. Variation in
feeding morphology among these populations will then be assayed to elucidate the
environmental and genetic contributions to morphological variation. In a related
study, the developmental basis of diet-specific feeding efficiency will be
assessed. The research will shed light on a longstanding issue in population
biology, how morphological variation is produced and maintained in a changing
environment. Because such variation provides the fuel for species to cope with
environmental change, the research has implications for conservation biology and
habitat management.