* 9600796
* Fourth E. Coli and Small Genomes Meeting: to be held        September 8-12, 1996, Lake Arrowhead, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Jeffrey Miller, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 5,500.00

9600796 Miller The E. coli genome analysis efforts are likely to achieve a
complete sequence determination of the well studied organism by the end of 1996.
Over 2800 genes and ORFs have been sequenced; over 70% of the chromosomal DNA,
and their gene products, where identified, are in the Swiss Protein database.
The extensive genetic, physiological and biochemical knowledge of E. coli make
this the best defined of all organisms. There is much excitement surrounding the
opportunity now to integrate these bodies of information as we approach total
sequence of E. coli DNA and all gene products. Moreover, there is the added
excitement of being able to compare the E. coli sequence with that of as many as
10 other small genomes. To carry out the integration, scientists working on E.
coli in different areas will interact. The sequencers, cloners, geneticists,
cell physiologists, biochemists, database builders and computer scientists all
come from different perspectives that are now fusing. The meeting will
facilitate the necessary interactions by bringing together leading researchers
in the analysis of genomes at the genetic and sequence level, and will
facilitate the coordination of the structural and functional analysis of this
organism's genome. Participants in the complete sequencing of H. influenzae,
mycoplasma, and 7 different archaea will also present their findings, affording
the unprecedented opportunity to compare results from so many completed genomes.
This meeting is designed to have a mix of invited and participant-initiated
presentations, and will also have hands-on workshops during which investigators
from different disciplines will be able to become familiar with available
databases and new tools facilitating analysis and coordination of information.
Participants will not only hear the latest information in the talks, but also
will have available hands-on instruction in new computer-based abilities to seek
out and capture, analyze, correlate and integrate complex new information. The
fields are moving very fast both in acquisition of new knowledge of the contents
of genomes and their significance to cellular processes and also in management
and analysis of the information, connecting bodies of knowledge on sequences,
genetic organization and regulation. No other meeting synthesizes the biology of
E. coli, sequence information and database analysis, as well as the comparison
with other completed genome sequences. ***