* 9600329
* International Research Fellow Awards Program:  Dynamics of  Colloidal Suspensions with Attractive Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Johan Bergenholtz, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1997
* USD 32,360.00

9600329 Bergenholtz The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will fund a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit which
will support Dr. Johan B. Bergenholtz's work with Professor Rudolf Klein at the
Universitat Konstanz in Germany. An understanding of the fundamental dynamical
processes in colloidal suspensions is important to the formulation of
engineering models for the design and optimization of processes involving
suspensions of colloidal-sized particles, such as proteins, paints, pigments,
and coatings. This understanding is lacking in the case of suspensions and
microemulsions when attractive interparticle interactions are strong. The
proposed research will extend existing dynamical suspension theories, developed
for charged colloidal suspensions, to include systems with attractive
interactions. Dynamic light scattering experiments will be used to assess the
success of the theoretical developments. This study will elucidate the
suspension dynamics near the percolation transition and will provide a better
foundation for analyzing the role of colloidal forces on macroscopic suspension
properties. ***