* 9600919
* U.S.-Czech Research on Mathematical Logic, Complexity       Theory, and Connections
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Samuel Buss, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 50,063.00

INT 9600919 Buss This U.S.-Czech research effort headed by Samuel R. Buss of the
University of California-San Diego, and Pavel Pudlak at the Mathematics
Institute of the Czech Academy of Sciences, will examine several closely related
areas of mathematical logic and computational complexity theory. These areas
include: bounded arithmetic; complexity of propositional proof systems; circuit
complexity and communication complexity; and cryptography. The U.S. team,
consisting of Buss, Russell Impagliazzo of the University of California-San
Diego, Toniann Titassi of the University of Pittsburgh, and Steven Rudich of
Carnegie Mellon University, will work together with three Czech partners at the
Mathematics Institute on deeply connected, fundamental open mathematical
problems. The Czech team consists of Pudlak, Jiri Sgall and Jan Krajicek. There
are three specific problems this international team will investigate: 1) finite
axiomatizability of bounded arithmetic, 2) bounds on the length of Frege and
extended Frege proofs, and 3) lower bounds for the depth and the size of Boolean
circuits. Results are expected to yield foundational research that will serve as
the basis for devising practical protocols in the future, with potential
application to cryptography. This project in mathematical foundations fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents
and pool research resources in areas of mutual interest and competence. ??