* 9600864
* CAREER: Project Lab, A Research-Intensive Laboratory Course
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Leilani Miller, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2002
* USD 353,972.00

9600864 Miller Funds are requested to develop, implement, and evaluate an
innovative laboratory course at Santa Clara University in which undergraduate
students will participate in a supervised reserach project. This research
project is directly related to ongoing research in the laboratory of the
principal investigator. The course will be named "Project Lab" and will be
taught for one quarter each year. Each year, the course will focus on research
activities appropriate for that particular stage of the research project. The
addition of this course will enhance the science education of undergraduate
students at Santa Clara University by providing hands-on laboratory experience
and exposure to real research problems. Specifically, students will study how
cells choose their fates in the soil nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans. In any
particular year, students will be exposed to several different types of
experimental techniques and procedures. Furthermore, equipment requested in this
proposal will enhance SCU science facilities to allow students access to state-
of-the-art technologies. Students will participate in the design,
implementation, and data analysis of each experiment included in that year's
Project Lab course. In addition, papers from the primary literature on topics
directly related to the research project will be assigned and discussed. At the
end of the quarter, students will assimilate and present their data as a poster
presentation to the rest of the class. Each year, several students will present
their posters at a local undergraduate research conference and some will
paricipate in a poster session at a regional or international C. elegans
conference. Finally, during the rest of the academic year and summer, two or
three undergraduate students who have participated in the course will continue
their research under the supervision of the PI. These extended research
experiences will provide intensive research exposure to highly motivated
students, in addition to sharpe ning their critical thinking skills. The goals
of his project are: 1) to provide direct research experience to a significant
number of undergraduate students at SCU 2) to motivate, attract, and retain
qualified students (particularly women and underrepresented minorities) to
pursue graduate studies in the biological sciences 3) to promot critical
thinking 4) to enhance SCU science facilities to support modern technologies 5)
to understand how cell fates are specified in C. elegans