* 9600629
* Workshop on Site-specific Recombination and Transposition,  September 22-27, 1996, Woods Hole, MA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Nancy Kleckner, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9600629 Kleckner and Mizuuchi The purpose of this Workshop is to assemble for
discusqions essentially the entire community of scientists who are working on
the biochemical mechanisms of site-specific recombination and transposition at
an "aggressively mechanistic" level. This interrelated group of reactions lie at
the heart of a number of very important biological processes: integration of
retroviruses, generation of antibody diversity, transmission of antibiotic
resistance genes and rearrangements of chromosomes. The analysis of these
reactions requires understanding and applications of many scientific disciplines
including protein biochemistry, biochemical kinetics, chemistry, DNA topology
and genetics, and the level of scientific analysis and expertise within the
relevant community is very high. The scientific program includes studies of
retroviral integration, prokaryotic transposons, site-specific recombinases of
the integrase and resolvase families, immunoglobulin rearrangements and
accessory host factors as they pertain to these reactions. In addition, the
program includes studies of chemical catalysis in other types of protein/DNA
reactions so that observations in the field can be placed in a broader context.
Finally, the meeting includes several talks on "model systems" studies which are
outside the field but are outside the field but are directly relevant with
respect to the types of questions being asked and/or the types of methods being
used to address questions mf interest. The meeting will be limited to 135
participants. This number is sufficient to include all of the principal
investigators who are working productively in this area as well as many post-
doctoral fellows and some graduate students. Essentially every attendee either
speaks or presents a poster. This meeting has become the intellectual focal
point for this field and is unique in the degree of interchange amongst
participants at both formal and informal levels. ***