* 9600325
* Japan JSPS Program:  In Vitro Evaluation of a Phospholipid  Polymer for Medical Device Applications: International      Research Fellow Award
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Betsy Williams, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 06/30/1997
* USD 7,300.00

9600325 Williams This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Betsy Newton-Williams at the
Institute of Medical and Dental Engineering, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan. Dr. Newton-Williams will work with Dr. Nobuo
Nakabayashi, Director of the Division of Organic Materials, on a research
project entitled "In Vitro Evaluation of a Phospholipid Polymer for Medical
Device Applications." The proposed research will evaluate the use of
(methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine) MPC copolymers as a surface enhancement
to improve the performance of implants and inhibiting bacterial adhesion and
cell attachment. The success of percutaneous implant devices has been limited
due to attachment of the skin cells to the implant and excessive tissue growth
around the implant. The implants also fail due to infection when bacteria adhere
to the implant surface and gain access to the underlying tissue through the area
between the skin and the implant. The objective of this research is to improve
implant performance through the incorporation of an MPC copolymer and the
prevention of cell and bacterial attachment. Different methods of incorporating
MPC polymers onto the surface of the bulk material will be examined. The
distribution of MPC and the integrity of the MPC on the material surface will be
evaluated during research, as well as in vitro protein adsorption, cellular
attachment, and bacterial adherence. ***