* 9600171
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Stigma, Spread and Status: Assessing the Impact of Physical Disability on Social       Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Michael Lovaglia, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/1997
* USD 7,288.00

9600171 Persons coping with physical disability face certain "social handicaps"
above and beyond their physical limitation. Often persons coping with physical
disability are stigmatized, in that they are perceived to be incompetent in
areas unaffected by their specific physical disability. Two theoretical
explanations suggest that competing mechanisms account for the spread of stigma:
(1) the presence of a stigma may overwhelm all other aspects of an individual's
social identity and becomes the only status cue used to characterize the
individual's social standing in a group or (2) physical disability may combine
with other relevant status cues to form a composite assessment of an
individual's competency. This Dissertation Improvement research investigates
experimentally the presence of a physical disability along with other relevant
status cues to determine which of these two interpretations best models the
social effects of physical disability. Participants consist of freshmen females
at a large university who sign up to participate in the experiments. Once in the
laboratory, participants will be exposed to videos of "partners on a decision
making project." These partners will be either portrayed as deaf or hearing and
having high, equivalent or low status relative to the particpants. The results
of the proposed study will (1) enhance our understanding of the social effects
of physical disability; (2) combine relevant research in group processes and
disability studies; and (3) suggest possible intervention strategies to
alleviate the social handicaps encountered by persons coping with physical
disability. ****