* 9600341
* Japan STA Program:  Studies on the Interdependancy of       N-linked Protein Glycosylation and Cell Cycle START in the  Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Joseph Horecka, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/1998
* USD 12,100.00

9600341 Horecka This award supports a 12-month Japanese Science and Technology
Agency (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Joseph Horecka at the National
Institute for Bioscience and Human-Technology in Tsukuba, Japan. Dr. Horecka
will work with Dr. Yoshifumi Jigami, Director of the Molecular Biology
Department, on a research project entitled, "Studies on the Interdependency of
N-linked Protein Glycosylation and Cell Cycle START in the Yeast Saccharomyces
Cerevisiae." The proposed research will investigate the inter-dependency between
asparagine-linked (N-linked) glycosylation and cell cycle START in the budding
yeast Saccharomyces Cerevisiae. Asparagine-linked protein glycosylation occurs
ubiquitously in eukaryotes and serves to modulate the structure and function of
cellular and secreted proteins. The variety of roles played by N-linked
glycoproteins range from yeast cell wall components to mammalian growth factor
receptors. In both yeast and mammals N-linked glycosyla-tion is required for
progression through cell cycle START, the point in late G1 at which cells commit
to a new round of DNA synthesis and cell division. Although the basis for this
requirement is unknown, its elucidation will reveal novel mechanisms of
eukaryotic cell cycle control. Two specific analyses will be undertaken in the
research. First, a molecular genetic approach will be used to identify genes
that function to connect the N-linked glycosylation pathway and the cell cycle
machinery. Second, the transcription regulation of OCH1 will be further
characterized. Since the enzymes involved in both N-linked glycosylation and
cell cycle control are similar in all eukaryotes, it is reasonable to expect
that the results from this project can be generalized to mammals. ***