* 9600275
* International Research Fellow Awards Program:  Elucidation  of Solid Phase Molecular Structure Via Solid State NMR
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Robbie Iuliucci, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1997
* USD 41,125.00

9600275 Iuliucci The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit which
will support Dr. Robbie J. Iuliucci to work with Professor B. H. Meier at the
University of Nijmegen in the Netherlands. The aim of this project is to study
the 3D structural aspects of molecules and their interaction in the solid phase
via Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR). The most useful NMR interactions for this
purpose in spin 1/2 systems are chemical shielding and dipolar interactions. Dr.
Iuliucci's background is in chemical shift anisotropy and Dr. Meier's expertise
is with polarization transfer experiments. Together they will advance the
understanding of solid state NMR. The University of Nijmegan's lab had two new
solid state NMR spectrometers working at 400 MHz and 300 MHz and has access to a
180 MHz solid state spectrometer and a 500, 600 and 750 MHz Bruker spectrometers
with solids capabilities. In addition, they have numerous NMR probes, including
high spinning speed double and triple magic angle spinning, probes, high field
static cross polarization, probes, a double rotation, probe, and a dynamic angle
spinning, probe, that enable most solid state NMR experiments. ***