* 9600111
* Problems in the Spectral Theory of Automorphic Forms and    Number Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Daryl Cooper, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sidney W. Graham
* 06/30/1997
* USD 11,139.00

Stopple The aim of this investigation is to study certain L-functions on their
critical line and to study the finer structure of the spectrum of the Laplace
operator on certain completely integrable systems. The L-functions are complex
analytic functions, given by power series in a domain of the complex plane, but
their most interesting behavior is on their critical line, which belongs to the
region of analytic continuation. The study of L-functions of Rankin-Selberg type
that arise from cusp forms of finite area hyperbolic surfaces is related to the
general Ramanujan conjecture. The methods to be used belong to the spectral
theory of automorphic forms. The problems in the finer structure of the spectrum
have recently attracted attention among physicists working on Quantum Chaos. The
central problem is the distribution of the spacings between the eigenvalues. The
hope is to bring tools from analytic number theory to the study of the pair
correlation function of completely integrable systems. This research falls into
the general mathematical field of Number Theory. Number theory has its
historical roots in the study of the whole numbers, addressing such questions as
those dealing with the divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among
the oldest branches of mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely
aesthetic reasons. However, within the last half century it has become an
indispensable tool in diverse applications in areas such as data transmission
and processing, and communication systems.