* 9600578
* U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research:  Reproductive Energetics of a South American Caviomorph Rodent Population
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1996,06/30/2000
* George Kenagy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 06/30/2000
* USD 57,526.00

9600578 Kenagy This Americas Program award will support a collaborative research
project between Dr. George Kenagy, University of Washington, Seattle, and Dr.
Francisco Bozinovic, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile. The objective of
the proposed project is to characterize the profile of energy expenditure for
breeding in the degu, a rodent belonging to a South American group, the
Caviomorpha. This group undertakes a lengthy gestation leading to birth of
highly precocial young requiring only a brief period of suckling. The study will
seek to identify the peak demand and expenditure of energy and to see how these
correspond to the maximal performance capacities of the selected species. Stable
isotope technology will be used to measure rates of energy expenditure. An
initial assessment will be made of the link between energetics and the mode of
life history that has evolved in caviomorph rodents. Life history theory has
produced the idea that for iteroparous animals an increase in current
reproductive output should have a negative impact on future reproductive
potential and survival. Evidence from genetic correlations and individual
variation in performance continues to lend support to the possibility that
energy relations are indeed a link between organismal performance and fitness.
This study will address the role of energy in shaping life histories by
providing insights into the process of energy use in a natural mammalian
population and its relation to maximum energetic capacities of females during
gestation or lactation. This will include the mammalian maternal strategy of
producing precocial young. ***