* 9600245
* Cooperative Research in Asymptotic Analysis and             Nonparametric Statistical Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Gang George Yin, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 11/30/1999
* USD 32,490.00

Khasminskii and Yin This proposal presents a joint effort of researchers at
Wayne State University and visiting scientists from Russia. The proposed
research project encompasses two parts: the study of singularly perturbed
stochastic systems, and nonparametric statistical analysis. Motivated by various
problems in production planning of manufacturing systems, the PIs and their
Russian colleagues will study singularly perturbed jump-diffusions, and related
problems in homogenization. Problems to be investigated include ones where the
diffusion component changes in a fast pace and the jump process vary slowly, and
where the jump process is the dominating force and the diffusion changes
relatively slowly. For the homogenization problem, the emphasis is on the
evolution of the probability distribution of fast and slow components of the
processes. Concerning the second part of the proposed project, the emphasis is
on asymptotically minimax procedures. The problems to be investigated include:
studying the asymptotic behavior of the minimax mean square risk for recovering
an infinite dimensional vector from noisy data, deriving conditions on the
Fisher information matrix under which an asymptotically exact lower bound can be
derived for mean square risk for general estimation problems, obtaining lower
bounds for density estimation problems, and uniform lower bounds for integrated
mean square risk for recovering a smooth regression function from noisy data,
finding asymptotically minimax estimators for interpolation problems,
investigating filtering problems under non-Gaussian noise, and proving that a
linear estimator is asymptotically minimax up to the second order in the
Bayesian risk expansion. The proposed project presents an effort of cooperative
research between researchers from Wayne State University and outstanding experts
from Russia. The results of their research in singularly perturbed stochastic
systems and nonparametric statistical estimation problems should be useful for
many appl ications in manufacturing systems, data analysis, control and
optimization of complex systems. This cooperative research project is expected
to foster the establishment of a long-term collaboration among the researchers.