* 9600318
* International Research Fellow Awards Program:  An           Experimental Study of the Stability and Wake Dynamics of a  Reentry Capsule at Low Speed
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Frank Wang, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/1998
* USD 35,405.00

9600318 Wang The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty- four months of research
abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit which
will support Dr. Frank Y. Wang to work with Professor Jean-Marc Charbonnier at
the von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics in Belgium. This project involves
investigating experimentally the dynamic stability characteristics of a reentry
capsule and their relation to the downstream wake flow at low speed. Dr. Wang
and Professor Charbonnier will measure aerodynamic coefficients of a capsule-
like body, mean and turbulent quantities of the boundary layer and the
downstream wake flows, and do flow visualization. An existing support system
specifically designed for the investigation of the stability of capsule-like
bodies will be used for both mounting the model and measuring its global
aerodynamic coefficients. Shadowgraph/Schlieren visualization will be utilized
as an initial step to globally characterize the wake flow. The flow diagnostic
effort will then concentrate on the use of particle image velocimetry (PIV) to
map out the boundary layer and wake characteristics. In addition, a parallel
investigation of the flow fields using conventional miniature five-hole probes
will be carried out to address the applicability of the PIV technique in this
type of problems. The measurement of aerodynamic coefficients is crucial in
providing the necessary information to ensure the safe return of astronauts. The
detailed documentation of the boundary layer and wake flow fields will broaden
the existing database for transonic blunt bodies, aiding the development and
validation of computational models, as well as offering an unprecedented
opportunity to examine the dynamic interaction between the flow over the capsule
and its downstream wake. ***