* 9600455
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research:  Experimental Psychology
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Michael Domjan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/1998
* USD 11,103.00

Description: This project supports a cooperative project by a US scientist, Dr.
Michael Domjan, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, and Dr.
Falih Koksal, Department of Psychology at Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey.
The research aims at improving the understanding of the animal learning process
in general, and the conditioning of sexual behavior in particular. The
experimental work will be on quails and will be conducted in Austin and in
Istanbul. In a pilot study it was indicated that observing a demonstrator male
quail receive a sexual Pavlovian conditioning procedure facilitates the
subsequent acquisition of sexual conditioned behavior in observer subjects.
Experiments are planned to identify what factors are responsible for this
effect. These will: 1. evaluate the effect of observing pairings of a
conditioned stimulus object with a female quail on the subsequent acquisition of
sexually conditioned behavior; 2. compare the effects of observing a
demonstrator's behavior directed towards a female quail or a conditioned
stimulus object; and 3. examine whether observational learning rather than
stimulus enhancement is responsible for the faster acquisition in the observer
subjects. Additional experiments will determine whether observational procedures
can induce conditional copulary behavior in subjects that do not otherwise show
such responding. Also studies will be carried out to determine whether
conditioned responses acquired through observational learning are as resistant
to extinction as those that develop through direct Pavlovian conditioning.
Scope: This project allows cooperation of two experienced scientists whose
capabilities complement each other to do important scientific work. The Turkish
scientist, who has Scottish graduate training and experience in experimental
clinical psychology, has a somewhat different perspective from that commonly
found in the U.S. experimental psychology programs. He has been instrumental in
introducing new lines of laboratory investigation related to the sexual learning
project. This project will help understand the process of learning by extending
previous studies ( such as learning of feeding in rats, pigeons, and honey bees)
to both a new species (Japanese quail) and to a previously unexplored response
system (sexual behavior). The project is supported jointly with the Division of
Integrative Biology and Neuroscience. This project meets the objectives of the
Division of International Programs.