* 9601385
* Development of Segment Specificity in Identified Lineages   of the CNS
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Melody V. S. Siegler, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2000
* USD 239,530.00

IBN 9601385 PI: Melody V.S. Siegler The nervous system has segmental populations
of neurons that are diversified to meet the requirements of sensory and motor
processing along the length of an animal's body. The work to be performed
assesses the contributions of two cellular processes to segmental
diversification and specialization during the course of embryonic development:
cell proliferation and cell death. In a model system, Schistocerca americana,
each segment of the central nervous system develops from an array of
neuroblasts, each of which can be identified as an individual. Each neuroblast
produces a "family" of clonally related neurons. For example, one neuroblast in
each segment, called the median neuroblast (MNB), generates a family of neurons
containing neurons of two different types, motor neurons, which innervate
muscles, and interneurons, which interconnect sensory and motor neurons. In the
thoracic segments the MNB families contain about 100 neurons, 20 of which are
motor neurons. In the abdominal segments the MNB families contain about 50
neurons, only 3 of which are motor neurons. The idea will be tested that the
MNBs, and other neuroblasts in anterior segments, divide at about twice the rate
of the comparable neuroblasts in the posterior segments, initially generating
neuronal pools of larger or smaller sizes. In addition, the role of cell death
in setting the final population size of neuroblast families will be investigated
. Cell death appears to remove many neurons in abdominal regions, but few
neurons in thoracic regions, providing a second mechanism for generating larger
thoracic and smaller abdominal segments. Related studies will focus on the
hypothesis that there are domains of cell death and of cell proliferation that
correspond roughly, but not precisely, to thoracic and abdominal regions. Their
imprecise overlap leads to three rather than two potential outcomes, thus: a
large neuronal population results from high proliferation rates and low cell
death, an int ermediate neuronal population results from high proliferation
rates and high cell death, and a small neuronal population results from low
proliferation rates and high cell death. Knowledge of how these fundamental
cellular processes shape segmental identity is crucial to an understanding of
development of the mature central nervous system.