* 9601864
* Upgrade and Development of Advanced (Electron Paramagnetic  Resonance/Electron-Nuclear Double Resonance/Optically       Detected Magnetic Resonance) EPR/ENDOR/ODMR Instrumentation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Martin Vala, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 02/28/1999
* USD 540,167.00

9601864 Angerhofer A state-of-the-art electron paramagnetic resonance facility
will be established at the University of Florida. The facility will support the
research of seventeen faculty members from several departments and colleges at
the University. A unifying theme of the research is the common goal to
understand the structure and dynamics of paramagnetic states in the various
materials of interest. Major instrumentation proposed includes the upgrade of an
existing EPR (electron paramagnetic resonance) spectrometer, acquisition of
pulsed ENDOR (electron-nuclear double resonance) capabilities, and development
of a commercially-not-available ODMR/ODENDOR (optically-detected magnetic
resonance / optically- detected electron-nuclear double resonance) spectrometer
and of a portable helium-three refrigerator for very-low-temperature EPR
applications. The instrumentation will be used to study a variety of material
systems, including photochemical reactants and matrix- isolated molecules
(Chemistry), rare-earth-doped semiconductors (Materials Science and
Engineering), low-dimensional ferromagnets (Physics), and biological
macromolecules (Pharmacology and Therapeutics). A total of twenty-four students
and post-doctoral associates (38% female participants) will be involved in
training and use of the instruments. The educational activity will be formalized
through a special topics course involving laboratory work along with theoretical
background for students from the various colleges involved. %%% The facility
will have a large impact on the research infrastructure of the Southeastern
region by creating a center of excellence in the area of electron paramagnetic
resonance. It will complement the instrumentation available at the National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) in Tallahassee, and serve as a staging post
for the high field and high frequency experiments being done at the NHMFL. ***