* 9601678
* Computer for DNA Sequence Informatics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Ronald Sederoff, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 126,631.00

This proposal is a request for partial funding of a DNA sequencing and DNA
informatics facility. The funds requested from NSF will be used to provide
computers for this facility and for associated research in DNA informatics.
Funds have already been obtained to purchase two automated sequencers. This
facility is intended to become a nucleus for research and teaching of Genomic
Sciences on the NCSU campus. Significance of the proposed activity to the
advancement of knowledge and education: New advances in the automation of
sequencing technology have created a new paradigm for research on organisms of
long term scientific or commercial interest. In this new paradigm, DNA sequence
is the primary basis for defining function of the expressed genes in a tissue,
organ or entire organism. It is now necessary and feasible to obtain far larger
amounts of sequence information to address a wide variety of important
biological problems. These areas include: development and physiology of
experimental organisms, the genetic engineering of agricultural plants and
animals, and the fundamental issues of population biology, systematics and
biodiversity that are needed to understand the mechanisms of biological
adaptation and evolution. A major barrier to the application of this new
paradigm in all areas of basic and applied biology is the lack of adequate
computational and statistical tools for the analysis of DNA sequences.
Methodology for DNA sequence information acquisition and analysis is important
for our nation's intellectual resource base, our research capability, and for
long term industrial development. Statement of Objectives: High throughput
sequencing, and advanced computational analysis of sequence information are
essential technologies for NCSU to advance our position as leaders in
Biotechnology of Agriculture and Forestry. The purpose of this proposal is to
create a facility for DNA sequencing and sequence analysis through the
cooperation of the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, the College of
Veterinary Medicine, College of Physical &amp; Mathematical Science, and the
College of Forest Resources. This facility will provide "state of the art" DNA
sequence and gene mapping, and computational technology at low cost to NCSU
faculty and the larger research community. One project to be carried out at the
facility is the "Pine Gene Discovery Project" that will identify all of the
expressed genes of pine, a project of great importance for systematics and
biodiversity and also for the wood products industry. In addition, the facility
will serve an educational role by introducing automated sequencing and DNA
informatics into the curriculum. Research and Academic Infrastructure: NCSU has
a long standing reputation for excellence in statistical analysis of genetic
information, population genetics, quantitative genetics, and plant molecular
biology. In addition to the immediate need to fund computational capability for
the DNA sequencing facility, our most advanced research programs in the analysis
of DNA sequence information are already nearing the limitations of the existing
computational equipment. The establishment of a strong informatics component
with a DNA sequencing facility, integrating existing programs of quantitative
and molecular genetics should lead to important new information and technology.
This is a joint proposal by 47 investigators from 20 Departments and five
Colleges of NCSU. These investigators represent a broad spectrum of scientific
knowledge, skills and experience and who all share a need for a local high-
throughput DNA sequencing facility with advanced computational capability.
$184,000 has been awarded by the North Carolina Biotechnology Center toward the
establishment of this facility. The U niversity has made a commitment for space,
salary for a Lab Manager, and support facilities to maintain the sequencing
center. $162,622 is requested from NSF for computing equipment. The total cost
to establish the facility in year 1 is $621, 211. The amount requested from NSF
is 26% of the total cost.