* 9601194
* Research Data Management and Connectivity for Neotropical   Field Stations
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Donald Stone, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 01/31/1999
* USD 170,000.00

Tropical Field Stations (TFS) generate information vital to the advance of
ecological, evolutionary, biosystematic knowledge, as well as providing core
data relevant to sociological, biological and economic processes directly
related to the conservation and management of tropical ecosystems. TFS are
characterized by being sites at remote locations in less developed countries,
often used on a temporary basis by researchers from different home institutions,
and whose interactions are restricted by disciplinary, cultural, national and
language barriers. Nonetheless, they hold an important key to unveiling the
effects of climate change and the principles of ecosystem management in the
tropics. In spite of the importance of preserving and making accessible the
information generated at TFS, there is no consensus on the guidelines that
should regulate data documentation, generation of metadata sets or overall data
management at these sites. Furthermore, TFS are not yet connected among
themselves with a suitable communications network. This lack of a framework
restricts comparative analysis and jeopardizes the long-term utility of the data
sets. Some characteristics of TFS --such as remote locations in less developed
countries and their multidisciplinary, multilingual, and transcultural set of
users-- are, in part, responsible for their underdeveloped stage regarding data
management and connectivity. In cooperation with other leading tropical
stations, the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) proposes the development
of a planning process (consisting of two phases: needs-analysis and prototype
development) that will seek a consensus on the guidelines that will effectively
regulate data management and accessibility at neotropical field stations.
Expected products are: (i) a document specifying the needs and characteristics
of data management and connectivity in TFS; (ii) a consensus on basic guidelines
and recommendations for data management and connectivity issues; (iii) a tested
prototype for later implementation involving a large array of field stations;
(iv) a report on the procedures applied and the problems and solutions
generated; and (v) a proposal for wider implementation of interconnected data
management systems at neotropical field stations. iv