* 9601745
* Environmental Hazards and Pregancy Loss:  Ethnographics in  Three Communities
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Linda Layne, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 12/31/1998
* USD 65,000.00

The term `mother nature` rests on culturally and historically specific notions
of both motherhood and nature. As we reach the end of the twentieth century,
scientific and technological developments are influencing the meanings of both.
This ethnographic study focuses on the issue of pregnancy loss in communities
exposed to environmental toxins, in order to understand these changes.
Obstetrical textbooks, popular literature and pregnancy support groups commonly
portray miscarriages and stillbirths as `acts of nature.` This view obscures
often relevant human impacts in communities and environments that influence
these events. This study focuses on five communities, in New York, Louisiana,
and Massachusetts, which have experienced an unusually high rate of pregnancy
loss, and where these losses have been attributed to environmental hazards. The
investigator will collect and examine oral, first-person accounts of these
losses. She will examine legal, scientific, social scientific, and journalistic
accounts as well. The stories will then be compared with those produced when
pregnancy loss is not attributed to environmental hazards, to explore the ways
in which the experience of reproductive loss is changed if the loss is perceived
as the result of a humanly-corrupted nature. Miscarriages and stillbirths are
important human experiences to which the special tools and perspectives of
anthropology and science and technology studies can contribute greater
understanding. The experiences of pregnancy loss and toxic contamination each
challenge persons' views of themselves, their communities and environments; the
intersection presents an ideal site to investigate usually tacit, taken-for-
granted assumptions about motherhood, nature and science and technology, as well
as the potentially different perceptions of different socio-economic, ethnic,
and racial groups. The topic offers a valuable perspective to examine the lived
experience of environmental crisis and can illuminate issues of equity and
gender involved in environmental controversies. Further, the study will address
issues of broad cultural concern, including issues of responsibility and blame,
and democratic decision making. Results of this research will be presented at
professional meetings and developed into a book aimed at scholars and an
educated lay audience.