* 9601434
* Mechanisms of Contractile Activation in Trout Myocardium: Role of Key Ions and Enzymes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Judith Gwathmey, Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases and Muscle Research
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/2000
* USD 226,440.00

9601434 Gwathmey Teleost (fish) are exposed to extremes in environmental
temperature and pH. As the global environment changes with increases in
temperature and acidification of the waters this species will be negatively
impacted. Dr. Gwathmey plans to define the pH and temperature dependence of key
enzymes involved in myocardial contractile activation and troponin C calcium
binding affinity. She will mechanistically define the relationship between
temperature, ion fluxes and myocardial energetics. With state of the art
techniques that are available to her speculation and assumption in the
literature regarding cardiac physiology in teleosts can now be addressed. She
will for the first time ever measure intracellular calcium concentrations as
well as key in muscles key ions in muscle preparations from the hearts of
teleosts and directly study contractile activation. Unique to teleost is the
fact that unlike mammalian species, the heart tolerates well hypoxic/ischemic
conditions and changes in intracellular pH. By studying the myocardium of
teleost i.e. a salmon she will be able not only to study the adaptive mechanisms
that enable teleost to survive extremes in environmental conditions, but to
apply a comparative approach.