* 9601501
* Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for       Analyses of Aquatic, Geologic, and Atmospheric Sciences
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* J. Kirk Cochran, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2000
* USD 215,240.00

This project consists of the acquisition of an isotope ratio mass spectrometer
(IRMS) and sample preparation equipment for stable isotopic analyses of
atmospheric, marine, geologic, and groundwater samples. The IRMS permits
extremely precise measurements of stable isotope abundances (such as those of
carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, etc.) with respect to a chosen reference
standard. Analysis of stable isotope ratios in various natural substances has
numerous geophysical and ecological applications. The applicability of IRMS
technology therefore crosses the boundaries among many of the major disciplines,
including the geosciences, chemistry, biology, and physics. The principal uses
of the SUNY Stony Brook IRMS facility will be to further strengthen Stony
Brook's expertise in atmospheric chemistry, specifically with regard to oceanic,
terrestrial, and atmospheric interactions, and to complement the institution's
existing expertise in the marine and earth sciences. Isotope ratio mass
spectrometry is an extremely valuable way to quantify the relative source
strengths of trace gas species in the atmosphere and to use this information to
evaluate the extent of anthropogenic influences on those species. There are also
numerous applications where stable isotopes may be used as tracers of
biological, chemical, or physical mechanisms, and the mass spectrometer facility
will also permit the analyses of marine and groundwater samples (organic carbon,
water, carbonates). Many Stony Brook faculty from several departments and
institutes have interests in the stable isotopic composition of a variety of
substances, including dissolved organic compounds, marine carbonates, carbonate
rocks, and organic carbon in marine sediments. This IRMS facility will represent
a major improvement to the general scientific research capability of SUY Stony
Brook.