* 9601588
* Acquisition of Computer Systems for Creating Analytical     Interfaces to Diverse Environmental Data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1996,12/31/2000
* Leonard Krishtalka, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/2000
* USD 362,003.00

The University of Kansas (KU) is establishing a national computational
laboratory for the analysis of biodiversity and environmental information. The
Kansas Environmental Informatics Lab (KEIL) will apply high-performance
visualization and database systems to computationally-intensive environmental
and biodiversity research problems. KEIL unites a cross-disciplinary campus
consortium of systematists, ecologists and computer scientists with
specializations in visualization, database and high-speed communications
organized around a common research focus of biodiversity and ecological data
analysis. We are collaborating with the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) on
research related to real-time access to terabyte sized environmental data
archives over gigabit networks. KU is making a fundamental commitment to KEIL: a
$300,000 cash match to the proposal ($150,000 from KU and $150,000 from the
Kansas Technology Enterprise Corporation); a new, full-time position for the
Director of KEIL (PI); $100,000 for startup costs; the four-year, $1~0,000 Self
Family Graduate Fellowship in Environmental Informatics, and space and
administrative support in the Natural History Museum for KEIL. KEIL will be the
first facility in the United States totally devoted to research questions in
biodiversity and environmental informatics. These research questions are grand
challenges-- we will demonstrate the effective use of high-performance computing
leveraged against a 300-year investment in biodiversity documentation and
burgeoning environmental data resources. Research themes to be investigated by
KEIL include: Integration of heterogeneous environmental and biological museum
data sets Predictive modeling of species spatial distribution based on real-time
aggregation of species occurrence in combination with climate and geophysical
data, as well as models of species distributions under climate change scena rios
Database architectures for access and analysis of very large environmental data
archives, in collaboration with SDSC Visualization methodologies for
morphometric and phylogenetic data On-the-fly visualizations of landscape,
terrain, species distribution and climate data, integrating views at scales
ranging from specific collection points to global perspectives. On-line access,
user interface, and electronic publication systems for disseminating
biodiversity information using VRML, SGML, HGML These research themes will
parallel KU training activities in computer science and biological research.
Several academic units and programs at KU are involved in ecological
biodiversity and computer science research and will use the facility. Students
at Haskell Indian Nations University in Lawrence are being trained in these
programs. KEIL instrumentation will also be the platform for: research on
national museum community architectures; training on community solutions and
applications; and recruitment of students and professionals to build and
maintain a national biodiversity information infrastructure. To support the
research mission of KEIL, we are requesting a four-processor SGI Onyx server.
The Onyx is engineered to function simultaneously as a high performance compute,
visualization and I/O (database) server. Three SIG Indigo2 workstations
connected by an ATM work group LAN will provide additional seats for faculty,
postdoctoral fellows, staff and students for development and visualization work.
An ATM network to SDCS and other data centers will complete the architecture.