* 9601592
* Acquisition of Advanced Capability 40Ar/39Ar Dating System  at the Berkeley Geochronology Center
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/1998
* USD 247,835.00

With National Science Foundtion support Dr. Paul Renne and his colleagues at the
Berkeley Geochronology Center will purchase a high sensitivity gas-source mass
spectrometer with an ultra-low background extraction line which will be combined
with a CO2 laser to measure 40Ar/39Ar ratios. The entire system will be fully
automated to allow 24 hour unattended operation. 40Ar/39Ar dating has proven to
be the most versatile means of calibrating the time interval during which
anthropoids appeared in the paleontological record and therefore it is widely
used by paleoanthropologists, paleontologists, geologists and paleobotanists. At
the current time however young samples have proven difficult to date and the
lijmitations are imposed by analytical capabilities rather than physical
constraints. With the new system the increased sensitivity will permit the
Center to date materials as young as 15,000 years and also enable finer grained
distal ashes and lower potassium materials to be dated by the single crystal
method. The Center is engaged in an active research program and both conducts
field research itself and collaborates with many scientists. It dates samples of
paleoanthropological interest from sites in Kenya and Ethiopia which are
shedding new light on hominid origins. It also is dating localities in Soviet
Georgia and Indonesia which have yeilded archaeological and fossil remains. With
the new equipment not only will output be increased, but questions dealing, for
example with the first appearance and spread of humans in the New World can also
be addresed.