* 9601791
* Acquisition of Laser Ablation Deposition System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Zeynep Celik-Butler, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/1999
* USD 174,994.00

9601791 Celik-Butler The acquisition of a Laser Ablation Deposition system (LAD)
is enabled. LAD has been demonstrated as a superior deposition technique for the
fabrication of compound oxide thin films as compared to other available
techniques such as sputtering and e-beam evaporation. The LAD will be placed in
the Solid State Technology Laboratory which has the capability for semiconductor
device fabrication including Si-MOS, Si micromachining, and semiconductor
lasers. The proposed LAD system will become the only LAD system in the North
Texas region. The LAD system will be primarily used to deposit semiconducting
YBaCuO thin films for application as uncooled microbolometers and semi-
insulating YBaCuO thin films for application as uncooled pyroelectric detectors.
This work is supported by the NSF, ARO and Texas Instruments. The cost of the
proposed LAD system project is $275,000 of which SMU will provide a 45% cost
share. YBaCuO is well known for its superconducting properties. However more
recently, the nonsuperconducting phases of YBaCuO are demonstrating themselves
useful in a number of applications including uncooled infrared (IR) detection,
the second harmonic generation of light, and photoconductive switching. The
materials are attractive since they are stable in composition and properties and
easy to deposit. One of the phases of YBaCuO is YBa2Cu3O6+x. As x is increased
from 0 to 1, YBa2Cu3O6+x evolves from an insulator with a well-defined energy
gap to a Fermi glass, and then through a metal-insulator transition to a metal.
Simultaneously, the crystal lattice changes from tetragonal to orthorhombic. The
oxygen content thereby determines the electrical and optical properties of a
material. YBa2Cu3O6+x is a ferroelectric material with pyroelectric properties.
In the semi-insulating phase, it has a low leakage current and is therefore
suitable for application as an uncooled pyroelectric detector. In the semi-
conducting phase, YBa2Cu3O6+x has a narrow band-gap, inheren tly low 1/f noise
and a large change in resistivity with temperature (TCR=3.9%) making it suitable
as an uncooled bolometer. Our preliminary investigations have shown that
semiconducting YBa2Cu3O6+x uncooled bolometers offer higher responsivities (Rv =
6x104V/W) and detectivities than cooled superconducting YBa2Cu3O6+x bolometers.
In addition, their performance is superior to other uncooled IR detectors
including VO2 bolometers and PbTiO3 pyroelectric detectors. To date, the
semiconducting YBa2Cu3O6+x IR sensitive material has been fabricated by simple
rf sputtering at room temperature onto Si, SiO2 and Si3N4 substrates, showing
material compatibility with a CMOS process towards the fabrication of
micromachined, uncooled microbolometer arrays with focal plane signal processing
resultant in a low cost IR imaging circuit. We believe that control over the
stoichiometry of the YBa2Cu3O6+x thin films would be significantly improved by
the use of LAD for the thin film fabrication. This would allow for greater
reproducibility and allow for the stoichiomery to be optimized to produce even
better performance. Therefore the acquisition of a LAD system would be a
tremendous benefit to the project. Further, an LAD system would improve the
capability of the laboratory allowing for future research projects in the
fabrication of compound oxide thin films with linear and nonlinear electro-optic
properties. Work in this area would compliment the semiconductor laser group and
allow for the fabrication of integrated optic devices. In addition, projects
would be initiated on the application of ferroelectric compound oxides to Si
devices such as the gate insulator in DRAMs. Since, the proposed system will be
the only LAD system in North Texas, it is anticipated other researchers will be
attracted to the facility. Faculty at SMU have a very cooperative relationship
with faculty at the University of Texas at Arlington, the University of Texas at
Dallas, and the University of North Texas. In addition, a large number of
companies are involved in the fabrication of Si and GaAs devices in the Dallas-
Ft. Worth metroplex which may need access to a LAD system to test some concepts.
The probability is high that external users will find the facility attractive
one established. ***