* 9601306
* Collaborative Research:  The Origins of Word Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Kathy Hirsh-Pasek, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 07/31/2000
* USD 237,187.00

9601306 HIRSH-PASEK Before children can tie their shoes they have learned
thousands of words. Yet little is known about the process of early word
learning, partly because of the methodological barriers researchers have faced
in attempting to work with preverbal and barely verbal children. This research
will use two new methods to investigate how young children (approximately 10-24
months of age) learn the words of their native language. The particular focus
will be on how children learn object names since, around the world, object names
predominate in children's earliest vocabularies. Previous research has suggested
that children are guided by a set of six principles in learning new words,
principles which narrow the range of choices which children must consider for
what a new word might mean. These principles are organized into two "tiers,"
with the first tier present by the end of the first year of life. The three
principles in the first tier are (1) "reference," or the idea that a word can
"map to" or become linked to an object in the world, (2) "extendibility," the
fact that a word does not just name the original object but a class of objects
(e.g., "dog" does not just label Fido, the family dog, but all dogs), and (3)
"object scope," the assumption that a new word labels an object (as opposed to
say, an action) and that it labels the whole object (versus just an interesting
part of the object). The eleven experiments in this project are designed to
understand how children derive these three principles of the first tier. In all
the experiments, children will be taught the names of novel objects under
various conditions in order to probe the processes by which they learn new
words. Since young children do not often talk on command, in all the
experiments, children will be asked to show their word learning facility through
their language comprehension instead of through language production. The
research will seek to answer three questions. The fi rst is the question of
emergence, i.e., when does each principle appear and does each principle have
both a mature and an immature form? The second is the question of mechanism,
i.e., what mechanisms are responsible for the appearance of each principle and
do children of different ages rely on different cues as they deploy these
principles for word learning? The finally question is that of language
specificity, i.e., do words have some special status for children (the way they
do for adults) or are they treated just the same as other environmental sounds?
For example, does an object's name come to stand for the child's concept of that
object, in a way different from, say, the sound that the object makes? Answers
to these questions will illuminate the mysterious process by which word learning
occurs as well as advance knowledge of cognitive development in general.
Furthermore, as we succeed in lessening the mystery of word learning, we will be
in a far better position to use our knowledge of the word learning process to
aid those children who are having difficulty with that process. ***