* 9601743
* Evolution, Learning, and Economic Institutions
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,12/31/1999
* H. Peyton Young, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1999
* USD 236,384.00

The basic phenomenon studied is social learning, and the ways in which social
learning generates social institutions and norms endogeneously. Social learning
occurs when individuals in a large population interact randomly, and then adjust
their behavior based on information about their past experiences and what others
in the population are doing. The focus is on the dynamics of such a process, and
on the aggregate patterns of behavior that emerge over time. The project is
particularly interested in situations where these aggregate patterns correspond
to recognizable economic and social patterns of behavior, such as forms of
economic contracts, rules governing government market transactions, and norms of
behavior in social interactions. The first and primary objective is to compare
the predictions of evolutionary game theory with the development of specific
kinds of economic contracts. The study focuses on incentive contracts between
principals and agents, particularly real estate commissions, contingency fees in
the law, and crop sharing contracts in agriculture, for which both time-series
and cross-section data exist. The starting point of this research is previous
work of the principal investigator on evolutionary properties of distributive
bargaining games. This framework is extended by explicitly modeling agents'
opportunity costs, by incorporating uncertainty into the output function, by
allowing the agents to bargain over multiple dimensions of the contract, and by
giving a more detailed treatment of the process by which they gather
information. The general goal is to show how patterns of inertia, change, and
regional variations in these kinds of contracts can be illuminated by
evolutionary arguments, and to show how these patterns differ from those
predicted by neoclassical equilibrium models. The second part examines the
robustness of evolutionary selection results under different specifications of
the agents' learning rules, and in particular their degree of rationality. The
third part examines the idea that the structure of social and economic
interactions in general -- the rules of the game -- can also be explained, at
least in part by evolutionary arguments. It is conjectured that efficient
institutions are more stable (in an evolutionary sense) than inefficient ones;
moreover their payoffs exhibit a central tendency effect -- they tend to lie
toward the middle of the feasible payoff set as opposed to the extremes. This
result has implications not only for the form of economic institutions (e.g.,
forms of contracts), but more generally for the welfare properties of different
forms of social organization, and connects with prominent ideas of distributive
justice in the philosophy and game theory literatures.