* 9601082
* Cahokia Mounds Site
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Melvin Fowler, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 65,646.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Melvin Fowler will conduct one
field season of archaeological field research at the site of Cahokia. In recent
decades Cahokia has been recognized as the premier archaeological manifestation
of pre-Columbian American Indian culture north of Mexico. No other
archaeological zone within the present United States was as geographically
large, the seat of as large a population, or has as many manmade features as
does the Cahokia site. While total agreement has not been achieved, a consensus
is growing that Cahokia can best be described as a complex chiefdom. Recent
studies have shown that its origin can be dated to approximately 1,000 A.D. or
slightly earlier. Cahokia is known for its large impressive earthern mounds
which include elaborate burials as well as many smaller mound features. Due in
good part to Dr. Fowler's work archaeologists have come to realize that many of
the smaller features contained very large wooden posts and they have found both
the now empty postholes and remains of earthern ramps used to raise the posts
into the ground. It also appears that these posts were arranged in large circles
to form `woodhenges`, analogous in some ways to stonehenges in Europe. Through
plots of post positions, it is very likely they served astronomical functions.
The goal of Dr. Fowler's work is to further test this hypothesis. He has located
small unexcavated features and predicted, on the basis of the astronomic
hypothesis where postholes and ramps should be located. Through careful
stratigraphic excavation he will search for them. The underlying issue which Dr.
Fowler and many other archaeologists wish to address concerns how preliterate
societies with simple levels of technology were able to organize and maintain
large scale social units such as the one represented at Cahokia. Many believe
that stonehenges and similar structures served to establish and a cosmological
order, the purpose of which was to reflect and reinforce a set of social and
status organizations. For example one wishes to know where elite structures were
located in relation to significant astronomical points on the woodhenge. This
research is important because it will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists. It will shed new light on one of the premier archaeological
sites in the United States and will increase our understanding of underlying
principles of social organization.