* 9601851
* Acquisition of a Computer System for Biophysical and        Computational Chemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Helen Berman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/2001
* USD 237,837.00

Funding is requested to purchase a multi-processor computer based on the RISC
architecture to replace the Convex C220. The projects for which the requested
equipment will be used include: Computer Simulations of Solvated Proteins and
Liquids (R.M. Levy), Computer Simulations of Double Helical DNA (W.K. Olson),
Biomolecular Structure and Interactions (H. M. Berman), Potential Surfaces for
Internal Rotation in Conjugated Molecules (L. Goodman), Medium Effects in
Electronic Structure Calculations (K. Krogh-Jespersen), NMR Structure
Determination and Protein Folding (J. Baum), and Structure and Interactions of
Macromolecular Complexes (M. Georgiadis). The need for the RISC based multi-
processor is based on the computationally intensive nature of these projects,
and the need for the visualization of the computed results concerning complex
biomolecular systems. Rutgers University is internationally recognized for the
strength of its research program in Biophysical Chemistry. A central theme
connecting the investigators participating in this proposal is that of
"Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics". The complexity and sheer size of
biological macromolecules makes the analysis of the structural and dynamic
features in these systems computationally intensive. This is true for the
theoretical studies including molecular modeling using computer graphics,
computer simulations of biomolecules in solution and quantum chemical
calculations of electronic properties of biomolecules and conjugated molecules.
This is also true of the experimental techniques that are represented in the
proposal: macromolecular x-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy. The
individual projects carried out by the coinvestigators all involve very large
scale computations. The shared computational facilities for molecular biophysics
and computational chemistry are housed primarily within the chemistry
department. The backbone of the computational resources for biophysical
chemistry is the Convex C220 dual processor. In 1986 a Convex Cl uniprocessor
was purchased with funding from a National Institutes of Health Shared
Instrumentation Grant. In 1989, with funding provided by an instrumentation
grant from the National Science Foundation and by Rutgers University, the Convex
was upgraded to a dual processor C220. At the time of its purchase, the vector
architecture of the Convex was quite remarkable, providing 10-50 times the
performance gains over the DEC VAX 780 hardware which it replaced. In the
context of today's computing environment, with the availability of RISC computer
workstations, the performance of the Convex is much less impressive. At present,
perhaps the only remaining remarkable attributes of the Convex are its sheer
physical size, its power requirements, and exhorbitant maintenance costs. We
propose to replace the Convex C220 with a multi-processor RISC computer system.
A final choice of vendor will be made after competitive evaluations of
alternative RISC systems is carried out after the grant award. Possible vendors
include Silicon Graphics, Hewlett Packard, IBM and DEC. At this time, we are
seriously considering the Silicon Graphics Power Onyx primarily because of its
cost effective floating point performance, but also because of its graphics
features. Our proposed budget is based on the purchase of an SGI Power Onyx
system with eight R8000 90 Mhz processors, 2 GByte high density memory, Reality
Engine graphics hardware, and 64 GBytes of magnetic disk storage.