* 9601421
* Organization of the Pathway of Urea Synthesis In Situ
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,02/28/2001
* Natalie Cohen, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 02/28/2001
* USD 320,000.00

9601421 Cohen Evidence from several laboratories has shown that the cell is a
highly structured system, in which the cytoskeleton and intracellular membranes
form a scaffold for the attachment of organized arrays of functionally related
enzymes. The purpose of this project is to identify some of the mechanisms
underlying the intracellular organization of soluble enzyme systems, using the
urea cycle as an experimental model. The pathway of urea synthesis in mammalian
liver consists of five enzymes, which operate in two cellular compartments; the
first two reactions are catalyzed by enzymes in the mitochondrial matrix, and
the next three by cytoplasmic enzymes. Although all the enzymes are soluble
(they go into solution when cells or organelles are disrupted in the absence of
detergent), the pathway is highly organized in situ; it behaves as a functional
unit within which intermediates are channeled between enzymes and compartments,
and the three cytoplasmic enzymes are sequentially organized at the
mitochondrial membrane. In addition, like their respective proteins, the mRNAs
of two of the cytoplasmic enzymes, argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) and
argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) are localized next to mitochondria, indicating
that the translation of these proteins occurs at their final intracellular site.
The aims of this research are: 1) To investigate the mechanisms underlying the
localization of ASS and ASL mRNAs, by: a) determining if these mRNAs are
enriched in a particular polysome population, some of which may be associated in
situ with mitochondria, and/or with a specific component of the cytoskeleton; b)
identifying the mRNA sequences involved in targeting; and c) identifying the
cellular component(s) that serve as the target for these mRNAs. 2) To determine
how the localization of ASS and ASL protein is maintained. Protein-protein
interactions of ASS and ASL with each other, or with a component of the
mitochondrial outer membrane, or of the endoplasmic reticulum or cytoskeleton in
the m itochondrial vicinity, will be studied in situ using: a) reversible cross-
linking reagents and immunological methods; and b) the two-hybrid system of gene
expression. The aim is to identify the specific protein regions participating in
the interactions, and to detect and characterize any other proteins involved in
anchoring the enzymes. %%% Living cells are highly structured systems, in which
certain enzyme proteins that are related in their overall function are organized
into multicomponent complexes in specific locations in the cell. Because it
allows them to function more efficiently, the intracellular organization of
soluble enzyme systems is a significant and basic feature of cells.
Identification of the mechanisms underlying that organization is an important
matter of general interest for many aspects of cell function. This research will
increase our knowledge and understanding of the regulation of urea synthesis, a
major function of mammalian liver. It will also provide basic information
directly relevant to other enzyme pathways whose function may be dependent on
specific intracellular organization and localization. ***