* 9601019
* Pilot Grant for the Development of a High-Field fMRI        Facility for Interdisciplinary Human Brain Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1998
* Neal Cohen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Within the last 20 years, our ability to link mental functions to neurological
substrates has been dramatically improved by a variety of new technologies.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in particular provides us, for the
first time, the capability to link the functional, anatomical, and behavioral
aspects of brain function. The ultimate objective of this proposal is to
establish a human fMRI facility in the Beckman Institute that will provide the
neuroscience community with a critical research tool to unravel the mystery of
brain function. In this SGER proposal we will take the first steps to build this
facility by establishing a research partnership with the Carle Foundation
Hospital in Urbana, IL to use its MRI facility as a "test-bed" for fMRI. UIUC
cognitive neuroscientists have developed a set of fMRI paradigms, already tested
on either neuropsychological populations and/or at other MRI facilities (Univ.
of Minnesota, Univ. of Chicago), that will be implemented on the GE Signa 1.5 T
clinical MRI system at the Carle Foundation Hospital. The Carle MRI system will
be upgraded with an advanced gradient set (Signa Horizon) for high speed
imaging, purchased jointly by Carle and UIUC, to permit state-of- the-art fMRI
to be achieved. This SGER proposal is needed to obtain funds to complete the
initial cooperative studies that will prepare the way for a future ARI proposal.
We have a very strong group of physical scientists in the Magnetic Resonance
Engineering Laboratory, the Biomedical Magnetic Resonance Laboratory and the
Image Processing Laboratory who have been instrumental in pioneering new data
acquisition methods, digital signal processing routines, and RF coil design and
modeling approaches. With the existing interdisciplinary team of neuroscientists
and engineers within the Beckman Institute, and the collaboration of Carle
Radiologists and GE Medical Systems personnel, we are poised to push the fMRI
technology to the limits of its potential a nd make use of this unprecedented
opportunity to advance our knowledge of human brain function.