* 9601659
* Acquisition of DNA Sequencers:  A Consortium Project
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Ronald Davis, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 483,000.00

Six ABI automated Model 377 DNA Sequencers are requested by the Consortium
formed among the Stanford Genome Center (Ron Davis)/the University of
Pennsylvania (Joe Ecker)/ and PGEC/USDA-UCBerkeley (A. Theologis) for sequencing
15 Mb of DNA of the Arabidopsis genome. The consortium has proposed to the NSF
that it will be able to achieve this goal with its current capacity in DNA
sequencers within three years at a cost of $0.67/base. The acquisition of
additional DNA sequencers (two by each participating site) is justifiable for
the following reasons: 1. It will allow the completion of the project in two
instead of three years and at the same cost per base. 2. New instrumentation is
being developed at the Stanford Genome Center which will produce DNA sequencing
reactions more rapidly and at lower cost. Consequently, the additional DNA
sequencers will be necessary to utilize this new technology to full capacity in
achieving higher DNA sequence production. 3. Our proposal to complete 15 Mb of
DNA sequencing in three years is based on the assumption that ABI will honor its
commitment to release the upgrade of the 373 and 377 sequencers to 64 lanes/gel
by spring, 1996. If this commitment is not honored, additional sequencers will
be required for completing the 15 Mb DNA sequencing project. The establishment
of a Consortium for sequencing the Arabidopsis genome will provide a national
example of transferring technology from a major Center (Stanford) to other
universities. This will allow the training of young scientists (Ph.D. students,
postdocs) for future genomic research.