* 9601867
* Development of Computer Assisted Tree Ring Dating System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Malcolm Hughes, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2000
* USD 260,048.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Malcolm Hughs and his colleagues
at the University of Arizona will develop a computer assisted system for tree
ring dating. At the present time all dendrochronology laboratories rely solely
on very time consuming but accurate manual techniques and the proposed system
which would increase speed but maintain accuracy would have a major impact on
the numbers of samples which could be analyzed. Because the characteristics of
tree rings are affected by temperature and moisture which vary annually, rings
differ in thickness from year to year and it has been possible to construct
sequences which are chronologically anchored in the present extend back
thousands of years in time. On this basis one can take old wood fragments (often
in the form of charcoal) , match them against a master sequence and determine
their absolute age. Because of geographic variation in climate, individual
sequences must be constructed for different parts of the world and most
laboratories work both to construct and extend master sequences as well as to
date samples of unknown age. This project is important for two reasons. The
first involves its broad scientific impact. A broad range of scientists
includingarchaeologists, paleobiologists, ecologists, geologists and
climatologists require accurate dating of past events and dendrochronology
provides such information. For example, scientists use such data to study rates
of ecological succession and the role of climate change in species extinction.
Through analysis of oxygen isotopes contained in tree rings it is possible to
reconstruct detailed changes in annual temperature and rainfall over several
millennia. Because of this, for many years the NSF Climate Dynamics Program
supported the Arizona Tree Ring Laboratory and the development of a master
chronology. Secondly this project is extremely important because the Arizona
prototype, if developed would serve as model for other tree ring laboratories
both in the US and abroad. Although the challenge is significant, the need for a
computer assisted system is evident. Dendrochronology was founded at the
University of Arizona. The laboratory provides training for many
dendrochronologists and its methodological innovations diffuse rapidly.