* 9601633
* Integrated Computer Crystallization Laboratories
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* David Agard, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 570,000.00

UCSF has had a vibrant crystallography lab in the Department of Biochemistry.
The successes over the last years encouraged the university to expand the
Faculty Appointments in Structural Biology. In 1995, Brigitte Raumann, a Program
in Biological Sciences Fellow, joined as an independent researcher. In 1996,
Wendell Lim and Jonathan Weissman joined as Assistant Professors in Cellular and
Molecular Pharmacology. This expansion, and the natural growth in numbers of
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows working the structural labs in
Biochemistry, has virtually overwhelmed the X-ray diffraction and computer
facilities at UCSF. In this proposal we present plans to augment the facilities
for three dimensional experimental Structural Biology for the Department of
Biochemistry and to equip a new lab with X-ray diffraction equipment and
computers within the Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology. The
proposed newly equipped and updated labs, one in Cellular and Molecular
Pharmacology and one in Biochemistry, are to be in their use and structure,
equally accessible to all X-ray crystallographers at UCSF. An extensive computer
system built in three tiers is planned to permit computing also in transparent
and equivalent ways. In the following narrative, we list the projects of the six
principal investigators and demonstrate the need for the new communal equipment.
The laboratory to house the new machines in the Department of Cellular and
Molecular Pharmacology will be renovated: a wall is to be added for separating
the core computers from the X-ray set, plumbing changed, electrical installation
and a safety enclosure will be huilt. The projects, most supported by NIH grants
to the P.I.s, are briefly described in narrative form, with references to
published work where possible, and followed by a table defining projects and
personnel. This lists the individual projects by title, the principal scientists
working on the project and the status of the project. T he status provides a
brief summary of the current needs for data collection.