* 9601155
* Reciprocal Induction of Development During the Establishment of an Animal-Bacterial Cooperative Association
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Edward Ruby, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2000
* USD 415,485.00

9601155 Mcfall-Ngai The goal of this research program is to define specific
aspects of the complex morphological, biochemical and molecular conversation
that underlies the development of the cooperative association between the
sepiolid squid Euprymna scolopes and its luminous bacterial partner, Vibrio
fischeri. The present proposal draws directly from the foundation created by
recent developmental studies of this model system, and focuses on four specific
questions: 1. What are the characteristics of the bacteria-induced cell death
that occurs in the light organ during the colonization process, and how do the
bacteria signal this process? 2. How is development of the accessory structures
of the light organ induced, and to what extent are the bacteria symbionts
involved in this process? 3. What are the identities of symbiosis-induced
bacterial genes? 4. Is bacterial catalase induction essential for symbiotic
competency, and/or for the triggering of host development? These questions will
be addressed both by examining diagnostic characteristics of embryonic and
postembryonic development, and by experimentally manipulating symbiotic and
aposymbiotic juvenile animals. In addition, development of the bacterial
symbionts will be probed using promoter-reporter constructs that will lead to
the identification of bacterial genes that are induced specifically during
symbiosis, and reveal the role(s) of these genes in host development. Light and
electron microscopy will be used in concert with in situ hybridization dn
immunocytochemistry to visualize regions of host and symbiont gene expression,
and the presence of resultant protein products.