* 9601069
* Physiological Mechanisms in the Control of Bioluminescent   Camouflage Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Michael Latz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9601069 Latz In the midwater depths of the ocean, the largest habitat on earth,
there are few refuges from predation. Some animals have evolved an extraordinary
anti-predation behavior using bioluminescent countershading to help them remain
cryptic to visual predators. This strategy, called counterillumination, involves
the biological production of dim light from the ventral surface of many fishes,
squids, and shrimps in order to disrupt their silhouette. As yet Dr. Latz does
not have a comprehensive understanding of the physiological pathways that
regulate how vision mediates the production of bioluminescence for
countershading. In the midwater penaeid shrimp Sergestes similis, a common
member of the midwater community off the west coast of the U.S., the interaction
of both hormonal and neural systems may be involved in the control of
counterillumination. The goal of the present study is to obtain pilot data from
which to develop a model for the physiological control of luminescent
countershading behavior in Sergestes similis. His previous work has demonstrated
that S. similis is a stable laboratory preparation; it counterilluminates in
response to downward-directed illumination, detected by the eyes, with light
emission from five light organs that are modified portions of the hepatopancreas
(liver). Dr. Latz has suggested that two control systems, one hormonal and the
other neural, regulate the induction and control of counterillumination. In the
present study the following hypotheses will be addressed: (1) the induction of
bioluminescence involves a hormonal pathway, (2) a hormone which helps regulate
the intensity sensitivity of the eye is responsible for the induction of
bioluminescence, so that (3) the induction of bioluminescence is linked to light
adaptation of the eye, and (4) once induced, the control of counterillumination
involves a neural pathway. The main area of study will identify the
physiological mechanisms controlling light emission. Tests using extracts of the
eyestalk s and purified hormones will determine whether a hormonal component is
involved in bioluminescence induction, and if so, identity the hormone.
Bioluminescence will be used as a behavioral assay of the color and intensity
sensitivity of the eye. Collaborative work will compare the sensitivity of the
photoreceptors with behavioral tests of visual sensitivity. The importance of
studying the physiological mechanisms of bioluminescence in Sergestes similis
extends beyond understanding how midwater animals control luminescent
countershading behavior. If a hormone is involved, this would be the first
documentation of hormonal control of bioluminescence in any animal, and a
significant contribution to the field of endocrinology by identifying an
entirely new target system. Because counterilluminating animals directly respond
to their optical environment, an understanding of the control of bioluminescence
also provides an insight into the poorly understood vision of deep-sea animals.
Overall, this study will be a major contribution toward understanding the
physiological control of bioluminescence, one of the most widespread yet
enigmatic behaviors in the ocean.