* 9601174
* Unusual Narial Structures in Dinosaurs and other VertebratesA Case Study in the Functional Interpretation of Anatomical Novelty in the Fossil Record
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Lawrence Witmer, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/2000
* USD 180,000.00

9601174 Witmer Several groups of dinosaurs exhibit unusual morphology in the
narial (nostril) regions of their skulls. The most divergent narial anatomy is
found in the duck-bill dinosaurs (Hadrosaurinae), horned dinosaurs
(Ceratopsidae), and the brontosaurs (Sauropoda). The function of these enlarged
narial regions remains enigmatic, preventing a comprehensive understanding of
skull evolution in Dinosauria. Ideas range from inflatable sacs and trunks to
brain-cooling devices. Thus, the investigators will test functional hypotheses
on these unusual narial specializations. Furthermore, the investigators will
probe the vexing issue of anatomical novelty in the fossil record. The noses of
the modern relatives of dinosaurs (birds and crocodilians) will be studied to
provide baseline anatomical data. Additionally, a number of modern groups with
narial novelties similar to those proposed for dinosaurs will serve as analogues
or "models" for the dinosaurs. The fossil taxa will be studied in museums
worldwide, and important specimens will be CT scanned for the first time. This
research will provide clear advances for the anatomical, functional, and
behavioral interpretation of dinosaurs. Furthermore, new, general data on the
functional anatomy of vertebrate noses will be of use for researchers working on
modern animals, including humans. Finally, the perspectives and methods used in
this research will make it a model study for the functional interpretation of
the enigmatic novelties of other extinct organisms.