* 9601920
* Models of Local Interactions in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Lars Hansen, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2000
* USD 111,310.00

Scheinkman 9601920 The high degree of variance of crime rates across space and
across time is one of the oldest puzzles in the social sciences. Under his
previous NSF grant the investigator demonstrated that the variation of crime
rates across U.S. cities with a population of at least 25,000, is too large to
be explained by independent decisions across agents, even after considering a
series of urban characteristics. A model is developed where social interactions
create enough covariance across individuals to explain the high cross-city
variance of crime rates. This model provides a natural index of social
interactions which can compare the degree of social interaction across crimes,
across geographic units and across time. This empirical framework allows the
decomposition of the gap between actual crime rates and the crime rates
predicted using observable characteristics, into a portion due to omitted city
characteristics, and a portion due to social interactions. The empirical
estimates of the index of social interactions gives similar results for
different data samples, and suggests that the amount of social interactions are
highest in petty crimes (such as larceny and auto theft), moderate in more
serious crimes (assault, burglary and robbery) and almost negligible in murder
and rape. Part of the work continues research on understanding and measuring the
role of social interactions in the determination of crime rates. The index of
social interactions is also applied to non-criminal choices such as teenage
pregnancies and schooling choice. The proposal also deals with dynamic models of
social interaction with an aim to modeling and measuring the role of social
interactions in the determination of the behavior of migration over time and in
the distribution of migration across communities.