* 9601656
* Acquisition of Cryosectioning System for High Resolution 3D Reconstruction
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Jonathan Nissanov, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1998
* USD 102,452.00

Accurate 3D reconstruction of biological tissue is technologically challenging.
The proposed project will fund acquisition of an instrument to accommodate high-
resolution reconstruction of large tissue samples and would support histology of
very hard bone samples. The system is based on a Leica Cryopolycut, a large
horizontal cryostat. Modification of the basic system will permit imaging the
tissue block face at unprecedented resolution. Using already available
techniques, these block face images would guide accurate registration of
consecutive tissue sections. The proposed instrument will be housed in the
Computer Vision Center for Vertebrate Brain Mapping (CVCVBM), a NIH Biomedical
Technology Resource. Three neuroimaging projects of the Center would directly
benefit from this grant. A fourth project to be supported by the proposed
instrument is in the field of mechanical and material engineering. The central
objective of the CVCVBM is to develop the technology to support multimodal
fusion of brain histological data. The specific focus is on the rat and mouse
nervous system. The approach being developed involves computer algorithms to map
experimental data into high-resolution, 20 m/voxel, 3D atlases. The proposed
instrument would support both construction of the rat and mouse atlas and
critical tests of the mapping algorithms. The fourth project discussed in this
proposal examines bone remodeling activity in the vicinity of a new class of
swelling type composite materials for orthopaedic implant application. Here, the
critical feature offered by the Cryopolycut is its ability to section through
untreated bone. The impact of the proposed infrastructure enhancement extends
beyond these projects. The CVCVBM research program is an instrumentation
development research program. Tools built at the Center are widely distributed
to other laboratories. Success in construction of the multimodal fusion engine
would likely enhance neurobiological research at l arge. Furthermore, the
facilities at the center are open to the research community and the proposed
instrumentation would compliment currently available shared equipment to support
construction of other high resolution 3D digital atlases.