* 9601476
* Acquisition of Automated Genotyping and Sequencing Equipment
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Martin Kreitman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 223,879.00

Unprecedented growth in the use of molecular methods by the ecology, population
genetics, and plant molecular genetics groups in Hull Gourt, representing three
biology departments, motivates this proposal for support of automated equipment
for DNA sequencing and molecular genotyping. This growth has been propelled by
three forces, the exciting scientific possibilities made accessible with
sequence data - many of which are being charted for the first time by the
proposed users, technological innovations in automated sequencing, and the
strategic growth of the three biology groups at the University of Chicago. To
further enhance research excellence and leadership, and to provide research
training opportunities we have developed a plan for a "hands-on" multi-user
facility that will contain equipment needed to carry out all steps in DNA
sequencing and genotyping. The facility will include two new DNA sequencers and
a workstation for automated sample processing, in addition to an existing ABI
373A sequencer. The facility will also have high capacity temperature cycling
machines for carrying out sequencing reactions, centrifuges, and other equipment
needed for this work. To accommodate the requirements for data editing,
statistical analysis and database comparisons generated by the research, the
facility will house four Macintosh PowerPC and two Silicon Graphics
workstations. The computing speed afforded by these workstations will assure the
group's leadership in the rapidly growing field of simulating molecular
population genetics and evolutionary processes. It will also promote the
synergistic interaction of complementing strengths - computation (population
geneticists) and informatics (molecular geneticists). The facility will be
managed by Dr. L-W Zen, under the supervision of Dr. M. Kreitman and a three
person Instrument Policy Committee. These modern instruments will have broad
impact on the University community. The 13 primary faculty users belong to si x
graduate training programs, and currently have 22 postdoctoral research
associates, 39 graduate students, and 26 undergraduates working in their labs,
including 34 women and eight members of minority groups. The nine secondary
users have 14 postdoctoral research associates, 28 graduate students and 13
undergraduates. All qualified users will have access to the sequencing facility
24 hours a day. More than one hundred undergraduates, over half of whom are
women, will use the instrumentation annually through required courses,
independent research, and other training opportunities. The University is an NSF
REU site, and also supports summer undergraduate research with grants from
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the Pew Foundation, and the Biological Sciences
Division. The Biological Sciences Division also participates in the Summer
Research Opportunities Program (SROP) and the DBS Minority Summer Fellowship
Program, both of which provide research opportunities for minorities. The use of
naturally occurring DNA sequence variation in the analysis of biological
processes is a common theme that unites the three areas of research represented
by the primary users - molecular population genetics, molecular ecology, and
plant molecular genetics. The ability to automate data acquisition is leading to
dramatic scientific advances in all three areas of research, and at the same
time is promoting interdisciplinary interaction on an unprecedented scale.
Interdisciplinary research and graduate training have been hallmarks of the
University of Chicago's educational philosophy. The recent growth of
interdisciplinary evolutionary genetics and ecology groups in the Department of
Ecology and Evolution, the creation of a developmental evolutionary genetics
group in the Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, and the joint
expansion of plant genetics by the departments of E&amp;E and Molecular Genetics
and Cell Biology (MGCB), all build on this philosophical foundation, and pro
vide strategic opportunities for innovative new research. The successful
recruitment of two senior faculty in molecular evolutionary genetics by the
E&amp;E department several years ago, M Kreitman and C-I Wu, have catalyzed the
conversion of research by other groups to incorportate molecular approaches. At
the same time, E&amp;E has embarked on a strategic plan to develop research
excellence in ecology by recruiting six faculty members, S PruettJones, M
Leibold, E Simms, C Pfister, T Wootton and J Bergelson. Several are using
molecular methods in their research, and J Bergelson's work is being
acknowledged as defining a new field of molecular ecology. At the same time,
MGCB has recruited into Hull Court two excellent plant molecular geneticists, B
Keith and D Preuss, and is currently searching for a senior plant developmental
geneticist, who will also be housed in Hull Court. Crucial to the fulfillment of
research potential of these expanding groups is the development of a Genotyping
and DNA Sequencing Facility, a point of convergence for all these research
groups.