* 9601978
* SSC: Special Project:  "Summer Science Camps                Accountability Project"
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Laila Denoya, SUNY College at Fredonia
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 04/30/1997
* USD 65,710.00

The State University of New York College at Fredonia prepares to advocate the
significant impact and findings of the nationwide funded Summer Science Camps
(SSC) by publishing the "Summer Science Camp Accountability Document" and
disseminating these findings to local, regional, state and nationwide
educational, scientific and gubernatorial institutions and organizations to make
the SSC experiences widely useful and usable. In view that the NSF sides with
and encourages open scientific communication from research and educational
activities developed in their funding programs, hence this proposal seeks to
achieve these objectives: To have the "SSC Accountability Document" available
for potential math and science project directors who want to know and find
projects to visit and to work in. To make available the "SSC Accountability
Document" to congressional offices, foundations, private corporations, public
libraries, postsecondary institutions, and other agencies which want to know
what is being done for disadvantages students in interesting them and guiding
them toward the fields of math and science as career avenues. To offer the "SSC
Accountability Document" to current project directors who want to advertise and
distribute their SSC programs to funding agencies and by others as a source of
data about their nationwide math and science early intervention programs for
disadvantaged students. ***