* 9601031
* Dissertation Research:  A Quantitative Assessment of        Variability in the Australopithecine, Human, Chimpanzee and Gorilla Face
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Richard Smith, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 01/31/1998
* USD 11,750.00

The interpretation of human evolution depends upon analysis of the behavior and
ecology of several extinct hominid species. However, the number of fossil
species represented by known specimens remains controversial, as does the
assignment of many individual specimens to particular species. A basic
unresolved problem concerns the range of diversity of individual species: At
what point are the differences between any two or more specimens sufficient to
suggest that they are from different species, as opposed to simply representing
the differences found among individuals from a single species? Using new
computer digitizing technology and three-dimensional analyses, measurements will
be taken from the facial bones of virtually all available australopithecine
fossils, and measurements of the identical facial structures will be taken on
large samples of skeletal material of modern humans, chimpanzees, and gorillas.
The range of variation in facial morphology of these three modern species will
be used as a basis of comparison for the ranges of variation among
australopithecine specimens. These results will provide important insights into
population structure and sexual dimorphism of early human ancestors. The extant
data will serve to both evaluate the categorization of australpithecine
specimens into species groups, as well as to establish whether or not
australopithecine species as currently defined are more or less variable than
modern analogues.