* 9601294
* Genetic Analysis of Yeast Casein Kinase 1 Function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Lucy Robinson, LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1999
* USD 294,979.00

9601294 Robinson Protein kinases of the casein kinase 1 (CK1) family are found
in all eukaryotes. These kinases phosphorylate serine or threonine residues in
an local acidic context, which can be comprised of an upstream phosphorylated
amino acid. There are at least four distinct CK1 isoforms in mammalian cells,
several of which are encoded by multiple genes. These isoforms have distinct
cellular locations and functions. For example, one human form that localizes to
the mitotic spindle appears to be required for mitosis. Another form, in liver
cells, may participate in the response to epinephrine. The study of these
proteins as distinct gene products is very recent, and little is yet known about
the functions of most forms of CK1. The budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
which is amenable to genetic manipulation, contains three CK1 isoforms. One
isoform affects DNA recombination and repair. The second has as yet undefined
functions, which appear to be distinct from those of the other two. The third, a
plasma membrane-associated CK1 isoform encoded by the functionally redundant
YCK1 / YCK2 gene pair, is the first CK1 demonstrated to be essential for cell
growth and division and is the focus of this study. The goal is to identify the
cellular pathways that require Yck activity and to identify the biological
targets of these kinases. Recent results suggest that multiple cellular
processes require the activity of the Yck proteins. Two processes will be
studied in detail, morphogenesis and endocytosis. The analysis of mutants and
the characterization of the pleiotropic phenotype of the conditional yck mutant
will allow insight into these and other processes that require Yck activity. The
proposed research combines classical and molecular genetic techniques with
biochemical and cell biological methods of analysis to achieve three specific
goals. The first is to assess the requirement and temporal specificity for
localization of the Yck proteins to the site of the emerging bud, and to
determine the relationship of Yck-mediated phosphorylation to the activities of
other proteins at this site. This will be accomplished by immunohistochemistry
and by assay of differential in vivo phosphate labeling of potential targets in
a conditional YCK mutant. The second is to clarify the relationship of Yck
activity with endocytic processes. This will be accomplished by genetic and
biochemical assays of various endocytic processes in a conditional mutant. Four
gene products with sequence similarity to the four subunits of clathrin adaptor
complexes were identified by mutations that eliminate the requirement for Yck
function. These will be assessed for their ability to interact in a complex and
for association with specific vesicle populations. Also, tests for a role in
endocytosis will be performed with loss of function mutants. The third aim is to
identify other gene products that either act in these pathways or that are
affected by Yck phosphorylation. A genetic screen for mutants requiring full
levels of Yck activity will be carried out using yck mutants. This approach will
allow independent confirmation of Yck activity in endocytosis and morphogenesis,
and may allow identification of downstream functions as well as potential
targets for these protein kinases in other pathways. The Yck kinases are
functionally similar to a mammalian CK1 isoform; therefore the results of these
studies could provide clues for CK1 functions in higher cells ***