* 9601209
* RNA Transport
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Mary Lou King, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9601209 King In the 1980's, a new area of investigation opened up with the
discovery that specific mRNAs are targeted to given regions of the Xenopus (King
and Barklis, 1985; Rebagliati et al., 1985) and Drosophila oocyte (Lehamann and
Nusslein-Volhard, 1986; Driever and Nusslein-Volhard, 1988). The consequences of
RNA localization for development have proven to be profound. In Drosophila,
local RNA expression results in protein gradients that determine regional
identity including head, thorax, and abdomen (Wang and Lehmann, 1991) as well as
the germ cell lineage (Ephrussi and Lehmann, 1992). More recently, a number of
localized mRNAs have been described in somatic cells, and it is now clear that
RNA targeting is an important regulatory mechanism for localizing particular
proteins (St. Johnston, 1995). However, little is known about how RNAs are
selected for, transported to and anchored in specific subcellular domains. Our
lab has isolated and characterized seven RNAs which display two basic
localization pathways to the vegetal cortex in Xenopus oocytes (Forristall et
al., 1995). In this proposal, the focus will be on analyzing Xcat-2, and VegT
RNAs as representatives of the two pathways because of their importance in early
developmental processes. VegT encodes a protein that can regulate the activity
of other genes. It contains a domain that is 50% identical with the DNA binding
domain of mouse brachyury (T gene), a transcription factor required for normal
early development and highly conserved in other vertebrates (Kisper and
Herrmann, 1993; Kispert et. al., 1995). VegT RNA injection on the ventral side
of Xenopus embryos induces a second dorsal axis. Mis-expression of VegT results
in headless embryos (Zhang and King, 1996b). Xcat-2 RNA encodes an RNA binding
protein that may be essential for germ cell determination and gamete production.
Xcat-2 co-localizes with the germ plasm which contains the presumptive
determinants for the germ cells. Dr. King's working hypothe sis is that RNAs are
selected for transport based on localization signals within their structure in
the 3'UTR, together with specifically bound proteins. She further hypothesizes
that the component parts of the transport particle as well as the RNA
localization motif are likely to be conserved among vegetally localized RNAs
using the same pathway. To test her hypostheses, she proposes to accomplish the
following specific aims: 1. To identify the RNA localization signal and
inclusive functional elements for Xcat-2 and VegT. 2. To determine what proteins
bind the localization elements and to assess whether they are required for
localization. 3. To determine if there is a common localization motif among
vegetally localized mRNAs using the same pathway in oogenesis. Her approach
takes advantage of the ability of in vitro synthesized RNAs to localize to the
oocyte's vegetal cortex after microinjection. A series of deletion mutants of
the RNAs will be created to identify localization signals and elements and to
assess the function of photocrossinked proteins to these signals. Finally, she
will use seven other localized RNAs that we have characterized to ask if a
common localization motif can be identified. Although oocytes will be employed
in this study because they offer many distinct advantages, the mechanism of RNA
localization is most certainly conserved among diverse cell types. Therefore,
her analysis should provide insight into how cells in general regionally target
RNAs.