* 9601402
* Microeconomic and Institutional Influences on the EmploymentRelation in Contemporary Russia
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Raymond Russell, III, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1998
* USD 122,068.00

This is a study of institutional and microeconomic processes concerning
managers and workers in Russia. The Russian government's programs of reform and
privatization have brought about major changes in the Russian economy in the
past five years. These recent transformations and the growing diversity of the
Russian economy provide a uniquely rich opportunity to test general theories in
the sociology of organizations and microeconomic exchange. Now that the Russian
economy has split into a multiplicity of ownership sectors, the relative
influence of institutional and microeconomic processes can be expected to differ
considerably from sector to sector. Institutional processes are hypothesized to
be strongest in the state-owned sector, where the influence of the government is
strongest, and where the "structural inertia" of individual organizations can be
expected to be greatest because of these organizations' greater age. In the
private sector, in contrast, institutional processes are likely to be weaker,
and microeconomic determinants of employment relations should have freer reign.
This study will investigate these processes by interviewing managers and workers
in organizations drawn from the three major sectors of the contemporary Russian
economy: the state-owned sector, which in 1994 still employed 46.7% of the
Russian labor force; the private sector, which in 1994 employed 31.8% of the
labor force; and Russia's new "mixed" ownership sector, which in 1994 accounted
for 20.2% of Russian workers. One organization from each of these sectors will
be selected from each of five industries (manufacturing, construction, retail
trade, personal services, and science and scientific services) in each of three
cities (Moscow, the national capital; a regional or "oblast" capital; and a
small city). This research will test and develop theories in the sociology of
organizations, and it will gain insight into the dramatic changes currently in
progress in Russia. Thus it will cont ribute to the knowledge base required by
both scholars and policy makers who wish to understand the transformation of
formerly state-socialist societies and the global socio-economic evolution that
distinguishes the end of the twentieth century.