* 9601295
* Collaborative Research on the Dynamics of Socio-Political   Orientations:  The Fourth Wave of the Political             Socialization Project
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1996,02/29/2000
* M. Kent Jennings, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 02/29/2000
* USD 519,237.00

This project will extend the Youth/Parent Political Socialization Study, a
national survey of high school seniors and their parents that began in 1965 and
was successfully repeated in 1973 and 1982. The fourth wave will focus on the
original youth sample, now nearing age 50. Interviews will also be conducted
with parents and offspring ultimately yielding a three generational data set
measuring political attitudes and behaviors of Americans. The fourth wave will
gauge long-term levels of persistence and change in political orientations. With
the respondents having undergone important life course transitions -- marital
instability, parenthood, aging children and aging parents, occupational changes
and career advancement -- the study offers a unique opportunity to evaluate the
implications of these transitions for political continuity and change. It also
offers the opportunity to examine the short and long run attitudinal and
behavioral consequences of major socio-political events bracketed by 1965 and
1997 and to investigate the individual level dynamics of major trends in
political attitudes and behaviors over this period. A second major aim of the
study is to use the parent-child pairs, the respondent-spouse pairs and other
family combinations that are imbedded in the design to trace the dynamics of
socialization and interaction within the family.