* 9601247
* Transnational Communities:  Their Emergence and Effects     Among Latin American Immigrants in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Alejandro Portes, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/1998
* USD 364,160.00

This is a study of the emergence of transnational communities involving the
United States and Latin American countries. Transnational communities are
created by immigrants who engage in a pattern of repeated back-and-forth
movements between countries, using such displacements in order to implement
complex economic strategies. Transnational communities can be defined as the sum
total of actors in an immigrant population whose prime occupational activity
requires long-distance contacts across national borders. For the most part,
these contacts involve the immigrants' countries of origin and their purpose is
primarily economic. However, as transnational networks develop, they come to
encompass social and political activities as well, and to involve third
countries. This study will examine the origins, characteristics, and effects of
this novel phenomenon as it has developed among Salvadoran and Dominican
immigrants, two of the largest groups arriving in the United States in recent
years. Processes of return migration, the sending of remittances to family
members, and the sponsorship of kin left behind are all familiar events that
have been studied in the past as manifestations of the enduring ties of
immigrants to their home countries. The novel development at present is the
proliferation of such ties to the point that sending and receiving areas become
integrated into unified social structures and those involved acquire a status
that transcends that of conventional immigrant. To address this phenomenon, this
project will conduct an integrated primary data collection effort involving
immigrant communities in the United States and selected cities in the two
sending countries. Two phases of data collection will be supported by the
National Science Foundation. In the first, informant interviews will be
conducted in two areas of concentration of each immigrant group and in two
cities of each sending country in order to identify the extent and range of
transnational enterprises. In the s econd phase, a survey of transnational
entrepreneurs and a matched sample of regular immigrants will be conducted in
four target communities in the United States. The resultant data file will
comprise 2,300 interviews in 8 different field sites. This research will add
considerably to our understanding of this new immigration-related phenomenon, by
mapping the social networks underlying the emergence of transnational
communities and testing hypotheses about the structure of networks of successful
transnational entrepreneurs. Because transnational communities link populations
across national boundaries, their growth in the modern world represents a
significant aspect of global change that will have great consequences for the
world's social, cultural, economic and natural environment.