* 9601532
* Oxygen Isotope Compositions of Fossil Biogenic Phosphates:  Climate Reconstruction in East Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Margaret Schoeninger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1998
* USD 60,768.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Margaret Schoeninger and her
colleagues will initiate a long term project to reconstruct East African Plio-
pleistocene climatic variation based on the analysis of phosphate oxygen
incorporated into tooth enamel. This first stage of the research will be
directed to the study of enamel to determine the extent of post depositional
alteration or diagenesis. The group will develop tests which determine whether
or not diagenesis has occurred so that samples can be selected accordingly. To
accomplish this goal they will collect both enamel and associated geological
samples and determine the degree to which host rocks are lithified. This will be
compared to the degree of enamel chemical alteration. Infrared spectra will be
obtained since preliminary information indicates that recrystallized apatites
are identifiably different from unaltered phosphates. Fluorine content, which
increases with diagenetic alteration, will also be measured and several other
indicators of change examined as well. With such data it should be possible to
determine if unaltered samples exist and determine criteria to select them. If
the project is successful it will provide a methodological tool of value to many
geochemists, biochemists and related scientists. It will also set the stage for
the next step of this research. Depending on diet and thermoregulation the
oxygen isotope ratios in different species of animal reflect different climatic
variables and through analysis of samples from carefully controlled
stratigraphic contexts it is possible to monitor changes in temperature humidity
and rainfall over time. The researchers hope to establish a climatic record for
the Northern Turkana area of Kenya over the period from ca. 5 million years ago
to recent times. Against these data it will then be possible to examine the
evolution of mammalian species including hominids. This region is particularly
important because of the rich fossil materials it contains. Many scientists have
speculated on the relationship between species change and climate and this
research will provide important data to address the issue.