* 9601816
* Acquisition of Equipment for Research and Education in Plant Ecophysiology, Ecology, and Evolutionary Genetics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Thomas Mitchell-Olds, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 109,170.00

We are developing a collaborative research and education group in plant
ecophysiology ecology. and evolutionary genetics. This interdisciplinary group
is composed of six scientists. five of which have ;assumed their positions since
January 1993. Our group is interested in the genetic variation of
ecophysiological, phenological and morphological traits and how these affect
population dynamics and ultimately, community structure. This interdisciplinary
group is focussing on questions essential to understanding the evolutionary and
physiological causes and consequences of patterns in plant ecology. Due to the
rapid increase of our research activities in plant ecophysiology, ecology and
evolutionary genetics, we have an urgent need for plant growth facilities and
analytical equipment. We are strongly committed to developing a collaborative
group with national and international recognition extending beyond the
individual members. With well equipped facilities we can significantly increase
collaborative efforts and research productivity. and continue to recruit
qualified graduate students and post-docs in our program. With adequate
infrastructure, our complementary fields of expertise will lead to many
additional future collaborations. Specifically we are requesting three walk-in
growth chambers, a dry combustion C,N,S analyzer, a scintillation counter and a
plate reader. A steering committee composed by the six principal investigators
will determine growth chamber space partitioning and day-to-day use of
analytical equipment. Specific training to graduate and undergraduate students
will be offered by means of intensive workshops developed by members of the
steering committee.