* 9601607
* Acquisition of a Structural NMR Resource
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Vern Schramm, Yeshiva University, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 408,166.00

Shared training and research facilities at the Albert Einstein College of
Medicine have been developed substantially during the past decade. The focus of
these facilities has been in structural and mechanistic biology. These new
facilities include a) an x-ray crystallography suite with facilities for three
faculty members and trainees, b) a mass spectrometry facility with three
instruments, faculty and staff, c) a facility for micro-scale peptide synthesis,
isolation, sequencing and analysis, d) a laser spectroscopy laboratory for time-
resolved molecular spectroscopy which supports a broad group of faculty and
trainees, e) a synchrotron beam-line at Brookhaven National Laboratories which
currently supports research and training activities of faculty members in
several departments. These new facilities have added to the strengths of
existing programs in pulsed EPR spectroscopy (Dr. Jack Peisach), and biological
NMR (Dr. Raj Gupta). Together, these facilities make the Albert Einstein College
of Medicine one of the premier training sites for structural biology in the
greater New York area. Each year, a larger fraction of the approximately 300
Ph.D. and postdoctoral trainees are involved in structural biology training as
part of their research programs. A weakness in our training and research
programs has been the deficiency in multipleresonance high-field NMR equipment
of the type required for structural determination of biological molecules by
current technologies. This deficiency was mentioned in the written critiques for
each of the past two site-visits for training grants in structural biology and
biophysics at this school. This proposal describes a plan to remedy this
weakness by the construction of a structural NMR resource containing two
spectrometers and associated workstations for molecular modeling: 600 MHz
1H13C15N triple resonance 2.5 and 5 mm probes, 4 channel system, 3-axis
gradients 300 MHz 1H13C31P19F 5 mm probe and 10 mm broadband multinuclear probe,
2 channels four 175 MHz UNIX graphics workstations located in the facility for
offline data analysis The facility will be newly constructed for the purpose of
housing this equipment and will be located on the ground floor of the Ullman
Research Building, excavated into foundation bedrock. A highly qualified faculty
member, Dr. Mark Girvin, has been recruited to oversee the facility. A full-time
staff person will also be provided. The structural NMR resource will operate as
a shared research and training facility available to all faculty and their
trainees. Examples of research problems under investigation by faculty and their
trainees include: structure of the transmembrane subunit c of F1Fo ATP synthase
from E. coli melting rates of stem-loop RNA secondary structure and the
influence of RNA binding proteins structure/function relationships for cell-
surface N-linked complex carbohydrates structure of domains which constitute
protein-localization binding sites structure of chromogranin A1-40, a disulfide
secretory protein and the effect of AA-replacements structure of the linker
region of the membrane protein P-glycoprotein determination of catalytic site
flap movements by NMR of 15N-labeled tyrosine phosphatase analysis of the
binding of carbohydrates to lectins by NOE and paramagnetic effects In addition
to fostering these research programs, the structural NMR resource will be used
as the site for a hands-on advanced level graduate school course in the theory
and practice of solving structural problems by NMR. The course is to be taught
every two years so all Ph.D. students will have the opportunity to learn NMR
methods of structural analysis. The location of the graphics workstations in the
structural NMR resource will facilitate use of the laboratory for graduate an d
postgraduate training.