* 9601207
* School Qualities, Education Policy, and the Distribution of Educational Benefits
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Richard Romano, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara J. Craig
* 10/31/1999
* USD 288,449.00

Dennis Epple and Richard E. Romano Carnegie Mellon University SBR-9601207 This
research will study public school policy from a theoretical perspective. A
computational model paralleling the theoretical model is developed and used to
explore properties of the model and investigate policy predictions. We compare
outcomes in localities that have residency requirements (neighborhood schools)
with outcomes where there is some degree of choice among public schools.
Outcomes with costless choice among public schools will be contrasted to
outcomes with costly exercise of public school choice (e.g. commuting costs). In
practice, when school systems introducing choice programs, they often impose
selection criteria for admission to various schools; the research will
investigate how such "controlled choice" policies affect equilibrium outcomes.
These neighborhood school and choice alternatives will be considered in
environments with centralized school finance and with decentralized finance. We
analyze settings with only public schools, then when there are both public and
private school alternatives. The research characterizes the factors that
determinate expenditures in all schools in all variations of the model. Public
school expenditures will be determined by majority rule, exploiting our earlier
work on voting over public provision when there are private alternatives. The
model developed in this research has the following features. Students are
characterized by an ability level and household income. A student's educational
achievement is increasing in own ability, educational expenditure per student,
and in the abilities of the student's classmates (a peer-group effect). The
demand for educational achievement is increasing in the student's household
income. The final part of the project will enhance the characterization of
school quality to include faculty-student ratios and a hierarchy of faculty
skills. The educational achievement function will be broadened to allow average
faculty qu ality and faculty-student ratios to affect achievement. The utility
function of faculty will depend on income, student quality, quality of faculty
peers, and, possibility, the faculty/student ratio. This model will serve to
permit analysis also of college and university education. We will investigate
how alternative policies affect the achievement of students of varying ability
and income levels, the distribution of students by ability and income across
schools, the welfare of students, school taxes and expenditures, private school
financial aid policies, the distribution of faculty by ability across schools,
and determination of faculty salaries in all schools.