* 9601370
* Monitoring Rapid Social Change in Southeastern Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Jane Collier, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1999
* USD 186,716.00

This project involves the ethnographic research of cultural anthropologists
based at Stanford University. The project is to monitor and compare the
economic, political and demographic transformations occurring in two highland
Chiapas, Mexico indigenous communities whose changes have been charted in
separate projects for almost 30 years. This area has seen an armed rebellion by
Zapatista rebels in 1994, and is the focus of high interest by the national
Mexican government as well as foreign observers. The communities to be studied
exemplify broader dynamics affecting indigenous society throughout this region
and in other similar regions in Latin America. One community in Zinacantan has
been the local indigenous elite for over 500 years, and has differentiated
around capitalized farming and small business enterprises; the other in Chamula
has been land-poor for many years and has relied traditionally on agrarian wage
work. In both communities economic changes have recently factionalized local
politics, in one case identifying with national political parties, in the other
with national (and international) religious proselytizing sects. Both
communities are experiencing new flows along what were traditionally fixed
ethnic boundaries. Using methods of ethnographic participant-observation coupled
with household-level censuses of local communities that have been recorded since
the early 1960s in one case and the early 1970s in another case, the
investigators will update demographic, political, social, economic and cultural
information on families and individuals. These censuses will be coordinated,
computerized, and placed into relational databases, which will be linked with a
local research institution ECOSUR, compiling health-related socio-economic data
for use by regional planners. The strength of this data set will be the
relatively long time span, the rich ethnographically-described cultural context,
and the clear focus on individuals and households instead of on communities.
This project is important because the data to be gathered will be used by
analysts to explain differential activities in job creation, social and
political organization, and religious conversions in this region which is
undergoing dynamic rapid and explosive change. It will be an immensely valuable
resource for social scientists trying to explain the course of events as well as
planners trying to modify these trends.