* 9601487
* Acquisition of Equipment for Image Analysis and 3-D         Reconstruction
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Roger Anderson, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1998
* USD 122,000.00

This proposal is for the acquisition of equipment to support two facilities
using image analysis; an image analysis core facility and a three-dimensional
reconstruction facility. These facilities will be housed in separate spaces on
the third and fourth floors in a new 80,000 square foot networked Biology
Building. The image analysis core facility will be able to acquire macroscopic
and microscopic images. Equipment for this facility include a camera stand,
stereo microscope, CCD camera, framegrabber and Pentium computer with Image Pro
Plus software, video monitor, and vibration isolation table for a new Olympus
BH40 epifluorescent microscope. A portable x-ray machine (housed in a research
lab) will be used to produce x-ray images of bone sizes and angles and egg size
and number in living reptiles. Radiographs measurements will be taken and
analyzed with the image analysis system. Data will be stored on Iomega 100 MB
zip drives. A separate Pentium computer with Image Pro Plus and Zip drive will
be housed in a computer lab to allow analysis of archived images. This facility
will support research programs of several Biology faculty across several
disciplines. Roger Anderson and Herb Brown will be using this facility for
individual and collaborative projects to examine skeletal elements and
ecological performance in reptiles from the wild. Giselle Muller Parker and
Emily Peele will use image analysis to count and size autofluorescent algae and
fluorescently-stained bacteria. June Ross will use the image analysis to measure
morphological features of fossil bryozoans. The three-dimensional reconstruction
facility will be used for the optical sectioning of fluorescently-stained
embryos, the removal of out-of-focus fluorescence, the reconstruction of three-
dimensional structures, and the analysis of three-dimensional data. Equipment
include a vibration isolation table for a Leica DMRB rnicroscope, a high
resolution 40X oil objective, CellScan System for three-dimensional
reconstructions, Pentium computer, Tektronics printer, and a lGBJaz drive for
data storage. This facility will support research programs of two Biology
faculty. David Leaf will use the three-dimensional facility for
immunofluorescent localization of a rab GTPbinding protein in sea urchin
embryos. Mary Anne Pultz will use the facility for immunofluorescent stainings
of Nasonia wild type and mutant embryos with cross-reactive antibodies against
Drosophila developmental regulatory proteins. Both projects are supported by
NIH-AREA grants. This facility will also support a collaborative project of Mary
Anne Pultz and David Leaf to analyze gene expression of the Nasonia homologue of
Caudal by in situ hybridization and immunofluorescent staining. Finally, the
facility will be used to start a long-term project on producing a comparative
three-dimensional atlas of gene expression in Drosophila and Nasonia.