* 9601018
* NMR and MRI Studies of Biomaterials.  Structure, Dynamics   and Processing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* David Zax, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2001
* USD 552,695.00

9601018 Jelinski The goal of this research is to understand the molecular basis
for the exceptional mechanical properties of dragline silk from the spider
Nephila clavipes. This biopolymer possesses a unique combination of high
stiffness with a very large extension to break, so that the toughness -- the
energy required to cause a tensile failure -- is very high. This unique
combination of properties makes this polyamide in some ways superior to the best
manmade synthetic polymers such as nylon-6,6 and Kevlar. Solid state deuterium
NMR and high resolution solid state NMR, including REDOR, will be the primary
physical techniques used in this research. The specific goals of this project
are (1) to test the hypothesis that the glycine-serine pairs are involved in
bends; (2) to understand the molecular dynamics and response to stretching of
the highly conserved tyrosine, leucine, and tyrosine residues, which are known
to reside in the amorphous regions; (3) to discover the changes in amino acid
orientation and dynamics upon supercontraction; and (4) to deduce how the spider
processes the silk and then mimic or modify this process in the laboratory. This
research will produve a fundamental understanding of the structure, dynamics and
processing of strong and tough protein polymers, and thus it will provide the
underpinnings for the manufacture of an entirely new class of materials. %%% Now
that the tools of modern biotechnology make it possible to produce "designer"
materials in bacteria and in plants, it is appropriate and timely to develop a
fundamental understanding of certain biomaterials. Silk from the Golden Orb
Weaving spider, Nephila clavipes, is being used as a source ofb io-inspiration.
This silk is stronger per cross-sectional area than steel, and stretches to 10%
of its length before breaking. This research aims to identify the molecular
arrangements and motions that contribute to its strength and toughness. Such an
understanding would permit the design of non-natural, protein-based, high-
performance materials. Once the materials are produced it will also be necessary
to understand how to process them correctly so that they acquire their ultimate
mechanical properties. The spinning apparatus of the spider is being used as a
source of bio-inspiration to learn how to process these matherials into fibers.
***