* 9601096
* Analysis of Histidine Decarboxylase Cooperativity by        Crystallography and Protein Engineering
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Jon Robertus, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2000
* USD 240,000.00

9601096 Robertus Histidine decarboxylase (HDC) from Lactobacillus 30a converts
histidine to histamine and CO2. The enzyme shows cooperative regulation. It is
activated by low pH. The goal is to examine the mechanism of this activation in
atomic detail using X-ray crystallography and site-specific mutagenesis. A
kinetic analysis of HDC found the wild-type enzyme can be described as having a
Tense state T with low substrate affinity and a Relaxed state R with higher
affinity; low pH and high histidine concentrations stabilize the R form. Several
site-directed mutants, including some double mutants, have been made which
stabilize the T form. The X-ray structure of HDC originally solved by the
Hackert group corresponds to the R state at pH 4.8. Two mutants of the enzyme
have been crystallized in its T state. X-ray data have been collected to 3.1 (
resolution on one form and molecular replacement and SIR phased solutions of the
structures are underway. It is also proposed to complete the molecular structure
of several other important mutants which have been crystallized. The T
structures will be compare with the known R model to describe tertiary and
quaternary structural changes involved in the cooperative mechanism. Residues
likely to play prominent roles in the T to R conversion will be identified. A
substrate analog, histidine methyl ester HME, will be soaked into the crystals
and the mode of substrate binding analyzed. These will be compared with the
binding already described for R state HDC at pH 4.8. Difference in binding
caused by pH and/or by quaternary structural rearrangement will be elucidated.
%%% The overall goal of this research is to shed light on the atomic forces and
interactions which turn enzymes on and off. The principles involved in this kind
of regulation are universal, and what we learn studying an enzyme from bacteria
will help us understand the rules used by all living systems. The switch trigger
under study in this project, the simple hydrogen ion, is of considerable
importance. The reason is that many metabolic processes involve the movement or
production of hydrogen ions, and indeed they are among the most common effectors
of biologic activity known. In spite of the simplicity and breadth of this kind
of enzyme regulation, there are presently no detailed models of how hydrogen
ions turn proteins off or on at the atomic level. We have formed a likely
hypothesis that the positively charged ion binds between two molecules of the
enzyme when they are arranged in a ring, and "pulls" them into an active
conformation. When the hydrogen ion level in the cell decreases, the ones
trapped in the protein exit leaving two negative charges at this site on the
proteins to repel one another. This repulsion changes the enzyme shape into an
inactive conformation. The work in this proposal should produce an atomic model
of the enzyme with and without the bound hydrogen ion and allow us to actually
see if the hypothesis is correct. This in turn will build our confidence that we
can understand the strategies used by other living systems to regulate enzyme
activity according to the local hydrogen ion concentration (pH). ***