* 9601720
* ARI: Advanced Post Processing Instrumentation for           Miniaturization Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2000
* USD 600,000.00

*** 9601720 Warrington This Academic Research Infrastructure award provides
funding to purchase an injection molding machine, electroplating stations, a
scanning Auger spectroscope, and an optical interferometric microscope. The
injection molding machine and electroplating stations will enable the mass
fabrication of microparts. The injection molding machine will replicate
microparts in plastics, and the electroplating stations will allow for micro
part production in a variety of metals. The scanning Auger spectroscope and
optical interferometric microscope will be used to analyze and test the micro
parts themselves and the masks and molds that are used to make them. The
scanning Auger spectroscope will be used to determine surface/interfacial
chemical composition, which is critical in the fabrication of masks, molds, and
micro parts. The optical interferometric microscope will be used to measure
surface roughness and geometry. This equipment will augment existing fabrication
equipment at the Institute for Micromanufacturing and in the College of
Engineering and Science at Louisiana Tech University. The above equipment will
enable and enhance research on the production and application of masks and molds
used in micropart fabrication and will also enable the direct fabrication of
microparts from these molds in a variety of materials. Nine projects in the
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technologies will take advantage of the
equipment. In particular, the injection molding machine will be used to model
and experimentally verify the micromolding process and will serve to rapidly
fabricate microsystem packaging concepts. The machine will also be used to
develop methods for mass replication of microstructures and systems using
polymer molds. The electroplating stations will be used to create
microstructures in nickel, gold and other materials and for rapid, economical
fabrication of micromilling tools. The scanning Auger spectrometer is an
instrument for identifying surface and int erfacial contamination, which
detracts from the quality of plating processes, photo resist, wafer adhesion,
and multi-level structure fabrication. This instrument will have use across the
university. The optical interferometric microscope will be used to quantify
vertical and sloped surfaces up to 5 mm in height. The proposed equipment will
allow for the development of process technology unique in the world, and for the
measurement, analysis, and replication of micro- to macro-scale devices from
masks and molds with three-dimensional surface features. ***