* 9601272
* Atmospheric Contamination of Russian Soils (1895-Present)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Jennifer Harden, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 08/31/1999
* USD 165,000.00

SBR-9601272 Andrei Lapenis SUNY-Albany The research supported by this award aims
to take advantage of the recent discovery of information that describes the
location and circumstances of late-nineteenth-century soils samples from sites
across Russia (across the East European Plain and in central and eastern
Siberia). The study will: measure the accumulation of atmospheric contaminants
in Russian soils by comparing the 1893 and 1996/7 samples; measure the changes
in soil carbon stocks; combine these analyses to assess the effect of climate
and soil type on the presence of trace metals in the soil profiles; and provide
data to constrain models of atmospheric emission of these elements during
Russian industrialization. The samples have been carefully stored, and with the
help of a pilot award from NSF (as well as some institutional and some personal
funds), the investigator has ascertained that 47 samples are in exceptionally
good condition, and that the locational and attribute information is sufficient
to locate and access the sites for current-day sampling. In addition, some of
the sites are in environmentally protected or controlled locations. The
investigator has collected long-term weather records for some of the sites
already. The current research will focus on four sites, which have been located
exactly from the documentation of the original samples. Three of which have the
same vegetative profile now as in the late nineteenth century. All four sites
will be resampled, and all eight samples will be analyzed for organic matter,
radiocarbon content, trace elements, base cations, pH, and particular
anthropogenic organic compounds. These data will be used to: measure the
accumulation of radiocarbon and toxic metals, trace nutrients, and other
atmospheric inputs; model the rate and form in which these elements are
processed in the different soils and ecosystems; and relate the storage, depth
distribution, and form of these constituents to climate and soils
characteristics. Th is should make small but substantive progress toward large-
scale estimates of organic carbon dynamics and trace-element contamination of
Russian soils. The research promises advances in soils science, the interaction
of climatological and ecological change, and the extent and nature of
anthropogenic effects on the environment. The period bracketed by the two
sampling dates entails massive industrialization in Russia, widely understood to
have affected the natural environment. While the presence of only two sampling
dates makes certain inferences difficult or impossible, the discovery of these
samples and their documentation is a rich find. This research offers an
unprecedented opportunity to study long-term carbon cycling, pollutant loading
in soils, and the nature of trace elements in Russian soils.