* 9601999
* U.S.-Turkey Workshop on 'Descriptive Models of Engineering  Design' - Istanbul, Turkey, 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Omer Akin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1997
* USD 15,360.00

Description: This project supports participation of six American scientists in
a U.S.-Turkish binational workshop on `Description Models of Engineering Design`
to be held at the Faculty of Architecture of Istanbul Technical University, in
Istanbul, Turkey in the Fall of 1996. This project brings together a number of
experts from the U.S. and from Turkey, as well as a number of experts from few
other countries. The purpose is to encourage inter-disciplinary interaction and
collaboration between researchers interested in describing engineering design
for a variety of purposes, including : understanding, prediction, explanation,
formal modeling, simulation, decision support, design assistance, and
automation. Formal methods and tool development in the area of engineering and
building design have had limited success. For example, computer assisted
building design (CABD) has made little impact in the design delivery process or
the actual performance of building or similar structures. Recently there has
been an increase in the attention paid to understanding how humans design and
how they use tools-especially electronic ones- while they design. Efforts in
this area are carried out by the NSF supported Engineering Design Research
Center, at Carnegie Mellon University, to develop design tools and understand
their use, to improve performance in industry. Scope: This project supports a
new idea for a workshop dealing with design as multidisciplinary endeavor
applicable to many engineering fields such as in structures, machines, and other
engineering systems. The workshop will serve as a medium for interdisciplinary
exchange of findings and ideas between international participants who will be
distributed between several key disciplines such as mechanical engineering,
electrical engineering, building engineering, and architecture. The meeting will
produce publications including pre-proceedings, and selected publications in the
international journal of Design Studies, and later in an edited book. The
meeting also is to forge a plan of cooperation among participating individuals
and institutions. The cooperation will target key concepts: practice, tool,
inter-disciplinary transfer, productivity and creativity. This project allows a
U.S. team of eminent scientists to work in an international setting with foreign
colleagues to stimulate this important area of improvement in design. The
project meets the objectives of the Division of International Programs (INT).
The Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems and INT are jointly funding this
project.