* 9601165
* Synaptic and Non-Synaptic Interactions Between Mesopontine  Cholinergic Neurons Controlling REM Sleep
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Christopher Leonard, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Emmeline Edwards
* 08/31/1998
* USD 144,873.00

9601165 Leonard Synaptic and non-synaptic interactions between mesopontine
cholinergic neurons controlling REM sleep. An important step toward
understanding how we sleep and dream has been the identification of specific
groups of neurons in the brain that generate these states. An important next
step will be to determine how these neurons interact. This proposed work is
focused on how signals from neurons that trigger dreaming and waking are
controlled. These cells, which use the chemical acetylcholine to communicate
with their distant target-cells, may also release this chemical locally to
regulate their own activity. Our experiments will test this possibility by
stimulating these cells and determining if any released acetylcholine can
influence the neurons in the immediate neighborhood of the stimulated cells. We
will also use a novel method to visualize these neurons with the electron
microscope to look for possible chemical release sites. This will allow us to
determine if these release sites make direct contact with neighboring neurons
that contain acetylcholine or are positioned at a distance from these neurons
and their processes. The results will help determine if acetylcholine acts as a
local feedback signal and whether this signal gets transmitted via classical
rapid cell-to- cell contacts or via a slower and longer pathway through the
extracellular space. Since these two signaling paths have different spatial and
temporal properties, our results will make testable predictions about the role
of acetylcholine in controlling the timing of sleep and wakefulness.
Accordingly, these findings will advance our understanding of the neural
mechanisms of sleeping and dreaming.