* 9601173
* Functional Morphology of Vomeronasal Chemoreception in      Squamate Reptiles
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Kurt Schwenk, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 08/31/2001
* USD 114,839.00

IBN-9601173 Schwenk Squamate reptiles (lizards and snakes) have figured
prominently in the growth of biological thought over the last fifty years. In
particular, they have served as model organisms in studies that have shaped the
field of vertebrate ecology, strongly influencing the development of modern
ecological theory. It is now universally acknowledged that much of the
behavioral ecology of lizards and snakes is directed by the chemical senses,
especially the vomeronasal system (VNS). Therefore, elucidation of VNS function
is a desirable goal within this broader context. The VNS is mediated by paired
sensory receptors called the vomeronasal (or Jacobson's) organs (VNO) which lie
in the snout just above the palate. In squamates the VNO are separated from the
nasal cavities but open directly to the oral cavity through two tiny holes in
the palate. They are stimulated by a unique behavior called tongue-flicking (TF)
during which the tongue is protruded and oscillated to varying degrees. The
tongue tip samples environmental chemicals extra-orally, either from the air or
from the ground, and delivers these chemicals to the openings in the palate
where they make their way to the VNO. The study will elucidate the anatomical
and functional bases of VNS function in a representative species, the Gila
monster (Heloderma suspectum). Gila monsters are an ideal study species for VNS
function because they retain an intermediate morphology of the chemosensory
apparatus that can serve as a functional baseline for future comparative
studies. By embodying both primitive and derived features, their morphology and
behavior provides information that can be generalized up and down the squamate
evolutionary tree. The study will use dissection, histology and electron
microscopy to examine the gross and microscopic anatomy of the tongue-
vomeronasal system. The morphological mode l generated from these data will be
combined with functional data derived from high speed cinegraphic (slow motion
movie) and cineradiographic (x-ray movie) analyses to create a functional-
morphological model of (1) tongue protrusion and oscillation; (2) environmental
chemical sampling; (3) chemical delivery to the VNO. This model of VNS function
will be supplemented with a theoretical/mathematical model of how chemical
molecules diffuse into the fluid coating the tongue surface so that chemicals
can be concentrated on the tongue during a tongue-flick. By clarifying the
mechanism of the most fundamental sensory system in squamate reptiles, an
important model group, this study should contribute substantively to our further
understanding of how this and other animal groups diversify through time.