* 9601722
* Development of Instrumentation for Measuring the Atmosphere Ar/N2 Ratio and Acquisition of Instrumentation for Automated Analysis of the Isotopes of Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Ralph Keeling, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2000
* USD 282,779.00

The PI will purchase and adapt a commercially available isotope ratio mass
spectrometer to measure variations in the Ar/N2 radio of air samples. The PIs
expect this ratio to vary due to air-sea exchange of Ar and N2 driven by
temperature-induced solubility changes. Once detected, such variations could
help to determine climatically relevant heat exchanges between the atmosphere
and oceans. The technique involves a dynamic on-line isotope dilution method in
which a rare stable isotope of argon is blended with a sample at the inlet of an
isotope ratio mass spectrometer. Critical aspects of the on-line dilution method
have been tested and proven using a mass spectrometer temporarily available at
the University of Rhode Island. The PI will obtain a dedicated instrument at
Scripps to develop an integrated measurement system consisting of a switching
stage and gas dilution stage connected to the mass spectrometer. He will test
gas handling and calibration procedures with this system. Finally, the PI will
equip the mass spectrometer to analyze isotopes of carbon dioxide and acquire
equipment for its automatic extraction from the samples for isotopic analysis.
This facility will allow analysis of carbon dioxide isotopes from air samples
from the same flask program, thus allowing further characterization of the
processes of heat and gas exchange in the world oceans. The research is
important because it will provide estimates of ocean and atmospheric charges
relevant to global climate processes.