* 9601805
* Establishment of a Nucleic Acid Analysis Shared Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Eleanor Spicer, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 01/31/1998
* USD 161,764.00

This proposal requests funds to establish a Nucleic Acid Analysis Core Facility
at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC). The goal of this facility is
to provide non-disease-oriented, basic science investigators at MUSC access to
newly developed molecular biology instrumentation that will significantly
improve the progress of their research objectives. The focus of this proposed
facility is on the analysis of DNA and RNA macromolecules. Much of the basic
biological research carried out today at MUSC, as in other universities,
involves analysis of genes, their mRNA transcripts, sequences controlling
expression of the genes, or translation of mRNA into protein products. In all of
these areas of investigation, the characterization of nucleic acids is central.
Thus, the proposed facility will have broad application to fundamental molecular
biology projects being pursued by investigators in most research departments at
MUSC. The main objective of this facility is to provide user-friendly access to
three major instruments that will provide automated DNA sequencing, automated
DNA and RNA fragment sizing and quantitation, and sophisticated imaging
detection, for analysis of electrophoretic gels and blots. The major proposed
instruments include an ABI Prism 377 DNA sequencer, an ABI Prism 310 Genetic
Analyzer and a Molecular Dynamics STORM Imager. The ABI 377 DNA sequencer will
primarily be used to carry out DNA sequence analysis on samples prepared by
individual investigators. Sequencing reactions will be performed by thermal
cycling, using a Perkin-Elmer 9600 thermal cycler. The Prism 310 Genetic
analyzer will be used to determine the size and quantity of DNA restriction
fragments and PCR products, which are produced in gene mapping and cloning
experiments. The Prism 310 will also be used for DNA sequencing on occasions
when no fragment analyses are required. The Storm Imager will have a variety of
applications, inc luding quantitative analysis of Southern, Northern and Western
blots, analysis of gel mobility shift assays, quantitation of CAT assays, and
colony and plaque screening. By housing these instruments in a shared instrument
facility and supporting their use with a trained technician and an experienced
director, we will be able to optimize the use and productivity of these
instruments and accordingly increase their impact on basic research and research
training at MUSC. The proposed facility will also be an important educational
and research laboratory for a variety of training programs at the Medical
University of South Carolina. Within the laboratories of the major and frequent
user groups, there are 26 postdoctoral fellows, 42 graduate students and an
increasing number of undergraduate science majors who will make use of the
facility in pursuing their science degrees and advanced research training. The
facility will also be used as a resource for students and high school teachers
participating in programs at MUSC aimed at advancing science education at the
K-12 levels in the State of South Carolina.