* 9601325
* Physiology, Phylogeny and Adaptation in Schiedea            (Caryophyllaceae):  An Endemic Hawaiian Plant Genus
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/05/1999
* Todd Dawson, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/05/1999
* USD 365,000.00

9601325 Dawson This research is an investigation of patterns of functional
diversity with respect to their phylogenetic (evolutionary) relationships within
Schiedea (Caryophyllaceae). A phylogeny (evolutionary tree) of the genera
Schiedea and Alsinidendron shows that the two genera arose from the same
ancestor and have radiated into diverse habitats in the Hawaiian Islands, and
include rain forest vines, coastal and subalpine shrubs, and herbs. The
comparative ecology and physiology of plants has rarely been conducted in a
rigorous phylogenetic context, with knowledge of the evolutionary relationships
of the species. As a result, it is difficult to know whether physiological,
anatomical and morphological traits are adaptations to different environments
because these traits have changed through evolutionary time in response to novel
selection in new habitats or are historical artifacts of past selection. This
research will study patterns of physiological specialization associated with
shifts in breeding system and morphology that accompany shifts in habitat
preference. Research objectives are: (1) to describe the patterns of
physiological diversity (patterns of water use and water-use efficiency using
measurements of carbon fixation and water loss rates, instantaneous water use
efficiency, carbon isotope ratio, hydraulic properties, and their associated
morphological changes) for 9 representative species; (2) analyze habitat
characteristics and correlate them with the functional traits for these species;
(3) interpret functional characteristics with respect to their evolutionary
relationships to understand patterns of physiological and morphological
character evolution; and (4) provide a detailed analysis of functional changes
within species and by gender that have occurred as hermaphroditic species
colonized drier habitats and different breeding systems evolved. Field studies
will provide information about functional variation under natural conditions,
and common garden studies will pr ovide information about functional variation
among species and by gender under controlled conditions in the absence of
environmental variation. In particular, plant hydraulic architecture (e.g., wood
structure and water transport properties) is likely to have contributed to
enhanced drought tolerance for Schiedea with evolution of woody features and
colonization of drier habitats. This study is one of the first to merge plant
physiological ecology with phylogenetic systematics, and permits an
understanding of the nature and patterns of physiological and functional
character evolution. Greater knowledge of how physiological and other functional
characters change through evolutionary time with changes in environment is
critical to understand how global climate changes will affect both native and
agricultural plants.