* 9601486
* Acquisition of Equipment for Study of Macromolecular        Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* John Lucchesi, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 159,000.00

The aim of this proposal is to establish a core facility which will provide the
necessary instrumentation for state of the art study of protein-protein and
protein-nucleic acid interactions. This facility will support the research
programs of faculty in the Department of Biology of Emory College, and the
Department of Microbiology and Immunology of the School of Medicine of Emory
University. These two Departments are located on successive floors of the
Rollins Research Center, a modern building less than five years old. Faculty
whose research efforts form the basis of this proposal include R. Ahmed
(Micro.), J. Boss (Micro.), G. Churchward (Micro.), R. Compans (Micro.), G.
Crouse (Biol.), D. Falls (Biol.), H. Ellis (Biol.), A. Glasgow (Micro.), S.
L'Hernault (Biol.), G. Jones (Biol.), J. Lucchesi (Biol.), S. Jinks-Robertson
(Biol.), C. Moran (Micro.) and K Ziegler (Micro.). There are already extensive
interactions between these faculty members because they are members of the
interdepartmental graduate programs in Genetics and Microbiology, and share
common research interests and teaching duties. The core facility will consist of
a Biacore 2000 biomolecular interaction analysis system, a Beckton Dickinson
FACSCalibur flow cytometer and cell sorting system, 2 Molecular Dynamics Storm
phosphorimagers with autoradiography and fluorescent detection capabilities, an
ABI Prism automated DNA sequencer and a Pharmacia ALF Express automated DNA
sequencer. This equipment will allow this varied group of well funded
investigators to perform state of the art studies of macromolecular interactions
that occur in many fundamental biological processes. These processes include DNA
replication, recombination and repair, transcription and the regulation of gene
expression, the development of multicellular organisms and the basic functioning
of the immune system. The types of interactions that are being studied include
the interactions between cell surface receptor proteins and their ligands,
protein-protein interactions that occur in the assembly of complex protein
machines such as RNA polymerase holoenzymes, the interactions between these
protein machines and their regulatory proteins, and the binding of recombination
and repair enzymes, nucleic acid polymerases and regulatory proteins with their
nucleic acid substrates. The investigators included in this proposal currently
have $1,899,888 in direct costs for the current year, of which $170,457 is from
NSF. These figures include only funding for basic research and do not include
funding for disease-oriented research. The goal of this application matches NSF
goals as follows. Some of the items of equipment proposed in this application
are not currently available on campus and will allow the development of
completely new experimental approaches. Access to other existing items of
equipment is becoming increasingly difficult because of the expansion of
research activities at Emory University. The proposed facility will therefore
improve accessibility to and greater utilization of modem research
instrumentation. All of the investigators listed in this proposal train graduate
and undergraduate students. Together, they supervise in their laboratories 12
postdoctoral fellows, 31graduate students and 20 undergraduate students and so
the instrumentation will be used in the training of future scientists. Matching
funds (50%) for this proposal will be available.