* 9601789
* Development of Atomic Force Microscopic Instrumentation for the Detection of Chemical and Biological Forces
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Eric Henderson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 07/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

This proposal seeks to establish an interdisciplinary research program at Iowa
State University (ISU) in the detection of biomolecular forces using the
principles of atomic force microscopy (AFM). This goal will be accomplished by
the formation of a collaborative research group at ISU that is composed of
scientists from the Department of Zoology &amp; Genetics and the Department of
Chemistry, evolving to include collaborations with investigators in other ISU
departments. The central focus of research will be the detection and measurement
of the binding forces operative in the interactions between relatively simple
(e.g., amino acids) and more complex (e.g., short peptides, protein/nucleic
acid, antibody-antigen) biomolecular systems. The information gained from these
investigations will provide important insight into the binding modes related to
the molecular recognition, self-assembly, and folding of biomolecular systems.
Furthermore, these studies will enhance the implementation of emerging molecular
force detection techniques in bioanalytical diagnostics. The development of this
program is divided into three interrelated projects, all of which seek to take
advantage of the ability of AFM and its variants to probe interfacial
architectures at nanometer length scales. The three projects are: Project 1:
Tip-Substrate Modification Methods. This project focuses on the development of
new, or the extension of existing, methods for the chemical and biological
modification of AFM tips. Approaches will also be devised for the construction
of spatially patterned surfaces as platforms for the preparation of small,
localized arrays of different molecular species. Project 2: Molecular Force
Interactions. This project investigates the molecular level interactions of
biological materials through AFM-force characterizations using the materials
created in Project 1. The project starts with characterizations under a variety
of contacting liquids (e.g., organic sol vents and biological media) of model
chemical systems (e.g., -CO2H, -CH3), progresses to increasingly complex systems
(e.g., amino acids, short peptides), and culminates with studies of the
biomolecular force interactions between supermolecular domains (e.g., the
leucine zipper) and whole molecules (e.g., antibody/antigen complexes). Project
3: The BioMolecular Force Microscope (BMFM). This project entails the
construction of a first generation AFM that is designed specifically for the
detection and measurement of forces between biological materials. The BMFM will
be based on established design principles for molecular force detection and on
the findings in Projects 1 and 2. To carry out the above projects, funding is
requested for instrumentation acquisition and construction, and for partial
support of personnel and supplies associated with the design, development,
operation, and maintenance of the instrumentation. As part of the institutional
costsharing, ISU will provide support for instrumentation and for several of the
research and training activities for the development of this program. This
support extends well past the recommended 50% cost share by NSF, demonstrating
the high level of commitment by ISU to the initiation and growth of the program.