* 9601941
* Development of a Great Lakes Bioenergetics, Physiology, and Behavior Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Stephen Brandt, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John W. Cross
* 08/31/1999
* USD 113,000.00

The Great Lakes Center of Buffalo State College requests funds to develop the
laboratoryinstNmentation for experiments on the bioenergetics, physiology and
behavior of freshwater fish and plankton. The experiments conducted with these
instNments will be coupled to our existing modeling programs in fish
bioenergetics, spatial modeling of habitat quality, 3-D foraging models and
individual-based models of fish populations and ecosystems. The new laboratory
equipment will provide a tight coupling and feedback between laboratory
experimentation and model development that will produce an integrated empirical
and theoretical approach to studying freshwater ecosystems. The core equipment
enhancement requested in this proposal is a computer controlled water quality
control system for bioenergetics, behavior and physiology experiments and for
culturing and maintenance of fish and plankton in the laboratory. The Great
Lakes Center of Buffalo State College has the only modern Aquatic Research
Laboratory (opened 1994) located on the lower Great Lakes (ol Lake Erie) capable
of supporting experimental aquatic research with lake water. The Aquatic
Research Laboratory is a new 7,000+ sq. ft. facility equipped with fish and
zooplankton culture rooms, experimental laboratories with flow-through water
systems (well water and lake water), a workshop, classroom, biological sorting
center and direct access to Lake Erie. Experimental work at the Aquatic Research
Laboratory has suffered from an inability to maintain water temperature and
water quality at levels required for bioenergetics, behavioral and physiological
experiments. Equipment for laboratory experimental facilities is requested to
collect detailed, speciesspecific data required for studies of freshwater
ecosystems and for the associated modeling efforts. The equipment will provide
facilities needed for experiments on metabolic rates, consumption rates,
predator-prey interactions, reactive distances, and physiological responses to
stress in both fish and plankton. These data will provides full sets of
parameter values for species-specific models (bioenergetics, foraging, etc.) and
eliminate the need to "borrow" data from unrelated species in model development.
In addition, the data will allow for measures of fish and plankton physiological
responses to changes in environmental conditions that may occur naturally or
result form anthropogenic effects on the ecosystem. The instrumentation we have
requested will add to the Great Lakes Center's Aquatic Research Laboratory by
enhancing our training of students (undergraduate and graduate) and researchers
(postdoctoral and visiting research scientists). Research training programs will
benefit by adding a laboratory experimentation component to our already strong
field and modeling programs. The Great Lakes Center has recently begun the only
Graduate Program in Great Lakes Environmental Sciences in the country, and the
requested laboratory facility would be a fertile training ground for students
enrolled in this program. In 1995 the Great Lakes Center hosted visiting
scientists from Canada, Israel, and other institutions within New York to train
them on the techniques we have developed for integrating our field sampling and
spatial modeling programs. The laboratory instrumentation will provide a sorely
needed component to the Great Lakes Center Aquatic Research Laboratory for
training and research on freshwater ecosystems.