* 9602029
* The Cerebral Cortex as a Target of Estrogen and the         Neurotrophins
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* C. Dominique Toran-Allerand, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 07/31/2000
* USD 216,000.00

9602029 Toran-Allerand The gonadal steroid, estrogen, has multiple effects on
the brain. One of its well characterized actions is to regulate the activity of
the reproductive axis. However, an additional action of perhaps even greater
consequence, is to influence the growth and differentiation of neurons in the
brain. Recently published studies by Dr. Toran-Allerand revealed that estrogens
may be intimately involved in modulating growth factor production in the brain
forming the basis for estrogen's growth modulating effects but ultimately,
estrogen also alters cognitive function. Dr. Toran-Allerand is continuing to
investigate the interplay between estrogen and growth factors by studying the
signal transduction pathways elicited by receptor stimulation. In exciting
preliminary results, evidence for receptor cross-talk has been found. These
studies are continuing and have been enhanced by investigations to analyze key
elements of the estrogen and growth factor systems, including receptor coupling
and protein kinases. That estrogen interacts in neurons with growth factors and
their receptors introduces an important new regulatory system with implications
for the development of the neuronal targets of estrogen. Although sex
differences in circulating estrogen and androgen levels during early life
represent an important epigenetic influence and appear to play a crucial role,
it remains to be determined precisely how exposure to circulating masculine and
feminine gonadal steroid hormone levels are translated into permanent
differentiation of the neural circuitry supporting sexually dimorphic behavioral
patterns. By stimulating the synthesis of proteins required for neuronal
differentiation, survival and maintenance of function, estrogen and growth
factors, acting perhaps in concert, as well as reciprocally, may have important
and intertwined developmental roles. Thus, mediation of estrogen action by
interactions with locally synthesized growth factors an d their receptors may
represent a universal mechanism by which the effects of hormones, such as
estrogen, may exert local control and exhibit both tissue and developmental
specificity's. These studies essentially provide the biological basis for gender
differences in behavior among all animal species, including man.