* 9602577
* FSML: Institutional Planning to Upgrade Laboratory          Facilities at a Tropical Rainforest Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Patricia Wright, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1998
* USD 24,990.00

Ranomafana Biological Station is located in Ranomafana National Park(RNP) in
southeast Madagascar. The station is operated by the Institute for the
Conservation of Tropical Environrnents (ICTE)affiliated with the State
University of New York and Stony Brook. The station property has been leased to
ICTE and the University of Antananarivo for 99 years by the Association
Nationale pour la Gestiondes Aires Protegees (ANGAP), the park service of
Madagascar. Over one hundred faculty-level researchers and nearly twice that
nurnber of students, most from US universities, have conducted research at
RNPsince the station was built in 1989. Madagascar is a megadiversity country,
one of the five countries in the world that contain the most species of plants
and animals. Ranomafana National Park is one of the highest biodiversity sites
in Madaga'scar. The Ranomafana Biological Station (RBS) is the only major
biological research station in the rain forest of sites Madagascar. Much of the
flora and fauna of Madagascar is endemic and many taxa are living
representatives of lineages usually existing elsewhere on earth only in the
fossil record. Therefore the rain forest at RNP serves as an excellent
comparison to some of the better-studied rain forest sites in the neotropics,
Africa and Asia. The Ranomafana National Park protects 41,500 ha of rain forest,
half of it pristine. The biodiversity of the park was virtually unknown when
researchers started focussing on the area 10 years ago. Much of the research
effort during the first 10 years at the RBS has been devoted to the essential
work of systematists. However, considerable research has also been conducted on
behavioral ecology of mamrnals and birds and important community dynamics such
as seed-dispersal, pollination, predation and phenology. This large body of
information has been collected at a biological station that has neither
electricity nor running water. Most of these data come from observation-based fi
eld research because processing and analysis of sarnples and data are severely
restricted by the primitive laboratory facilities. This project will allow the
RBS leardership to carry out the comprehensive planning necessary to upgrade the
laboratory and living facilities at the RBS. The results of this planning grant
will be a report that details how best to expand the research facilities to
accomrnodate long-term researchers using technically-oriented methods that take
advantage of existing and developing research technology. Aquatic ecologists,
systematists, behavioral ecologists, community ecologists, and conservation
biologists will participate in planning the biological station upgrade so that
they can improve the quality and quantity of data they collect.