* 9602790
* Renovation &amp; Replacement of the UC Davis Core Greenhouse    Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 10/15/1996,06/30/2002
* Arnold Bloom, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/2002
* USD 1,398,975.00

The University of California at Davis has one of the most extensive research
and training programs in plant biology worldwide. Research programs, conducted
by over 130 faculty, range from plant cell and molecular biology, development
and genetic regulation, germplasm enhancement and conservation, environmental
physiology, population biology and ecology to plant pathology and pests. These
investigations are performed in greenhouses, the fundamental tool for plant
biologists. Existing greenhouse space on campus is in poor condition and is
limited in its usefulness during certain periods of the year. Problems include:
inadequate temperature control, insufficient supplemental lighting, dilapidated
infrastructure, noncompliance of state and federal codes, deficiencies in
structural design, and the lack of pure water for cooling and irrigation. This
ARI award will support UC-Davis in its endeavor to provide modernized greenhouse
facilities for the Department of Plant Biology. The project includes the
renovation of most greenhouses, and replacement of four greenhouses by a Core
Greenhouse Facility. Renovations will rectify the critical problems that impede
upon research in many of the greenhouses that lack controlled environments.
Renovated facilities will allow researchers to use powerful molecular genetic
and transgenic tools dependent on controlled environments for research. In
addition to its specific impacts on the institution and on the state of
California, the new core facility will have a profound impact at the national
level. Many pressing problems identified at the national level, such as global
climate change, protection of the environment, and improvement of agricultural
competitiveness through biotechnology, have long been recognized as important
priorities, and their solutions involve a thorough understanding of plant
biology. Faculty at UC-Davis are highly productive, and research results are
widely distributed both nationally and internationally. This project will
catalyze this research potential, greatly enhancing the productivity and
contribution of the large and diverse contingent of plant biologists at the
institution.