* 9602734
* Renovation of Biological Sciences Building at UMBC
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1996,10/31/2000
* Lasse Lindahl, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/2000
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Department of Biological Sciences is one of the premier departments at the
University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC). The undergraduate research
experience, particularly in the sciences, has been identified as an
institutional priority. In addition, plans have been developed to focus efforts
on a small group of programs at the graduate level, including programs in
Biology. Programs encompass a wide breath of research and training with foci in
Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology; Neurobiology; and Ecology and
Environmental Biology. Ensuring the quality of undergraduate and graduate
research programs in the department is instrumental to the success of the
University's goals. However, quality is threatened by the Department's occupancy
of an antiquated structure that was never designed as a research facility.
Having the distinction of being the oldest building on campus, many of the
mechanical systems, such as HVAC, plumbing, and electrical, are outdated and
have reached their functional life span. Laboratories in their existing
configuration cannot accommodate changes in programs or research thrusts without
major modifications to the facility. Because of poor ventilation, and the lack
of a dedicated instrumentation room, equipment is stored in the main corridor,
obstructing passage to other rooms. As part of the comprehensive renovation
plan, NSF funds will be used to renovate existing research and research training
laboratories. Renovations will include: a complete overhaul of the building's
utility systems, replacement of fixed equipment, and the creation of research
support rooms. Modular research labs, the renovation's key feature, will
increase training opportunities, expand program flexibility, and facilitate
communication and research collaborations. As the most culturally diverse of all
the Maryland colleges and universities, many under-represented minorities are
encouraged and given opportunities to pursue advanced studies in the sciences,
which is evident by the success of the Meyerhoff Scholarship Program. This
Program is designed to recruit and retain minority students that demonstrate an
aptitude and interest in science and technology. Renovation of the facility is
vital to the continual training of scientists for the 21st century and to the
realization of UMBC's goal to become a top public research institution.