* 9602558
* Expansion of Housing for Researchers at the University of   Virginia's Blandy Experimental Farm
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Edward Connor, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1999
* USD 141,563.00

The Blandy Experimental Farm (BEF) is a 700 acre field station, owned and
operated by the University of Virginia since 1926 for the purpose of supporting
field research. The BEF is not involved in agricultural research. The BEF
preserves a diversity of habitats characteristic of the Ridge and Province
Region, as well as a diverse array of successional fields. The BEF is unique
among field stations because of i) its proximity to the large scientific
community in the Washington, D.C. area; ii) the presence of a large, and mature
Arboretum on-site (the State Arboretum of Virginia); iii) its proximity to a
large array of pristine montane and aquatic habitats; iv) the ability of
researchers to establish field experimental plots/gardens in close proximity to
greenhouse and growth chamber facilities; and v) an extensive public education
and outreach program. Research at the Farm has led to more than 70 student
theses (25 in the last ten years). Thirty- five research projects (involving
more than 32 Ph.D. researchers) have recently been completed or are ongoing. The
ability of the BEF to support new and ongoing research is currently limited by
inadequate housing facilities for researchers. This project will initiate
development of a new residence complex and construct two 2-bedroom apartments
for researchers. Twenty different researchers representing at least 22 separate
research projects would benefit from expanded on-site housing.