* 9602656
* Renovation of J. M. Smith Chemistry Building at the         University of Memphis
* O/D,OIA
* 11/15/1996,10/31/1998
* Ying-Sing Li, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/1998
* USD 105,991.00

The University of Memphis is the recipient of ARI funds for the renovation of
four research laboratories and two support facilities in the JM Smith Chemistry
Building. Built in 1966, research space, originally designated as teaching
laboratories, has not undergone any repair since that time. Although the space
is sufficient, it is insufficient in terms of quality space required for
conducting modern chemical research. Existing labs will be renovated for
research and research training in computational chemistry and experimental
chemistry. Support areas will be modernized for sample preparation and for
housing spectroscopic equipment. ARI funds, along with University matching
funds, will be utilized to upgrade, replace or install fixed equipment to allow
faculty and students to maximize the utility of the space. Specific improvements
include the upgrading of air-handling, communications, electrical, and plumbing
systems. A walk-in fume hood will be installed in one laboratory to maintain a
safe working environment and permit a wider diversity of experiments to be
performed. Handicap access to labs will be enhanced as part of the renovations.
Research projects to be pursued once renovations are completed include: modeling
of catalysis, environmental remediation, and advanced material synthesis using
quantum and classical mechanical methods. Improved infrastructure will support
the development and application of new computational methods for modeling non-
linear optical materials, and support research programs engaged in spectroscopic
study of chemical systems of importance in catalysis and biology, respectively.
This project is consistent with the goals of the Department, by permitting
productive faculty and student researchers to maintain their current level of
scholarly activity. Modernized facilities will enhance the research aims of a
young and growing department, and accommodate for future growth.