* 9602167
* Economy and Culture at a Late 11th Millennium Village Site  in SE Anatolia:  A Continuing Investigation into the Origins of Sedentism and Animal Husbandry in the Taurus-Zagros Arc
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1997
* Michael Rosenberg, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1997
* USD 42,904.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Michael Rosenberg and his
colleagues will continue archaeological excavation at the site of Hallan Cemi
which is located in the Zagros mountain region of Southeastern Turkey. The site
itself consists of a low mound approximately .7 hectares and previous work by
Dr. Rosenberg has shown that it covers the time period from approximately 10,600
to 10,000 years before the present. Dr. Rosenberg will conduct one season of
work in which he will open broad areas and through controlled stratigraphic
excavation recover large amounts of faunal and floral remains as well as a broad
range of material objects such as stone tools. These will be analyzed by a team
of specialists in order to reconstruct subsistence and social patterns and to
set the site into a broader regional context. Given the date of Hallan Cemi and
the materials collected to date, it is apparent that this site documents a very
early phase of the Neolithic Revolution. The term `Revolution` is an appropriate
one because it marks perhaps the most significant shift in lifestyle over the
ca. 2,000,000 years of human existence. In the Neolithic plants and animals were
domesticated, settled village life emerged and a technological explosion which
included the development of ceramic technology and metallurgy occurred. It is
ironic, given great archaeological interest in this question that so little is
known about the Zagros region since it is both known to contain very early
Neolithic sites and has been postulated as a possible point of origin. The work
to date by Dr. Rosenberg has demonstrated that Hallan Cemi represents an early
stage in this process. While it contains domestic plants and animals, ceramics,
another hallmark of the Neolithic are lacking. The large faunal and floral
samples which will be collected will shed new light on the subsistence change.
This research is important for several reasons. Within two years this entire
region will be flooded by a newly constructed dam and if work is now done now a
unique opportunity will be irrevocably lost. The information which Dr. Rosenberg
collects will increase our understanding of perhaps the most important
transformation in human history.