* 9602155
* Distinguishing Values from Valuation in a Policy-Relevant   Manner
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Stephen Johnson, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/2000
* USD 174,710.00

Environmental decisions require public participation and therefore knowledge of
the ways in which the public values natural resources and the environment.
Contemporary techniques, such as willingness-to-pay and cost-benefit analysis,
provide a narrow economic measure of value and consequently fail to include the
emotional and moral content that is at the core of any value. It is difficult to
reflect public feelings about the environment and related policy preferences
without careful elicitation of the emotional and moral components of value. This
project will develop experimental techniques for eliciting values embedded in
narratives and discourse, and rich in moral and emotional content. The values
these techniques elicit will be compared to the methods and findings of other
researchers interested in environmental values. In a second stage, findings will
be used to measure support for environmental action decisions. By improving
methods for values elicitation this research attempts to increase understandings
of public support or opposition for actions concerning the environment. Research
results will be reported in publications in relevant scientific and policy-
oriented journals; presentations at professional and publicly-oriented meetings
and conferences; and the successful techniques will be incorporated into the
applied research conducted by the research institution.