* 9602797
* Replacement and Renovation of Collections Space at the      Paleontological Research Institution
* O/D,OIA
* 11/15/1996,04/30/1998
* Warren Allmon, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 04/30/1998
* USD 142,891.00

The Paleontological Research Institution (PRI) is the world's only private
research organization dedicated solely to the science of paleontology. It houses
major collections of invertebrate fossils and Recent mollusks and one of the
nation's largest collections of type and figured fossil specimens. Due to the
lack of permanent curation and storage facilities, the collections have been
allowed to deteriorate, and have been inaccessible to the research and
educational communities for many years. PRI has embarked upon an effort to
replace and expand current facilities in order to consolidate collections of the
Institution, Cornell University, and the University of Rochester. Specifically,
funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will enable PRI to
replace existing space that is in poor condition presently used to house the
collections. For the first time in almost a century, this project will provide
the needed space to adequately house and care for collections, and make them
available for research use. As a result, the combined collection would be one of
the largest and finest in the nation, with particular strengths in the Cenozoic
of the Western Hemisphere and Paleozoic of the Northeastern US. These are both
areas of considerable current research interest in the areas of environmental
and faunal change. As the largest fossil collection within a 250 mile radius,
the combined collection would have the potential to serve as a regional and
national center for paleobiological research and education. Most importantly,
this project will improve accessibility of three large and scientifically
important collections of fossil invertebrate and Recent mollusks to researchers,
educators, and students who have previously not had access to them, thus having
a direct effect on future research programs, and paleontological research on a
national scale.