* 9602038
* Nonmarket Institutions, Coercive Power, and Economic        Efficiency
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Avner Greif, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/2000
* USD 175,423.00

The purpose of this research is to extend a comparative empirical and
theoretical study of the nature, implications, and decline of a non-market
economic institutions that supported anonymous markets for goods characterized
by distance in time and place such as credit markets and contracts for future
delivery. This research consists of two separate but related projects. The first
is an empirical and theoretical examination of the relations between political
institutions, coercive power, and commercial development during the late
medieval Commercial Revolution. Specifically, these relations will be examined
in the context of late medieval Genoa, the second largest maritime Italian city-
state during that period. The extent to which the potential use of military
power hindered the ability of feudal lords, who established the Commune of
Genoa, to cooperate will be analyzed. Further, the extent to which political
institutions hindered or fostered such cooperation will be examined. The second
project will examine the economic implications of the ability of social groups
(such as clans, tribe, and ethnic groups) to invest economic resources in
military strength and use this ability to expropriate wealth from other groups.
In this context, the conditions will be explored under which a state with the
ability to predate and demand taxes can promote economic welfare, and the
conditions under which economic welfare is not hindered due to the absence of a
state with such attributes. This analysis will combine the two prevailing views
of the state. Namely, the state as reflecting a social contract and the state as
dictator with limited coercive power. A game theoretical framework will allow
the explicit modeling of self-enforcing contractual relations. It is expected
that this analysis will provide the foundation for future empirical research
into the nature of the state and the economic experience of economies in pre-
modern Europe and contemporary Africa.