* 9602386
* MMATE 2000 Project - Maricopa Mathematics Advanced          Technology Education 2000 Project (MMATE 2000)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Alan Jacobs, Maricopa County Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2000
* USD 353,235.00

MMATE 2000 Project - Maricopa Mathematics Advanced Technology Education 2000
Project (MMATE 2000) The current mathematics curriculum does not adequately
align with the needs of technicians and future technicians in an advanced
technology workplace. The objective of the Maricopa Mathematics ATE 2000 (MMATE
2000) Project is to close the gap between what is taught and what students need
for the workplace, and to continually close that gap by applying continuous
improvement methodologies. The Project will engage community college and
university faculty from mathematics and related disciplines and representatives
from 12 semiconductor manufacturing industries in the Phoenix area,
collaborating to develop course materials for 8 modules (15 class hours each)
that emphasize how mathematics is used in the high-performance workplace.
Through mini-internships in industry and MMATE 2000 workshops, faculty will
increase their awareness of how mathematics is used in an advanced technology
environment and will learn how to use the course materials in the classroom.
Faculty will work with industry on a continual basis to review the mathematics
content of the curriculum and maintain the currency of the applications that
drive the course materials. The materials will be disseminated through a
publisher with a national sales force. The target audience is all mathematics
students who take courses below college algebra, especially those preparing for
jobs as technicians in an advanced technology workplace. MMATE 2000 will improve
the quality of the human resource base for advanced technology industries by
significantly improving the way technicians are educated in mathematics.