* 9602942
* Multi-User Controlled Environments for Plant Growth in the  Division of Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Gary Stacey, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/2001
* USD 155,064.00

This project is designed to build a multi-user facility for the growth of plant
material in the Division of Biology at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville.
The primary goal is to grow plants for experimentation under tightly controlled
environmental conditions with respect to light intensity, light quality,
temperature, and humidity. Reflecting similar developments in animal systems, a
small number of plant species have been selected to represent the plant kingdom
as models for research purposes. This group of one principal investigator (PI)
and four Co-PIs employs Arabidopsis as a model angiosperm, Pinus as a model for
both gymnosperms and trees, Ceratopteris as a model fern, representing lower
plants, and soybean and Lotus japonicus as models for the interaction between
higher plants and nitrogen fixing bacteria. To take full advantage of their
model characters, optimal but distinct growth conditions need to be established
for each species. The five (Co- )PIs and two additional major users propose that
the diverse and expanding requirements for plant growth in the Division of
Biology are best accommodated by a cooperatively administered multi-user
facility. The plant growth facility (PGF) will consist of a core plant growth
unit which will comprise two walk-in growth chambers, six reach-in growth
chambers, and two tissue culture incubators, all fitted with microprocessor
control over light and temperature conditions. The PGF will optimize the growth
conditions for all the model organisms used. The new facility will be centrally
located and within easy reach of the major users. A cooperative style of
management will be devised, which shall ensure access to part of the facility
for researchers other than the five (Co) PIs on a case by case basis. The PGF
will serve as a crucial support for our interdepartmental plant science graduate
training program. Apart from drastically improving our research infrastructure,
the PGF will allow the (Co-)PIs to enliven their teaching programs at the
undergraduate level, for instance by devising an experiment that will bring
plant evolution into the classroom. In building the PGF, the (Co) PIs seek to
create a multi-purpose environment for the efficient and reproducible culture of
plant material, which will satisfy their diverse and multidisciplinary research
approaches and teaching obligations.