* 9602708
* Renovation of Laboratory Space in the Chemistry Department  for Biomolecular Research
* O/D,OIA
* 11/15/1996,04/30/1999
* Werner Kuhr, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 04/30/1999
* USD 390,000.00

Scientific and technological advances at the molecular level are providing
dramatic new approaches to address critical problems at the interface between
biology and chemistry. These advances may well redefine current boundaries
between existing fields, and cross fertilization of ideas across traditional
disciplines will allow the development of new successful collaborations in
biotechnology and advanced molecular materials. Molecular biological approaches
are used in several research laboratories in the chemistry department at the
University of California - Riverside (UCR). However, faculty are dispersed in
many locations within Pierce Hall, in which space for chemistry was constructed
in 1965. The building lacks certain core facilities necessary for the conduction
of faculty research in the following areas: inorganic chemistry, chemistry of
biomaterials, receptor-ligand binding chemistry, synthetic organic chemistry,
and nucleic acid chemistry. A partnership between the NSF and UCR will be
established to develop the required research infrastructure to provide a
physical focus for extension and development of collaborative efforts across
tradition boundaries in chemistry. Improving the research infrastructure in
Pierce Hall will involve the renovation of 21 research laboratory spaces on the
third floor. Renovations include: asbestos abatement, removal of non-code
compliant fume hood, sinks, and benchwork, upgrade of utility systems to include
additional power, steam and industrial hot water, reconditioning of HVAC, gas,
vacuum and plumbing lines, and the installation of casework, fume hoods, and
cabinets. Joint-use core facilities including cold rooms, a centrifuge room,
multipurpose instrumentation rooms, a Level 3 recombinant DNA facility and a hot
lab will be created. This project, complementing a previous ARI Chilled Water
Project in Pierce Hall, will directly enhance the research prospects for five
senior personnel, eight postdocs, twenty graduate students and eleven
undergraduate students. Having modern facilities will improve research training
opportunities for students with research interests at the Chemistry-Biology
interface. Since the university has the largest percentage of minority students
of any UC campus, and women comprise over 52% of the UCR student body, this
project will have an impact on the recruitment of these groups of individuals
into the physical sciences where both are seriously underrepresented.