* 9602192
* U.S.-Austria and Germany Cooperative Research on Electrical Transport in Magnetic Multilayers
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Peter Levy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 10/31/1999
* USD 23,000.00

This award supports Professor Peter Levy and junior members of his research
group at New York University to collaborate in solid state physics research with
Professor Peter Weinberger and his research group of the Institute of
Electrochemistry of the Technical University of Vienna, Austria. A third member
of the collaboration is Professor I. Mertig of the Technical University of
Dresden, Germany. . Through collaboration, they expect to develop models and
perform calculations that will provide new insights into the factors that
control the magnetotransport properties of transition-metal magnetic
multilayers. While all three groups are theoretical in their orientation, their
efforts are complementary. The US group is focused on analytical and model
calculations while the expertise of the Austrian group lies in the ab-initio
calculation of electronic structure, magnetic and transport properties of
solids. Professor Mertig of Dresden has considerable expertise in the
application of multiple scattering theory to the calculation of impurity
scattering in ferromagnetic metals. The `giant magnetoresistance` of magnetic
multilayers is interesting both for the fundamental physics needed to explain
its origins and for its applicability to emerging computer technologies. While
there is consensus that this effect comes from the magnetic field changing the
spin-dependent scattering of the conduction electrons, the there are many
unresolved questions about how this is achieved and which are the dominant
factors at different levels of the multiple layers. This trilateral
collaboration will address some of those questions, and contribute some of the
new understanding of this phenomenon needed before any attempt can be made to
manipulate and use it.