* 9602741
* Replacement, Consolidation, and Upgrade of Existing         Anthropology Laboratory Space
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Joel Kuipers, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1999
* USD 162,000.00

Founded in 1884, the Department of Anthropology at the George Washington
University has a long history of fieldwork and laboratory-based linguistic,
biological and archaeological research. Having a close relationship with the
Smithsonian Institution provides access to important research collections and
curatorial expertise for both students and faculty. Research and training
activities are currently performed in space, originally designed for non-
research purposes, which is dispersed throughout the university. Deficiencies,
such as crowded conditions, inadequate ventilation, and the lack of a fume hood
needed for experiments and training involving wet chemistry, have forced faculty
and students to find other space on or off campus to conduct research. Funding
from the NSF's ARI Program will be used to relocate, consolidate, and upgrade
existing laboratory facilities in order to provide enhanced research and
research training capabilities in biological anthropology, archaeology,
linguistic anthropology, and visual anthropology. Revamping of facilities for
research and training in Anthropology is only part of a long-term university
initiative for the department. This project will provide separate facilities for
an archaeology and biological anthropology laboratory, and for a visual and
linguistic anthropology video laboratory. Renovations will include provisions
for adequate bench space, secure storage for materials, and proper ventilation.
A newly installed fume hood will allow for the preparation of casting materials,
acid washes, and chemical analysis of ceramics and other procedures presently
not feasible. Upon completion, research enabled by this modernization project
will include: full preparation of specimens for specialized analysis such as
ancient DNA and neutron activation, experimental conservation studies of
archaeological and ethnographic artifacts, casting of unique human fossils, and
the analysis of communication and behavior using concordance software. Examples
of research projects to be housed in the facility include studies of later
Pleistocene and Holocene fossils and artifacts from Central Africa, and analysis
of linguistics and social change in Indonesia and Zaire through long-term visual
records. Upgraded laboratories will not only enhance faculty research but also
the training of students, who have historically been overwhelmingly more than
75% women and minorities.