* 9602663
* Renovation of Research Space in the Physical Science Complex
* O/D,OIA
* 10/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Warren Ford, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1999
* USD 600,000.00

The Physical Science (PS) complex houses the Departments of Chemistry and
Physics on the campus of Oklahoma State University in Stillwater. Built in two
parts, 1958 (PS I) and 1969 (PS II) respectively, the structure has deteriorated
badly from heavy service. Some space is not suitable for research involving
experimental chemistry because it does not meet current building and safety
codes, and in general violates standards for chemical research laboratories.
Research laboratories are substandard in fume hood ventilation capability, HVAC
service, electrical systems, explosion proof and hazardous chemical storage
facilities, ventilated plumbing systems, and outdated laboratory casings. The
Chemistry Department is confronting a critical period regarding the maintenance
of its present level of research productivity. Senior faculty are retiring, and
it will be difficult to replace them with young faculty if modern and safe
laboratory facilities are not available. Renovated laboratories are necessary in
order to attract and retain faculty needed to sustain the Department's current
program status. Funding from the ARI Program will assist OSU in its endeavor to
renovate a portion of space in PS I and PS II to comply with standards required
for personnel safety and scientific research. In addition, renovations will
entail removal of asbestos containing material, installation of new plumbing and
electrical services, new acoustical ceilings to reduce noise levels, and new
solvent safety cabinets. Four research groups investigating the following will
be affected: inorganic chemistry and material science, organic and polymer
chemistry, analytical chemistry, and bioanalytical chemistry. Joint funding by
the NSF and OSU will ensure that a safe research facility with markedly enhanced
capabilities to conduct research and research training will be provided. OSU and
the Department of Chemistry seek to establish a basis for continued growth in
quality and multidisciplinary research. This ARI project will improve the
institution's ability to provide the type of environment that will foster this
growth.