* 9602182
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Solid-State Sensors and   Interface Circuits
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Khalil Najafi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 27,898.00

Description: This award supports collaboration between Dr. Khalil Najafi,
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the University of
Michigan (UM), Ann Arbor, with Dr. Tayfun Akin, Department of Electrical and
Electronics Engineering at the Middle East Technical University (METU), in
Ankara, Turkey. The research project has two parts: 1. the design and
fabrication of a low-power high-precision interface circuit for capacitive
pressure sensors, and 2. the development and testing of a wireless capacitive
pressure sensor with a telemetrically accessible output signal. Part of the
design and analysis of the sensors and the necessary electronics will be done at
METU, while the fabrication will be done primarily at the UM. The testing and
characterization of these devices will be done at both institutions. These
micromachined sensors and actuators and other microelectromehanical systems
(MEMS) have many applications in biomechanics and in implantable devices, in
industrial processing, automotive systems, avionics, and in environmental
monitoring. Scope: This award allows collaboration between a very active and
well recognized group in the United States, at the UM, and a small, but
promising, group in Turkey at METU. The collaboration will be beneficial to the
U.S. team because of the recent work by the Turkish scientist and his expertise
in designing analog circuits and the necessary interface circuits. The Turkish
scientist and his student will benefit from their access to modern fabrication
facilities at the UM. The resulting enhancement of capabilities at METU will be
useful in meeting research needs in the rapidly growing MEMS field. This award
is funded jointly by the Division of International Programs and the Division of
Electrical and communications Systems.