* 9602370
* North Central Collaboration for Education in NDE/NDT
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1996,04/30/2001
* David Holger, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 04/30/2001
* USD 673,705.00

North Central Collaboration for Advanced Engineering Technology Education in
NDE/NDT Increased requirements for improved reliability of machines and
structures in a wide spectrum of industries have created a growing demand for
educational and training opportunities in non-destructive evaluation and non-
destructive testing (NDE/NDT). NDT technician programs have developed in various
parts of the country, largely in response to specific and urgent technical
requirements of local industries. The Center for Non-Destructive Evaluation at
Iowa State University in collaboration with five community colleges, together
with industrial partners, is developing materials and providing professional
development for faculty to improve the education of technicians with
specialization in NDE/NDT. The primary activities include the development and
dissemination of new curriculum materials for use in new and existing courses as
well as the redevelopment of existing materials to increase their mathematics,
science, and engineering content. Simulation of ultrasonic, radiographic and
eddy current NDE techniques, previously developed at Iowa State University, are
being transferred to personal computers for use in technician programs to allow
students to develop a physical feel for how parameters of interest influence
inspection results. Community college faculty are being provided enhancement
opportunities to enable them to better implement the new industrial and research
developments in NDE. Workshops provide professional development for two year
college faculty in development of frameworks, assessment, and upgrading the
mathematics, science and engineering. Industrial partners are participating in
the workshops and providing guidance to the project.