* 9602620
* Renovation of Electrical Engineering Building Research      Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1999
* John Johnson, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1999
* USD 177,000.00

The University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR), founded as the Missouri School of Mines
in 1870, is one of four universities in the University of Missouri System.
Officially designated as Missouri's technological university, the institution
has been recognized as one of the best undergraduate engineering schools in the
country. Part of the tradition of excellence is reflected in the Electrical
Engineering Department's research and training programs. Faculty and students,
including both graduate and undergraduate, actively conduct research in the
fields of: Power Systems, Electric Machines, Devices and Power Electronics;
Electro-magnetic Compatibility; Digital Devices; Controls; Communications and
Signal Processing; Optical Systems; and Solid State Devices. However, current
conditions of the Electrical Engineering Building, constructed in 1959, are less
than optimal to support research activities. Infrastructure utilities are
inadequate, better facilities for communication network cabling are needed, and
the building does not comply with current safety and ADA regulations. The
National Science Foundation and UMR will form a partnership to improve existing
research space for research personnel in the Engineering Building. Funds will be
used to renovate experimental, computer, and undergraduate research facilities.
Modernizing research space for undergraduates will encourage more to participate
in research, stimulating students to pursue graduate studies in engineering. In
addition to providing a safe working environment, and increasing research
productivity, the project will assist the Department in its efforts to recruit
new faculty.