* 9602007
* Goverance in an Information Age (Values, Structures and     Alternatives for Public Agencies in Cyberspace)
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Chris Demchak, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 09/30/1999
* USD 128,622.00

In dramatic numbers, U.S. public organizations are embracing modern networked
communications such as the World Wide Web. In the process, they create the
foundations for governance in an information age. The U.S. public and its
political leaders expect that these expensive changes will produce more open and
more effective government. Under some organizational configurations, these
values may conflict however, and agencies may be forced inadvertently to
emphasize one over the other, or to fail at both. Currently little is known
about the real operational effects of these new technologies in specifically
public organizations, which may develop undesirable and difficult to change
path-dependent directions. U.S. policy makers and public managers need more
comparative knowledge about the relationship between values, structures and
environments in public organizations with networked, computer-mediated
operations. In particular, it is important to address two questions. First,
under what conditions of use are networked computer-mediated operations (CMOs)
strongly correlated with some structures and values and not others? Second, what
structural and procedural alternatives exist for public managers to assure
acceptable levels of both effectiveness and open government while implementing
networked operations? Using a modified organizational configuration approach
enriched by focused policy analysis, this research will investigate an emerging
natural experiment, the diffusion of networked CMOs across a wide set of public
agencies. Using the World Wide Web and field research, the project will develop
a broad database which charts the diffusion and variations of structures, value
hierarchies, and environments in network technologies across a wide set of
public agencies in the westernized nations. The project will also develop in-
depth analyses of four to five exemplar agencies in appropriately selected
countries, as they implement these networked computer-mediated operations.
Results will be presented in scholarly articles as well as in presentations to
agency officials. During and beyond the life of the project, the database will
be continuously available on the Web for policy makers, public managers, and
scholars pursuing these and other questions. The work provides a foundation for
near and long term public management research on the transformation and
consequences of the information age for public governance.