* 9602515
* Quantized Fields in Nonlinear Dielectric Media:  A          Microscopic Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Mark Hillery, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 01/31/2001
* USD 12,000.00

9602515 Hillery This is a collaborative project between Professor Mark Hillery
of the Department of Physics, Hunter College, and Professor Peter Drummond of
the Department of Physics, The University of Queensland, Australia. Over a
three- year period, Professor Hillery will make several trips to Brisbane to
work with Dr. Drummond on the study of the propagation of the quantized
electromagnetic field in nonlinear dielectric media. This is important from a
fundamental point of view because it provides an example of an experimentally
accessible quantum field theory. From a practical point of view, the quantum
noise in these fields must be understood if they are to be used for long
distance communication in optical fibers as has been proposed. The models which
have been used to treat these phenomena are either phenomenological or based on
the quantization of the macroscopic Maxwell equations. A microscopic approach to
the description of quantized fields in a medium of two-level atoms has recently
been developed at Hunter College. Dispersion, which can be a problem in a
macroscopic approach to quantized fields in dielectric media, is naturally
incorporated into this theory. This description will be extended to a medium of
3-level atoms. This will allow the theory to encompass nonlinear processes, such
as parametric down conversion, which were not described by the 2-level atom
medium. The counterpart investigators will concentrate primarily on the
description of how a field propagates from free space through a medium and
emerges again into free space. The study of finite media should allow the
collaborators to examine the input-output theories which are used in quantum
optics at a more fundamental level and to address some of the problems which
arise in them. The analytical and numerical techniques which the Australian
counterpart has developed on the macroscopic level will complement what the
principal investigator and his colleagues have developed at Hunter College on
the microscopic model.