* 9602465
* Geophysical Instrumentation for Archaeological Research
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Kenneth Kvamme, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/1999
* USD 25,082.00

With National Science Foundation support, Boston University will purchase remote
sensing instrumentation for use by the Archaeology Department. The equipment
includes: 1. a Geometrics Model G-868 Cesium Magnetometer with a sensitivity of
(.05 to .01 nT and measurement rates from 10 to 1 per second). The machine has
an internal memory for storage of 250,0000 measurement points and runs a full
day on a rechargeable battery pack; 2. a Geoscan Research Resistance Survey
System RM-15. This electrical resistivity meter with Geoplot Software is fully
automated for rapid survey and wide-area coverage. Rechargeable batteries will
also power the unit for a full day; 3. a Dell latitude LX 4100D portable
notebook computer and printer suitable for in field processing and temporary
storage of geophysical survey data. The portable printer will serve to print
maps in the field for use by survey crews. Archaeological excavation is time
consuming, expensive and destructive by its very nature. Remote sensing
techniques permit archaeologists to, in effect, look below the ground to locate
magnetic and other anomalies and to plot their location and sometimes shape.
These can reflect the presence of buildings, hearths, pits and other features.
The results can guide placement of archaeological trenches to make best use of
limited time and resources. Boston University is a leader in remote sensing and
its very active Archaeology Department conducts excavations in many parts of the
world. It's current equipment is approximately a decade old and requires
replacement by more accurate, faster and more reliable models. This award
accomplishes that goal. The department also provides training in remote sensing
techniques, available no place else in the United States, to numbers of both
graduate and undergraduate students. Currently Boston University researchers are
pursuing a number of projects. The most anthropologically relevant of these
include underground mapping of the ancient capital of Narvin in northern Ireland
and survey of K'xabo, a Mayan site in Belize.