* 9602694
* Renovations of Penn State's Intercollege Materials Research Laboratory (IMRL)
* O/D,OIA
* 12/15/1996,11/30/1998
* Joseph Dougherty, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 11/30/1998
* USD 500,000.00

The Pennsylvania State University, one of the leading institutions in the field
of inorganic ceramic materials research, is the recipient of funds from the
Academic Research Infrastructure Program for the renovation of facilities of the
Intercollege Materials Research Lab (IMRL). Located on the University Park main
campus, the Materials Research Laboratory Building, which houses the IMRL,was
constructed in 1969 with assistance from the National Science Foundation.
Research conducted in the facility is diverse in content and scale, having both
theoretical and applied investigations, including studies of ferroelectric,
dielectric, optical, and thermomechanical properties of materials. Processing
and materials synthesis experiments involve thin film deposition, high pressure
synthesis, low temperature synthesis, and high temperature ceramic processing.
The laboratory contains characterization facilities with special emphasis on
ellipsometry, x-ray power diffraction, electron microscopy, and vibrational
spectroscopy. In addition to research in the core of materials science, there
are many investigations that are interdisciplinary in the broadest sense,
including design and synthesis of materials suitable for the encapsulation and
immobilization of nuclear and chemical waste and other environmentally related
problems. Current conditions of the 27 year old facility makes it difficult for
the department to compete in world-class materials research. New families of
electronic analysis and test equipment require environmental controls that are
beyond the capabilities of the present facility. Because of environmental
constraints, sensitive measurement operations have to be suspended several
months. Funds will be used to install new fume hoods and renovate installations
that will provide the required ventilation for both research efforts and
compliance with OSHA and Clean Air Acts. Research space will be renovated to
provide 3-level clean room facilities for thin film, tape casting, and screen
printing operations for electronic materials. Upon completion, the project will
enhance the role of IMRL as it continues its output of important research
results and quality graduate students for the future of advanced materials and
processing in the nation. The renovations will help the Department maintain
research excellence into the 21st century.