* 9602674
* Renovation of Laboratory Space at the Department of Physics William James Hall at Southern University
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/1997,08/31/2000
* James Hill, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/2000
* USD 575,415.00

Southern University, a Historically Black College and University, is the
recipient of ARI funds to renovate physics research and research training
facilities. The institution is the largest of the HBCU system and is composed of
three campuses, including Baton Rouge, the main campus, and the site of the
renovation project. Presently, research faculty and students engage in research
activities that include: nuclear, particle and astro-particle physics,
experimental solid state physics, theoretical solid state physics, and material
science. However, existing conditions in James Hall, the home of the Physics
Department, are inadequate for research and training programs. Renovations to
the 1972 structure will encompass: upgrading HVAC, plumbing and electrical
systems, installing new fume hoods, and ensuring that laboratories comply with
ADA and state health and fire codes. A clean room will be created as well as
rooms to house a cosmic-ray test stand, and a Superconducting Quantum
Interference Device magnetometer. The renovations are essential to the growth of
the department and will enhance research and training capabilities of
undergraduate and graduate students. The project will be instrumental in the
creation of a Ph.D. program in material science by providing modernized space
and facilitating collaboration between physics and engineering. Because of the
University's historical mission, many African American scholars will enter the
pipeline contributing to the nation's scientific infrastructure.