* 9602119
* Signal Transduction Pathways and Gene Expression in the     Circadian Clock System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* F. Rob Jackson, Worcester Foundation for Biomedical Research, Inc.
* Continuing grant
* Walter Wilczynski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 70,000.00

9602119 Jackson Circadian clocks located in the brains of all animal species are
essential for the regulation of daily rhythms in many different physiological,
endocrine, and behavioral processes. Such clocks, for example regulate the timed
release of hormones, the timing of waking and sleeping, and even the changing
sensitivity of animals and humans to pharmacological agents used in the
treatment of cancer and other diseases. Circadian clocks can be reset by light
stimuli and this is crucial for the synchronization of these clocks to
environmental light/dark cycles. The proper synchronization of circadian clocks
to environmental time (solar time) is essential and insures that physiological
processes (within an organism's body) occur at an appropriate time of day and in
a coordinated manner. Indeed, most travelers are aware of the phenomenon of jet-
lag, which results from a desynchronization of bodily rhythms during adaptation
to a new time zone. Although it is known that light can reset the circadian
clock, the exact mechanism by which the nerve cells comprising the clock
transduce light information into a resetting response is not well understood.
The major purpose of this grant is to define and study the signaling pathways
within clock neurons which are activated during the clock resetting response.
This work will be accomplished using the model genetic system Drosophila
melanogaster and contemporary molecular biological approaches. It will also take
advantage of existing Drosophila mutants which have heritable lesions affecting
specific cellular signaling pathways. The significance of this work is that it
will lead to a more complete understanding of how the brain's clock is reset by
environmental signals such as light.