* 9602560
* FSML-Analytical Equipment for the St. Croix Watershed       Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Ronald Lawrenz, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1997
* USD 106,997.00

The St. Croix Watershed Research Station (SCWRS) is the biological field
station of the Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM). The lands and facilities of
the SCWRS are located within St. Croix National Scenic Riverway at the boundary
between Minnesota and Wisconsin. The SCWRS provides opportunities to conduct
research on a large midcontinental river system and associated habitats. The
SCWRS was established in 1989 and has greatly expanded its physical facilities,
staffing, and research activity in the intervening six years. Following a
strategic planning effort, a modern 6200 ft2 Research Center and year-round
housing facility for visiting scientists were completed in 1995. In 1995-96 the
SCWRS expanded its permanent research staff to create a core research program
focusing on landscape-level problems in land-water interaction. A total of 35
separate visiting research programs have been supported at the SCWRS over the
past six field seasons, including several major projects dealing ecological
problems of national and global significance. This project is a direct outgrowth
of the recent expansion of SCWRS physical facilities and the immediate need to
acquire key pieces of analytical equipment to support current and pending
research initiatives. Support is requested for three major acquisitions: (1) an
automated ion analyzer for measuring phosphorus, nitrogen, and silica in water,
and solids; and (3) research-grade stereo-and compound microscopes. These
instruments will greatly improve SCWRS's analytical capabilities for measurement
of biological and biogeochemical components of aquatic systems.