* 9602824
* Renovation of the Environmental Engineering Analytical      Laboratories, and Civil Engineering Rooms 3109, 3104 and    3119
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/1997,12/31/1999
* James Alleman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1999
* USD 446,400.00

Funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will be used to support
the renovation of two analytical instrumentation laboratories, and one graduate
environmental research laboratory for the Department of Environmental
Engineering at Purdue University. Engineering faculty at Purdue are actively
engaged in research within new areas of national interests that include
hazardous waste treatment and minimization, soil and groundwater remediation,
and environmental fate modeling. With new acquisitions of advanced analytical
equipment, the department is dedicated to make the environmental engineering
graduate research program internationally competitive. It is an opportune and
critical time for the University to renovate facilities that house these and
future acquisitions, and the laboratories that house graduate and faculty
research. Because environmental systems research is interdisciplinary, modern
facilities are required to accommodate and maintain analytical instrumentation.
Research space in the Civil Engineering Building, constructed 33 years ago, is
deteriorated and deficient in the modern utility systems. Fume hoods lack proper
compressed air, vacuum, natural gas, and water outlets. There is a lack of
adequate space for large instruments that require full access ventilation.
Limited aisle space between benches restricts access and thus does not comply
with ADA regulations. Renovations will eradicate physical research barriers and
add to the existing capabilities. Modernized facilities will improve
accessibility and functionality of instruments for research and research
training, and enhance the quality of the research experience for faculty,
graduate and undergraduate students, and visiting scientists. This project will
positively impact the Department's ability to recruit exceptional students,
including those of under-represented groups and women in this nationally vital
area.