* 9602968
* Ethical Issues for Food Biotechnology - A North America-    Europe Comparison
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Paul Thompson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 03/31/2000
* USD 67,397.00

Philosophers often analyze ethical issues in debates over food and agricultural
biotechnology as involving conflicts between different understandings of
scientific responsibility. Some views stress prediction of consequences; some,
sets of social rules or personal and community virtues that must characterize
scientific conduct and government regulation, irrespective of consequences. This
tension runs through debates over environmental impact, food safety, animal
protection, and social consequences of agricultural biotechnology, as well as in
debates over the morality of intellectual property rules and questions about
public trust and confidence in science. Yet, many questions remain as to whether
philosophical accounts of ethical issues represent actual lay persons' concerns,
and whether these accounts have any cross cultural validity. This project will
produce a comprehensive philosophical overview of these ethical issues and
subject it to scrutiny with respect to its incorporation of lay concerns and its
cross cultural relevance. To begin, selective empirical studies of public
documents and media representations of the US controversies concerning ethics
and food biotechnology will be analyzed and compared with the philosophical
accounts. The comparison will assess whether these accounts represent amplified
discussions of lay persons' beliefs, if they serve as alternative vocabularies
for interpreting issues, or if they are largely irrelevant to lay persons'
concerns, (or perhaps some combination of these three possibilities). This
assessment uses results from empirical research in the US on moral language in
the formation of lay attitudes towards environmental conflicts, and on the role
of mass media in affecting public perception of risk. The project also involves
developing a collaboration with researchers in The Netherlands that will enable
cross cultural comparison of Dutch and other European philosophical accounts and
lay persons' views. The debates and philosophical analyses of debates from the
US and the Netherlands could then be compared to assess a) whether the debates
themselves are consistent with one another, and with the respective
philosophical analyses of them; and b) how different cultural approaches to
ethical philosophy may themselves create different ways of conceptualizing
ethical issues in food and agricultural biotechnology. The research would
address this question by placing a North American and a European analysis of
biotechnology controversy into philosophical dialogue with one another, and by
using the speech and media studies empirical analyses of both to ask questions
about the respective roles of philosophy and culture in framing the points of
debate. This award helps to support the US research component and several
initial meetings and explorations between the US and Netherlands research teams.
If progress warrants, a supplement and extension to the award may allow for a
workshop in Europe and follow-on research activities.