* 9602140
* U.S.-Czech Materials Research on Low-Dimensional Electronic Systems in Semiconductors
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Steven Girvin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/1999
* USD 44,000.00

INT 9602140 MacDonald This U.S.-Czech materials research project between Dr.
Allan MacDonald of Indiana University, Bloomington, and Dr. Pavel Streda of the
Czech Institute of Physics will feature the basic physics associated with low-
dimensional electron systems. Specifically, the researchers will study
equilibrium and transport properties of multi-layer electron systems by
focussing on double-layer systems in zero and tilted magnetic fields. The
collaborative effort will build upon theories of inter-plane transport as the
U.S.-Czech team attempts to define how the inter-layer correlations reflect the
way the charge is partitioned between two layers where coupling effects are
observed. Results are expected to lead to a determination of the electronic
structure of multi-layer systems subjected to in-plane magnetic fields and to
contribute to a theory that can describe in-plane transport in the presence of a
magnetic field, applied parallel to or tilted from the layer plane. Such new
knowledge of magnetoresistance may prove useful in fabricating semiconductor
devices. This project in materials research theory fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??