* 9602144
* A Travel Grant Program for the 12th International           Biophysics Congress, to be held Amsterdam, The Netherlands, August 11-16, 1996
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Henry Lester, Biophysical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/1997
* USD 20,000.00

9602144 Lester 12th International Biophysics Congress Travel Program The
International Union for Pure and Applied Biophysics will hold its General
Assembly and 12th International Congress in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, on
11-16, August 1996. It is proposed that the Biophysical Society administer a
travel grant program offering a limited number of travel awards to qualified
U.S. Scientists who may require such assistance, with preference to young
investigators and invited participants. The U.S. National Committee for the
International Union of Pure and Applied Biophysics (USNC/IUPAB) of the National
Academy of Sciences will distribute applications, and receive the completed
applications. Responsibility for screening travel grant applications will be
vested in a Committee of the Biophysical Society chosen by the Council of the
Society or its Executive Committee for a slate of candidates provided by
USNC/IUPAB. The Biophysical Society and the USNC/IUPAB feel that qualified U.S.
scientists should be assisted to attend this Congress to facilitate exchange of
recent significant developments and dissemination of biophysical research data
long before it could appear in journal form. In order to facilitate the maximum
number of U.S. scientists in receiving travel awards, the Biophysical Society
has agreed to manage this program without assessing an overhead charge. %%%