* 9602176
* Community Participation and Child Rights:  An Ethical and   Scientific Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1996,09/30/1998
* Mary Carlson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 09/30/1998
* USD 32,000.00

This project undertakes a one-year active engagement with community-based
service providers and child advocates to structure a process by which to
evaluate the ethical implications of new concepts of child rights and new
biomedical technologies for evaluating stress in children. The academic goal is
to document a process that other scientific groups can use to work with
communities and public groups on controversial scientific interventions. The
societal goal is to enhance the community basis for the collaboration of
academia and civil society in generating public policy and practice involving
science and technology. The project proceeds by a series of meetings with staff
and parents of a child service/advocacy organization that will: a) exchange
information and points of view, through both written materials and discussions,
around the ethical concerns and frameworks that guide the design and evaluation
of their services and those guiding the scholarship and research activities of
the investigators; b) discuss and debate potential risks and benefits of the
child rights approach and its relationship to cortisol measurements as a
strategy to assess stress in children, and c) discuss and debate use of this
technique to detect early signs of developmental stress, to monitor the
effectiveness of social services, and to evaluate the appropriateness of
institutional care settings. The project will archive written material and
document discussion covering these issues over the eight months of dialogue. The
goal is to attempt to develop a consensus on ethical issues relating to
conceptual frameworks, research methodologies, service design and evaluation to
assess stress in disadvantaged children in this particular situation as well as
more universally. The research team, an experimental psychologist, an ethicist,
and a physician will collaborate on scholarly publications to provide guidelines
for the exchange of information between service agencies, advocacy groups and
academics who share a commitment to improving the well-being of disadvantaged
children.