* 9602839
* Renovation of Cell Engineering Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 11/01/1996,10/31/2000
* Tracey McIntosh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/2000
* USD 620,000.00

Within the School of Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania, scientists
conduct advanced research on how cells transduce physical stimuli into
intracellular signals to alter genomic function, and learn how to control the
process of cell proliferation and remodeling for purposes of engineering new
tissue constructs. Typically, the engineering, physical, and life sciences
separately investigate cellular systems to understand how cells communicate,
adapt to changing conditions, differentiate, and grow. Critical breakthroughs in
cellular engineering occur at the intersection between the life sciences,
natural sciences, and engineering; these breakthroughs are facilitated by
forming a multidisciplinary laboratory environment. Penn is in a unique position
to focus the intellectual and infrastructure resource to successfully build a
basic research program impacting engineering and the sciences. With assistance
from the National Science Foundation, the University will create the Cellular
Engineering Laboratories (CEL) designed to integrate these disciplines and
cultivate the knowledge of cellular systems to positively impact national
efforts in biotechnology and bioengineering. The CEL will be created by
renovating existing, contiguous research space in the basement of Hayden Hall, a
structure that was built in 1896. Most of the services are original, and are
inadequate to support modern research. Renovations include: the replacement of
the electrical power distribution system, installation of a new HVAC system,
improvement of temperature and humidity controls, and the provision for proper
ductwork and piping required for the installation of equipment used in tissue
culture work. Cellular Engineering research conducted and dispersed in other
buildings will be relocated to the newly renovated area. This consolidation will
expedite interaction between faculty, and provide an interdisciplinary
laboratory environment where students from different departments can
collaborate. There is strong support to promote activity in Bioengineering at
Penn, and the institution has invested resources to enhance emerging programs
with the Biomedical engineering enterprise. The CEL project, coupled with
research space within the Institution for Advanced Science and Technology, and
the Institute of Medicine and Engineering, will accommodate faculty and students
interested in this emerging field, thus creating a new blend of science and
engineering.