* 9602440
* South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE)    Center of Excellence
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Lynn Mack, South Carolina State Board Technical & Comprehensive Education
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2001
* USD 2,100,000.00

South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE) Center of Excellence
The South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE) Center of
Excellence addresses expanding the pool of skilled technicians in advanced
engineering technology fields to aid the state's and the nation's manufacturing
industries in remaining competitive in the global marketplace. The SC ATE Center
seeks to create a learning environment which models the new technologically
sophisticated work milieu rather than simply teaching about it. Objectives are
focused in three broad areas including curriculum reform, program improvement,
and faculty development. Curriculum reform centers on developing integrated
engineering technology core curricula using a systems-based approach; program
improvement encompasses recruitment/retention reforms as well as the development
of an electronic communications infrastructure for state-wide curriculum design
and delivery; and faculty development emphasizes the use of
interdisciplinary/intercampus teams for designing and implementing curriculum
reforms. The primary target audience of the SC ATE Center is technical college
students enrolled in, or desiring to enroll in, engineering technology programs
with a particular emphasis on attracting women and underrepresented minorities.
The Center seeks to impact the educational pipeline from middle school through
the baccalaureate level. A particular emphasis involves working with Clemson
University and other four-year colleges to help prepare the middle and secondary
school technology teachers of the future. Collaborative partnerships encompass
over twenty-five educational, governmental, and business/industrial entities
including the State Department of Education, Clemson University, South Carolina
State University, the Virginia Community College System, the Governor's
Math/Science Advisory Board, the Governor's Commission on Women, the SC
Department of Commerce, AMP, Inc., BellSouth Telecommunications Inc., Michelin
North America, Bose Corporation, Robert Bosch Corporation, and NCR Corporation.
A strong evaluation component, headed by the Academy for Educational
Development, will facilitate the development of program improvement processes
and curriculum products which will have a significant impact on engineering
technology education nation wide.