* 9602785
* Renovation of the Water Supply and Treatment Facilities of  the Great Lakes Center
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Stephen Brandt, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 06/30/2001
* USD 109,775.00

The Great Lakes Center of Buffalo State College will receive funds from the ARI
Program to renovate the laboratory water supply and water treatment facility for
the Aquatic Research Laboratory (ARL). The ARL is the only modern facility
located on the lower Great Lakes capable of supporting experimental aquatic
research with lake water. Experimental work at the ARL has suffered from an
inability to maintain water temperature and water quality at levels required for
bioenergetics, behavioral and physiological experiments. At present, the water
system mixes all waste waters into a single septic tank system that does not
meet OSHA standards. This award will support the renovations of experimental
facilities to provided filtered lake water with computer-directed temperature
control. Thus enabling faculty and students to conduct experiments that will
provide detailed species-specific data required for studies of freshwater
ecosystems. Improvements will provide facilities needed for experiments
measuring fish and plankton physiological responses to changes in environmental
conditions that occur naturally or result from anthropogenic effects on the
ecosystems. Experiments conducted with these renovated facilities will be
coupled with the Laboratory's existing modeling program in fish bioenergetics,
spatial modeling of habitat quality, 3-D foraging models and individual-based
models of fish populations. The Great Lakes Center has established the only
Graduate Program in Great Lakes Environmental Sciences in the country. This
project will not only benefit research training for students, but for visiting
scientists from other institutions and abroad who come to learn techniques
integrating field sampling and spatial modeling programs.