* 9602608
* Renovation of a Multidisciplinary Environment for Research  and Research Training
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Raymond Mackay, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1997
* USD 411,982.00

Located in rural upstate New York near the Canadian broader, Clarkson
University, founded 100 years ago, has earned a reputation for providing
talented men and women with a quality private education in engineering, science
and management. Although regarded as a small university, Clarkson has a large
engineering program. Presently, the School of Engineering is dispersed among two
campuses in five different buildings. This arrangement has interfered with the
development of interdisciplinary research opportunities. Sufficient space is now
available to consolidate the entire School of Engineering in a single
interconnected complex on one campus. Funding from the National Science
Foundation, with resources from the institution, will allow for the relocation
to and renovation of research and training space in CAMP and Rowley Halls.
Underutilized laboratories will be renovated and remodeled to provide flexible
and efficient usage of space. Modern utilities systems will be installed, in
addition to the replacement of workbenches and walls. The new building's
configuration will maximize interdisciplinary contacts and collaborations, and
establish shared equipment facilities. This organization will eradicate any
barriers that may have existed between faculty research, research training, and
undergraduate education. Creation of a multidisciplinary environment for
research and research training will enable the institution to better prepare
students to meet the engineering challenges of the next century.