* 9602157
* Thermal Noise in Test Masses and Suspensions                for Gravitational Wave Interferometers
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Peter Saulson, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* David Berley
* 07/31/2000
* USD 689,178.00

According to the Fluctuation-Dissipation Theorem, thermal noise arises from any
mechanism that dissipates mechanical energy. This means that a gravitational
wave interferometer test mass and its suspension will work better, the lower is
the level of dissipation. The Syracuse group will carry out studies of various
test mass and suspension designs, characterizing them by their dissipation
levels. One means of doing this is to measure the quality factors of the various
mechanical resonances in the system. A novel method, newly developed by the
Syracuse group, involves careful measurement of the response of the system after
a steady stress has been released. Both methods will be employed in the search
for the best ways to build and suspend test masses for LIGO. In order for the
search for gravitational waves to succeed, it is necessary that detectors be
free from disturbing influences that can mimic or mask the weak gravitational
wave signal. Thermal noise, also known as Brownian motion, is among the noise
sources most in need of reduction. The aim of the research program of the
Syracuse University group is to understand the sources of thermal noise in
interferometric detectors of gravitational waves (such as those of the LIGO
Project), and to thereby learn ways of minimizing its strength. In addition to
its main goal of improving the performance of LIGO and other gravitational wave
detectors, this work may stimulate progress in understanding the structure of
noncrystalline solids, such as the fused silica from which test masses are made.