* 9602360
* Materials Aspects of Manufacturing Technology Institute
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* John Rusin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 12/31/2000
* USD 221,174.00

Materials Aspects of Manufacturing Technology Institute This Materials Aspects
of Manufacturing Technology Institute is developing a set of instructors with
sufficient background and understanding of the materials processing aspects of
manufacturing technology to serve as leaders to enhance technology education in
the U.S. It is also aimed at providing a model interactive program involving
high school and community college instructors and students and industry. This
model is demonstrating successful interactive curricular, laboratory and project
programs as well as assisting in the transition for technology students across
the high school-community college boundary. This Institute is being developed by
the University of Washington in partnership with high schools, community
colleges and industry in the Pacific Northwest. Over a three-year period, it
will provide 60 instructors at the high school and community college level with
an understanding of the principles and applications of materials as they are
used in the manufacturing technology field. It consists of a 15 day program
intensive in materials science and technology, including lectures, labs,
discussion sessions, independent research and projects for community college and
high school instructors from the Pacific Northwest. Each year of the 3-year
program includes 20 new participants; of the 3-year total of 60, approximately
40 participants will be from high schools and 20 from community colleges.
Generally, one community college instructor and two high school instructors from
the same geographical area form a team for project and follow-up work. Selected
participants are allowed to return for a second year at their own expense.
Academic year follow-up programs consist of 2, 1-day meetings on campus.
Participants develop interactive high school--community college projects,
performed jointly by a team of students from nearby schools with local industry
involvement. Evaluation tools are being developed, and evaluation data is being
collected annually and analyzed by the project team.