* 9602375
* Multimedia Communications Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* David Beyer, Middlesex County College
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 09/30/1999
* USD 309,983.00

Multimedia Communications Technology The convergence of computer, interactive
television systems and telecommunications is creating a new employment market in
multimedia communications technology. Multimedia refers to information that
combines more than one medium. Every segment of the industry is growing quickly
and has the potential for future growth. Networked multimedia communications
will have a broad impact on business, education, and on communications in
general Examples of networked multimedia communications include videotelephony
and videoconferencing, real-time video on demand, interactive video and
multimedia messaging, remote collaborative work, interactive information
services and multimedia education and training. Middlesex County College and the
Carteret public schools will work, mver a two-year period, with representatives
from the Siemens Rolm Corporation and York Telecom to develop and implement an
articulated curriculum to prepare multimedia communications technicians for
employment and continuing education. Building on an established, ABET-accredited
electrical engineering technology program with a computer electronics option,
the College will develop and implement a curriculum that provides a sound
foundation in core and technical skills and knowledge, as well as the foundation
interpersonal skills and knowledge that respond to industry needs. The overall
goal of the project is to develop and implement a high school through associate
degree program in Multimedia Communications Technology to satisfy the needs of
business and industry for highly-skilled, well-educated technicians, and, at the
same time, prepare graduates for further education. An existing articulation
relationship with the New Jersey Institute of Technology will serve as a vehicle
to extend Multimedia Communications Technology articulation through the
baccalaureate degree. The education of technicians, described as the employees
who "understand how the process operates in its entirety and are ready to
intervene if trouble arises," is a critical component in the revitalization of
American business and industry. Where once an employee was expected to do a job
without reference to what others were doing, now "teamwork, communication
skills, breadth of knowledge, initiative, versatility and leadership skills" are
basic requirements for employees at all levels. Just as business and industry,
to remain viable, have moved to a concentration on quality, so too must
technician education restructure for quality. Key elements in the design of the
curriculum structure will be the inclusion of methodologies and techniques that
promote the development of team building and creative problem-solving skills.
Collaborative learning, project-centered instructional activities and authentic
assessment derived from the completion of real-life projects will form the
curricular framework for the Multimedia Communications Technology program. The
multimedia communications technician must have a background rooted in
electronics and computer technology, with a strong foundation in mathematics,
science, and written and oral communications, as well as the ability to
participate as a team member in a quality-focused work environment. This
background, coupled with a knowledge of graphic design, will prepare multimedia
communications program graduates for careers in this new field.