* 9602669
* Replacement, Renovation, and Consolidation of Research and  Research Laboratories in Biology and Physics Departments at Millersville University
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Albert Hoffman, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 04/30/2001
* USD 400,000.00

Millersville University, located in Lancaster County, PA, is the recipient of
ARI funds for the replacement, renovation, and consolidation of research and
research training facilities for biology and physics. Current space is not
designed for research and training activities and is dispersed in several
locations on campus. Despite these conditions faculty and students have actively
engaged in independent research projects. The University is committed to
improving the research infrastructure on campus and is constructing a new
science building. As part of this infrastructure initiative, funds from the ARI
Program will be used renovate space in the existing Roddy Science Center to
house research focusing on ecology and plant biology, and experimental work in
physics emphasizing gas effusion. In addition to reconfiguring space, fixed
equipment consisting of fume hoods, growth and environmental chambers, and an
autoclave will be installed. This project will enable senior personnel to
function as a single unit in one building, thus increasing collegiality,
communication and cooperation in all aspects of academic life, especially in
research. Renovations will provide for the sharing of instrumentation and
facilitate new areas of research that are not feasible with present facilities.
Modernized laboratories will comply with ADA and safety codes providing a
conducive environment for research scholars to perform investigative work. In
addition to providing new research opportunities for all interested in pursuing
research, students who never considered science as a career option may be
attracted to the field by observing research in progress.