* 9602016
* Collaborative Research:  Identity and Environmental Action: The U.S. Environmental Movement as a Context of Behavioral  Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Willett Kempton, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Victoria S. Lockwood
* 08/31/2002
* USD 201,500.00

This project consists of collaborative grants to cultural anthropologists at the
Universities of Delaware and North Carolina. The researchers will study how
collective cultural forms influence individual action by studying the
environmental movement in the US. Environmentalism is a new social movement
organized at local, national and international levels. Majorities in opinion
polls identify themselves as `environmentalists`, suggesting a link between
environmentalism and personal identity. Using ethnographic techniques of
participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and personal narratives,
the project will study three face-to-face environmental groups, one national
environmental organization that communicates with members through mail and
telephone, and a random sample of citizens not belonging to any group. The
researchers will ask how an individual's identity as an `environmentalist`
relates to their observed behavior and energy use. A national survey will be
built from the ethnographic research to check for the hypothesized relations
between identity and action. The results promise to advance theory in
psychological anthropology, new social movements and identity formation as
collective phenomenon. The results will be of practical value to federal
agencies concerned with behavioral factors in environmental degradation, to
environmental educators, and to environmental action groups.