* 9602477
* Acquisition of a Dual Purkinje Image Eye Tracker for Use    in Cognitive Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Bradley Gibson, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Laura Carlson-Radvansky and her
collaborators will purchase a Fourward Optical Technologies dual Purkinje image
eye tracker and supporting devices. The eye tracker operates by comparing two of
the four reflections that are produced when light strikes the eye and through
noting the position of them the tracker records changes in eye position. This
instrument has high temporal precision and accurate spatial resolution. Response
time of the eye tracker is 1 millisecond and spatial resolution is accurate to 1
minute of arc. Visual fields of greater than 20 degrees may be tracked. The
investigators currently use a limbus reflectance eyelid eye tracker and the more
accurate Purkinje tracker supplied under this grant will increase the range of
experiments which can be performed. Cognitive psychologists are concerned with
what happens inside the head when humans think, remember, talk and look around
at the world. Because these events are not directly observable, equipment and
methods are needed that allow inferences to be made about the nature of the
processes, representations and structures that govern mental life. The research
projects that will use the eye tracker are unified in their assumption that
cognitive processes are dynamic and best understood by sampling behavior
continuously across space and time, although the specific research questions are
quite diverse, spanning the domains of visual perception, spatial cognition,
memory and attention. The research will not only enable the investigation of
important issues within each area, but may also enable the identification of
commonalties across areas. The specific research questions address issues
including the achievement of perceptual stability in visual perception, the
coordination of multiple reference frames in spatial cognition and the spatial
versus temporal nature of map learning. The cognitive science program at the
University of Notre Dame is relatively new and growing rapidly. It is attracting
increasing numbers of undergraduate and graduate students and the acquisition of
the dual Purkinje image eye tracker will further both undergraduate teaching and
graduate teaching and research.