* 9602214
* Renovation of Montana Tech of the University of Montana     Chemistry Building
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Joseph Figueira,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1998
* USD 980,000.00

Montana Tech of the University of Montana is the recipient of funds from the
National Science Foundation to support the renovation of research and research
training space in its Chemistry Building. Constructed in 1921, the structure has
supported research activities for the Metallurgy, Chemistry and Geochemistry
Departments for 75 years. Mission focused research and training have been a
historical strength of the university, and Montana Tech's location in Butte,
places it near the largest Superfund site in the United States. This combination
has produced a dramatic increase in funded research in chemical and biological
remediation technologies and related scientific issues. Growth in
interdisciplinary research, combined with research in the metallurgy, mining,
petroleum, biology, and chemistry programs, has led to an increase of funding as
well. However, because of the age of the facility, the poor condition and
capacity of the utility infrastructure, and the complete lack of a modern
ventilation system, research is hampered by existing conditions. Renovations
will include replacing the original 1921 electrical, heating, mechanical, and
ventilation systems. Poorly designed space will be reconfigured to comply with
ADA regulations and allow for more flexibility and efficient space usage. New
fume hoods will replace the original building hoods, and a centrally located
autoclave will be installed. Dispersed chemical storage will be consolidated in
a centralized area that will allow for the safe storage and handling of
hazardous materials and waste. Both the Chemistry and Biology Departments will
share the facility, which will enhance existing collaborative research in
biological remediation, and increase the breath and depth of the joint programs.