* 9602219
* Renovation of Science Research Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Ronald Martin, Louisiana State University Shreveport
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/29/2000
* USD 1,469,846.00

Louisiana State University at Shreveport (LSUS) is the recipient of funds for
the renovation of the Science Building. Constructed in 1967, the building houses
the Departments of Biological Sciences, Chemistry, and Physics. All faculty in
biology are involved in research that concentrates on utilizing molecular
approaches to solve systematic and other biological problems. Research interests
in the biology include: genetics, cell biology, animal and plant physiology,
microbiology and molecular biology. Senior faculty in the Department of
Chemistry and Physics maintain research specialties in biochemistry, organic
chemical ecology, radio-organic and polymer chemistry, environmental chemistry,
isotopic kinetics, and computation physics. Recent additions of programs in
biochemical science and environmental science, shared masters programs in
molecular biology with LSU Medical Center, and a new graduate course in
Environmental Science have exacerbated research and training facility needs. In
conjunction, when the research facilities were designed, LSUS was only a two
year institution. Renovations will encompass: the provision of adequate
electrical outlets, vacuum, and water to all labs and instrument rooms, the
installation of an autoclave system, and the upgrade of the air-handling system.
Several new fume hoods will be installed; existing fume hoods will be modified
to improve efficiency of operation and safety. The project will bring facilities
into compliance with ADA requirements and State building standards. Renovations
will accelerate new directions for faculty research programs as well as
significantly enhance multidisciplinary, research opportunities. Renovation of
the targeted facilities will insure greater capacity and safety for student
research and encourage more students to consider science careers.