* 9602617
* Renovation of Protein Engineering Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 10/15/1996,09/30/1998
* Charles Craik, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1998
* USD 211,885.00

Funding from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will enable the
University of California at San Francisco to renovate existing research space
dedicated to protein engineering studies. The primary focus of the Laboratory
has been on understanding and applying structure-function relationships in
proteins with a particular concentration on proteases and their natural
inhibitors using genetic and biochemical methods. Protein engineering
technologies are used to create wild-type and variant proteins in reagent
quantities that are then analyzed both biochemically and biophysically to study
substrate specificity, catalytic mechanism and structure. Located on the ninth
floor of the UCSF Medical Sciences Building, the facilities provide a unique
window on the principles and practice of protein engineering and its potential
application to biotechnology. Research space, constructed 40 years ago that has
been used for various significant scientific contributions in protein
engineering since 1985, will be renovated. These facilities include four rooms:
Molecular Biochemistry Laboratory, a Fermentation and Sterilization Room, a Cold
Room, and a Computer Modeling Room. The lack of items such as no sinks, drains,
vacuum and natural gas will be provided, a fume hood will be installed, and
repairs to the electrical and refrigeration systems will be made. The Program is
extremely productive and actively recruits high school, undergraduate, and
minority students who aspire to become scientists interested in
interdisciplinary research. Students experience many aspects of biotechnology
from computer modeling to hands-on protein engineering to structure
determination. Not only will this project enhance collaborations, but it will
promote the development of new macromolecular tools needed to conduct state- of-
the-art biotechnology research.