* 9602788
* Renovation of the Bartol Research Institute Computing       Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 11/15/1996,06/30/1998
* William Matthaeus, Bartol Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,078.00

The University of Delaware-Bartol Research Institute (BRI), a non-profit
research organization, is located in Sharp Laboratory with the Department of
Physics and Astronomy at the University of Delaware. BRI is engaged in
fundamental areas of research in theoretical and experimental physics, as well
as participation in the University's Joint Graduate Program in Physics and
Astronomy. Research interests and activities span a wide range of disciplines
and include both theoretical studies and in-house investigations, as well as in
situ and remote observations of space, the Sun, and the interplanetary and
interstellar mediums. Most of the research activities are supported by the
Computer Facility consisting of the Main Computer Room and the Computer Room
Annex. Research conducted in the facility is connected with computer simulations
and analysis of data from experiments and from simulations in the broad field of
space physics, fluid dynamics as applied to astrophysical plasma, and high
energy air showers. Computational components of these projects are limited by
inadequate CPU power, data storage, and visualization and graphics capabilities.
Increased research needs have placed a strain on the central Computing Facility,
which impedes on the ability to conduct research. Funding from the Academic
Research Infrastructure Program, combined with resources from the Bartol
Research, will be used to modernize and enhance the mechanical, electrical and
environmental aspects of the 12 year old facility. Renovations include replacing
an air conditioning unit with one that possess environmental controls,
installing new ductwork associated with the air conditioning system, and
installing environmental monitoring capabilities. The electrical power and
distribution equipment will be upgraded, including the addition of an
Uninterruptible Power Supply system. These improvements will allow the Bartol
Computing Facility to operate more safely and efficiently and accommodate for
future growth, and, therefore, enabling the Institute to provide high quality
computational support for various research efforts.