* 9602836
* Renovation of Research Space in Building C of the Emerson A.Cooper Science Complex
* O/D,OIA
* 10/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Kenneth LaiHing, Oakwood College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1998
* USD 210,588.00

Oakwood College, a private Historically Black College, located in Huntsville,
Alabama, is the recipient of funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure
Program. The mission of the College is to provide access to education
opportunity, academic excellence and spiritual development for its students who
come from diverse backgrounds. Funds will be used to renovate and repair
research and research training space in the Emerson A. Cooper Complex, a 15 year
old structure that houses the Departments of Biology and Chemistry. Specifically
space in the -C+ Building of the Science Complex, originally designed as
instructional laboratories will be renovated to correct problems that have
resulted from age related deterioration and make space more conducive to
performing research. Renovations will consist of: removal of walls to maximize
space usage, upgrading of lighting, installation of additional electrical
outlets, and fiber optic cabling, replacement of HVAC, and the installation of
fixed equipment. The renovations will allow the Departments of Biology and
Chemistry to continue their active research programs that enhance science
training. Remodeling inadequate facilities will help utilize space more
efficiently and provide space for faculty to accommodate additional
undergraduate students in their laboratories and train more students for
research careers. This project will be instrumental in the College's mission of
sustained academic excellence, and the science departments' continuation of
producing African American scholars that contribute to the scientific enterprise
of the nation.