* 9602369
* Technology Instruction for the 21st Century - Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Bruce Naples, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Continuing Grant
* SIMONEAU ROBERT W
* 08/31/2001
* USD 639,625.00

Technology Instruction for the 21st Century - Phase II Rapid advancements in
telecommunications--data communications and distributed information systems
technology--have significantly increased the scope of knowledge and skill
required of science and technology students. Using telecommunications
technologies as a vehicle for instructional change, this project integrates four
components: Curriculum and Instructional Materials Development, Instrumentation
and Laboratory Improvement, Faculty Enhancement and Dissemination of
instructional materials, and Distance Learning and Remote Access Technology. The
anticipated outcomes of this project are: improvement of marketable skills for
science and technology students; development of methods to keep curricula in
pace with cutting edge technology through development, delivery, and dynamic
revision of instructional materials; and promotion of activities that
significantly improve faculty skills. Curriculum and Instructional Materials
will be developed for courses and laboratories in the telecommunications
technologies. Courseware will be in the form of on-line (networked) laboratory
manuals, instructional multimedia presentations, and innovative uses of
converging technology as instructional tools. Interactive multimedia courseware
on high speed networks will serve as textbook and laboratory manual for the
twenty-first century. Revisions will be made dynamically keeping all materials
current. Products resulting from project activities will also support the NYNEX
Next-Step AAS degree program in telecommunications technology and the consortium
of SUNY and CUNY colleges developing the program. Because network technology is
a core project tool, it is anticipated that the dissemination of project
materials will occur via local and wide area networks and that faculty will
utilize telecommunications technology to promote ongoing dialogs and exchanges.