* 9602510
* FSML: Database Center at the Sierra Nevada Aquatic Research Laboratory (SNARL)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Daniel Dawson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

The Sierra Nevada Aquatic Research Laboratory (SNARL) is a field station of the
University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB), located in the eastern Sierra
Nevada. The station is one of the most used and scientifically productive sites
in the University of California's Natural Reserve System (NRS). SNARL supports
the full gamut of year-round field research in habitats ranging from alpine
watersheds to alkali lakes, old growth forests to experimental streams. This
project will create an office building and database center at SNARL. The center
will make use of a recently acquired building that has been moved to the site
and is being renovated. The project will also support the creation of the
database center which will provide 1) networked computers and peripherals for
field station users, 2) Geographic Information System (GIS) software and
databases, 3) Global Positioning System (GPS) hardware and software, 4) a
dedicated Internet connection, and 5) staff to develop and support research with
emphasis on spatially-related data sets. The project will provide new
opportunities for field scientists to process and analyze data while "in the
field." The telecommunications link will allow visiting scientists to stay in
contact with staff and colleagues and to move data back and forth from the field
station to their home institution. The ability to move and store large data
files, such as remote sensing images, will be part of this project. There is
substantial demand for the additional space and proposed facilities and
equipment. Database development and management will be emphasized to improve the
support for researchers at the field station. National and international access
to these data sets will be available via the Internet.