* 9602348
* A GIS Core Curriculum for the 2-Year College
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Michael Goodchild, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 12/31/1998
* USD 188,469.00

Title: A GIS Core Curriculum for the 2-Year College An increasing number of
Geographic Information System (GIS) technician positions are being created by
industry and public sector users of GIS. Community Colleges are attempting to
create GIS programs that will meet this demand. This project addresses the need
for a supporting resource for the GIS curriculum design and course building
activities taking place in a number of the two-year colleges. The National
Center for Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA) in collaboration with a
number of community colleges and current NSF Advanced Technological Education
Projects will develop a GIS Core Curriculum for Technical Programs (CCTP). This
World Wide Web-based resource will support efforts to develop discipline-
specific GIS materials by providing access to the fundamental elements of GIS
theory and practice as they relate to efforts to provide GIS technician
education in the community colleges. The CCTP will be patterned after the
successful NCGIA Core Curriculum in GIS developed for university level GIS
curriculum development and will also draw from the experience of the current
effort to update and create a World Wide Web (WWW) version of the Core
Curriculum in GIS. NCGIA and an Advisory Council, including GIS specialists from
community colleges, the GIS industry, and the GIS user community, will select
GIS educators from the community colleges to participate in a week-long Work
Session to create a framework for the CCTP. The framework will outline the
essential units of material and a format for the CCTP. Following this session,
each unit will be written by an individual with expertise in the unit topic. The
completed set of units will be compiled as a WWW resource and will be tested in
a number of community college GIS curriculum development and GIS instructional
activities. Following a detailed evaluation from the sites testing the CCTP, it
will be edited and made widely available via the WWW and CD-ROM.