* 9602180
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Computational Fluid      Dynamics for the Design and Optimization of Cardiac Assist  Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Roger Kamm, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1999
* USD 16,700.00

9602180 Kamm This award provides funds to permit Dr. Roger D. Kamm, Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to pursue with
Dr. Byoung-Goo Min, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Seoul National
University, for 24 months, a program of cooperative research for the development
of computational fluid dynamic methods that can be used to assist in the design
and optimization of cardiac assist devices. The U.S. investigator brings his
experience with use of computational methods for the analysis of flow in the
cardiovascular system, using methods appropriate both for three-dimensional,
unsteady flows with moving boundaries of the type that occur in the chambers of
the artificial heart or the ventricle. The Korean collaborator and his research
team bring to the research their considerable experience in the development of a
total artificial heart, extending from fabrication of the device to implantation
and long-term testing in large animals. An important component of this research
is the experimental verification and extension of the numerical simulations
using both laser Doppler anemometry and particle image velocimetry. The combined
expertise of this group of collaborators will help in the development of
techniques that can be used in the design of the next generation of cardiac
assist devices which can be optimized with regard to the flow field to reduce
the tendencies for thrombus formation and hemolysis, while minimizing the power
requirements of the device. Previous research on implantable heart assist
devices has produced many successes, but has not yet lead to a reliable total
artificial heart. This project is based on the premise that the next generation
of heart assist technology will require new tools that draw upon newly developed
capabilities in computational methods and experimentation. The collaborators in
this project expect to develop these computational tools. The project brings
together Korean experts i n biomedical engineering and medicine and U.S. experts
in computational fluid dynamics. Together they will attempt to develop a
smaller, more reliable, and more efficient left ventricular assist device. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
This project provides an international research experience for a U.S. graduate
student. Korean participation is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF). ***