* 9602945
* Fluorescent DNA Sequencer with Robotic Molecular Biology Workstation
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1999
* Gerald Forrest, Beckman Research Institute City of Hope
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 159,115.00

Funds are requested to purchase an ABI PRISMTM 377 DNA sequencer to upgrade the
DNA sequencing shared resource facility in the Beckman Research Institute at the
City of Hope Medical Center. The requested equipment will provide increased
output in both the number of samples sequenced and in the amount of data derived
from each sample. The DNA sequencing facility currently supports 30 44
investigators with a variety of basic interests and novel techniques in the
field of molecular biology. For example, the requested equipment will support
projects involved in: DNA damage and the repair of the damage plays an important
role in disease and aging. A project to understand the mechanisms of W induced
damage and repair in human cells is underway. Gene products that interact with
DNA repair proteins are being studied using ligated mediated PCR. Their role in
binding to DNA domains will require the use of DNA sequencing. Oxygen free
radicals play an important role in disease and aging. They damage DNA and
proteins and they alter gene regulation. Studies on the structure, function and
regulation of proteins that modulate free radicals are in progress. Glutathione
peroxidase, carbonyl reductase, and DT-diaphorase are being studied to determine
their role in free radical modulation, mutagenesis, carcinogenesis and drug
metabolism. The cloning, expression, and structural analyses of these genes in
tissue culture and in transgenic animals will require the use of the DNA
sequencing equipment. The Major histocompatibility region in chickens encodes
for resistance to several diseases. A family of genes within the Mhc is being
studied to understand the mechanisms by which resistance to disease occurs.
Polymorphic expression of genes in the Mhc is a key feature in vertebrates. The
reason for this polymorphic expression is not known in humans. The chicken
offers a model system to understand the relationship between gene expression and
disease. Characterization of the genes with in the Mhc will require extensive
DNA sequencing. Cyclic GMP-inhibited cAMP phosphodiesterase (PDE3) has been
extensively studied for its important role in the antilipolytic action of
insulin in adipocytes. Recent data has shown that two different PDE3 genes exist
which are expressed in a tissue specific manner. One of these genes is expressed
in the cardiovascular system and may contribute to diabetic vascular disease.
The characterization, regulation and structure of the genomic gene will be
analyzed using the DNA sequencer. The role of X chromosome inactivation, DNA
methylation, and chromatin structure will be studied in genomic imprinting.
Genomic imprinting results in the selective expression of either the maternal or
paternal alleles of a gene. The mechanisms of genomic imprinting are presently
unknown; however, genomic imprinting is implicated in several diseases leading
to mental retardation, cancer and behavioral problems. A basic understanding of
the mechanism(s) of genomic imprinting is essential to understanding the timing
and mechanisms of gene regulation during embryonic development. A new improved
procedure for sequencing methylated DNA will be used with the requested
equipment. Other projects types that will need the requested equipment include
protein-nucleic acid interactions, alternative splicing, ribozyme construction
and characterization, tissue specific transcriptional and post translational
regulation in Drosophila, the role of the transcription factor TWIST in
regulating early bone development, the structure-function of genetically
engineered antibodies, and the regulation of aromatase in estrogen-dependent
breast cancer.