* 9602188
* A Planning Visit to Seoul, Korea, for Cooperative Research: Impact of Particle Transport in Soils on Filter Performance
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Lakshmi Reddi, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 06/30/1997
* USD 3,825.00

9602188 Reddi This award provides funds to permit Dr. Lakshmi N. Reddi,
Department of Civil Engineering, Kansas State University, to make a short-term
visit to Korea to finalize plans with Dr. In-Mo Lee, Department of Civil
Engineering, Korea University, for cooperative research to assess the impact of
particle transport on filter performance under realistic in-situ conditions.
During the one-week visit, the collaborators expect to (1) gather field
information on which to develop the experimental basis of future research, (2)
observe the placement of filters and overall construction procedures as an aid
to understanding discrepancies between field observations and laboratory
results, (3) formulate assumptions for the modeling component of the proposed
research project, and (4) prepare an outline of the modeling and experimental
components of the proposed research for review by tunneling industry consultants
and by KOSEF prior to submission of a formal proposal to NSF and KOSEF. A number
of soil structures, both above ground and subsurface, require filters for
protection against erosion and piping. Fine particle accumulation in filters
leads to buildup of pore pressure which can be large enough to cause damage to
such structures as retaining walls, dams, and tunnels adjacent to the clogged
filters. Field conditions in the subway system in Seoul, Korea, offer an
excellent opportunity to test the fundamental particle transport models
currently being developed by the PI. The proposed collaborators have
considerable experience in the field of the proposed research. This project is
relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Program which seeks to increase the
level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through
the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and
through collaboration on problems of mutual interest and benefit. ***