* 9602547
* FSML: Hakalau Forest Biological Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Leonard Freed, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1998
* USD 135,342.00

The Hawaiian islands have an extraordinary endemic biota. Modern ecological and
evolutionary studies of this biota are limited by logistic problems of remote
locations and the absence of field stations near those locations. Critical
conservation studies of endangered species are similarly limited. With initial
funding from the World Environment and Resources Program of the John D. and
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, the University of Hawaii is constructing a
biological field station at Hakalau Forest National Wildlife Refuge on the
Island of Hawaii. The 33,000 acre refuge, located at 6000 ft elevation on the
eastern slope of Mauna Kea, contains 6 species of Hawaiian Honeycreepers in old
growth ohia-koa forest, 5 additional species of native birds, the hoary bat, and
6 species of endangered or candidate plants. This will be the first field
station in the state of Hawaii that is located in a remote area near the
significant biota and that is designed for education as well as research. The
objective of this proposal is to complete construction of two major buildings
and outfit the station with an initial phase of appropriate furnishings and
equipment. Funds would be used to finish a dormitory building that can sleep 20
people and a main building that has a kitchen, large dining\all purpose room, 2
offices, a laboratory, and a workroom. The current state of the buildings is
advanced framing. The remote location requires rural technology for production
and storage of electricity, and for collection and use of water. The location
also requires wheel-drive vehicles. Furnishings for the buildings include office
furniture, chests of drawers, and tables and chairs for meeting and dining. The
general design of the finished facility provides user friendly conditions for
long-term residents: vehicles to get to remote study sites; simple but
comfortable sleeping and eating conditions; gathering places; power, space, and
equipment for working indoors during the evening and du ring inclement weather;
a cellular telephone; and a washing machine. The first phase of new scientific
equipment includes computer workstations. These will enable residents to be
productive during evenings and foul weather. The computers will also be the
sites of curation of long-term data sets that documemt the ecological
heterogeneity on established study areas on the refuge. They will eventually be
integrated with a series of weather stations in established study areas and a
GPS\GIS system as part of a future second phase of equipping.