* 9602919
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Development of Materials   with Ultra-Fine Grain Sizes
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Terence Langdon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/2000
* USD 29,275.00

9602919 Langdon This award supports a three-year collaborative research project
between Professor Terence G. Langdon of the University of Southern California in
Los Angeles and Professor Minoru Nemoto of Kyushu University in Japan. This
research investigates processing parameters and microstructural characteristics
that are associated with ultrafine grained materials, including the influence of
microstructure and concurrent microstructural evolution on the mechanical
properties of materials at elevated temperatures. The research employs a new
processing method "equal channel angular pressing (ECA)" to create
nanocrystalline metal and magnesium alloys. Past experiments have established
that metallic alloys with ultrafine grain sizes in the nanometer range have the
potential for high ductilities and superplastic-like flow at relatively low
temperatures. ECA provides a capability for producing intense plastic straining
that can refine the metal alloy grain size into the nanometer range. Aluminum
and aluminum-based alloys and copper and magnesium alloys are selected for the
study because this selection allows an evaluation of the role of stacking fault
energy and its effects on dislocation networks and grain boundary structure.
This collaboration will facilitate the extensive expertise in mechanical testing
of the Americans with the considerable experience in microstructural analysis of
the Japanese. The research could lead to a new processing technique for
deformation processing of nanocrystalline materials and could impact future
metal alloy processing in the metal forming industries. Through the exchange of
ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
promote international understanding and cooperation. ***