* 9602234
* Research and Training in Evolutionary Primatology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2004
* John Robinson, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2004
* USD 1,213,859.00

9602234 This award renews support for a multi-institutional Research Training
Group in Evolutionary Primatology at five institutions in New York City. The
faculty group includes 30 evolutionary, population and behavioral biologists at
the City University of New York, Columbia University, New York University, the
American Museum of Natural History and the Wildlife Conservation Society. The
funds awarded will provide stipends for graduate students, will defray part of
the cost of the trainees' research, including field work and will help support
an annual colloqium. In addition, funds will be used to purchase specialized
research equipment to be used by trainees and to bring investigators from other
research and academic institutions to give research seminars and in some cases,
to participate in longer term training activities. During the original period of
support, the participating academic institutions have developed and refined a
unique graduate program that allows their students to take courses and pursue
research at any of the five member institutions. Evolutionary primatology draws
its theory, methods and empirical data from many areas within the biological
sciences, anthropology, and geology. The research programs of the participating
faculty focus on human and non-human primates from the perspectives of
morphology, paleontology, systematics, molecular and population genetics,
behavior, ecology, and conservation biology. Thus the training provided by this
group will equip students with the broad background necessary for integrative
studies in this challenging and interesting area. ***