* 9602776
* Renovation of Chemistry and Geology Research Facilities,    Georgia Southern University
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Fredrick Rich, Georgia Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/1999
* USD 900,000.00

Georgia Southern University (GSU), a unit of the University System of Georgia,
is the largest and leading center of higher education in the southern half of
the State. Distinguished as having been the fastest growing college or
university in the United States for the years 1987-1992, GSU has sustained a
104% increase in enrollment since 1985. The University is committed to providing
academic excellence to a diverse student body, particularly in the sciences.
Establishing a partnership with the National Science Foundation, GSU will aid
the university in its endeavor to improve its scientific infrastructure by
modernizing the Herty Building. Constructed in 1958, the facility is home to the
Departments of Chemistry and Geology/Geography, and has never been renovated.
Funding from the ARI Program, combined with university and State funds, will be
used to renovate five chemistry and four geology laboratories. Geology
laboratories support faculty research in geochemistry, igneous and metamorphic
petrology, sedimentology, invertebrate and vertebrate paleontology, economic
geology, geomorphology, and palynology. Chemistry facilities support faculty and
student research and training in physical chemistry, organic chemistry,
biochemistry and analytical chemistry. Existing research space is antiquated to
support current research activities and consists of the following deficiencies:
old laboratory benches, inefficient space utilization, poor lighting, exposed
ductwork and pipes, and outdated fume hoods. Renovations will encompass:
upgrading of electrical, HVAC, and lighting systems, installing new lab benches,
cabinetry and fume hoods, and installing additional fixed equipment. The
renovations will create a more efficient, functional, and safe working
environment, which will permit the full use of geology research equipment
currently available. The project will provide facilities capable of supporting
the rapidly growing research programs of chemistry and geology faculty and
students. The project will continue a significant university effort to improve
science facilities, and upholds the institutional goals and NSF's core
strategies by: 1) strengthening the physical infrastructure, 2) integrating
research and education, and 3) developing intellectual capital by attracting and
supporting activities among groups and regions that traditionally have not
participated as full stake holders in science, mathematics, and engineering.