* 9603661
* The Social Evolution of Eurasian Steppe Communities in      Southeastern Kazakhstan and the Rise of Ancient             Civilizations
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Claudia Chang, Sweet Briar College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2002
* USD 145,838.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Claudia Chang and her colleagues
will conduct three field seasons of archaeological and ethnographic research in
the Chilik region of southeastern Kazakhstan which constitutes the boundary
between the Tien Shan Mountains and the broad Eurasian steppe. The team brings
together Western, Kazakhstani and Chinese specialists in archaeology, historical
linguistics, geoarchaeology ethnography and archaeology to conduct a coordinated
investigation into the origins and development of Eurasian nomadic societies. At
Chilik, a large alluvial valley, the team will initiate the collection of
vegetation, soils and geomorphological data to create a modern-day environmental
baseline which will provide a context to interpret prehistoric economies of
herding, farming and hunting and gathering. The team will construct a geographic
(GIS) database that will allow them to implement a computer-based cartographic
system to reconstruct how prehistoric peoples exploited the multiple
environmental zones in the region and how patterns of exploitation are related
to different site types. Reconnaissance surveys will provide the basis for sub-
surface testing for buried archaeological deposits. Six sites representing the
entire chronological span of human habitation will be selected for testing.
Larger scale block excavations will be conducted at Bronze and Iron Age sites.
Complementary ethnographic data will be collected on contemporary Kazakh land
use, economy, technology and social organization to provide a template for
reconstructing past herding and farming economies. Although archaeologists have
long recognized that nomadic pastoral societies played an important role in
Eurasian prehistory, this development has always been viewed from the
peripheries - the regions where such groups came into contact with more settled
agrarian societies. The recent opening of Kazakhstan to foreign researchers will
now permit this development to be studied in the heartland. Dr. Chang and her
collaborators will focus on four questions: 1. What evidence exists to establish
that Eurasian steppe cultures had their own indigenous origins and internal
dynamics in the evolution of complex society? 2. How did the multi-resource
economic base of this region play in role in what is likely a unique
developmental process? 3. How can ethnographic data serve as a baseline for
reconstruction the past? 4. How can the models of diffusion and migration that
are currently used to explain the spread of Indo-European languages and related
cultural traditions be illumined by archaeological data from this region? This
research is important for several reasons. It will open a long-closed area to
international archaeological investigation. It will provide data of interest to
many archaeologists and shed new light on the development of complex societies.