* 9603186
* Latin America Regional Cooperation:  Short-Term Visits to   U.S. Institutions by Young Latin Americans Investigators
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Ernest Eliel, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1999
* USD 67,500.00

9603186 Malin The American Chemical Society, working together with the chemical
societies or scientific academies of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and
Mexico, will organize and monitor two-month visits by young Latin American
scientists to laboratories in the United States. During the two years of the
project, the American Chemical Society will select three participants from each
country from among nominees identified by the counterpart organizations. As a
pilot project, at least two additional scientists will be selected to visit
industrial laboratories in the United States. The host companies will furnish
the stipends for the industrial visitors. Costs of international travel will be
borne by the visitors' countries of origin. A major benefit to the United States
scientific community will be the establishment of long-term collaborative
research relationships between US laboratories and some of the outstanding young
chemical scientists in Latin America. This will facilitate investigation jointly
with US scientists of important scientific problems, for example, in natural
products chemistry and environmental chemistry. A second major effect of the
program will be to strengthen working relationships between US organizations and
Latin American scientific societies and academies. Finally, the program will
foster interactions between young scholars from the region and US industry,
which, in the spirit of the NAFTA accord, will benefit both sides as the Latin
American economies continue to expand. This award is jointly supported by the
Chemistry and the International Divisions of NSF. ***