* 9603033
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Seismic Permanent          Displacement of Geosynthetic-Reinforced Soil Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/09/1999
* Dov Leshchinsky, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 04/09/1999
* USD 18,495.00

9603033 Leshchinsky This award supports a two year collaborative research
project between Professors Dov Leshchinsky and Hoe Ling of the University of
Delaware and Professors Jiro Takemura and Tsutomu Kimura of the Tokyo Institute
of Technology in Japan. This research project will undertake a study of the
long-term performance of geosynthetically reinforced walls and implications of
creep and stress relaxation on design. The problem of time-dependent response of
geosynthetically reinforced soil structures requires study from the standpoint
of fundamental mechanics and current design procedures, for future applications.
The major goals are: 1) to experimentally study stress relaxation of selected
geosynthetic reinforcement; 2) develop a simple constitutive model to
realistically simulate the time dependent behavior of the reinforcement; 3)
implement this model into an existing finite element computer code; and 4)
conduct an extensive numerical parametric study of geosynthetically reinforced
walls at working stress conditions. The proposal brings together two
laboratories that have constituted different parts of the process: the Americans
will be responsible for conducting the analytical parts of the research and the
Japanese will be conducting the centrifuge tests. The results of the research
will facilitate the understanding of time dependent behavior of geosynthetic
reinforcement interactive with backfill soil and will make the design of such
structures more rational. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
project will broaden our base of knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. ***