* 9603636
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Meeting on the Cell and       Molecular Biology of Aplysia and Related Invertebrates,     April 16 - 20, 1997, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 02/28/1998
* USD 11,017.00

9603636 Grodzicker The mollusc Aplysia, and a number of other invertebrates,
have proven extremely useful in studies of basic cellular neurobiology and the
cellular basis of behavior and learning. This utility is due, at least in part,
to the extraordinarily large size of its nervous system cells (some of which are
almost a millimeter in diameter) and the ability to recognize these cells as
unique individuals. This tremendous experimental advantage has allowed the
investigation of individual cells, their patterns of interconnections,
modulation of the strength of connections between cells, and the relationship
between these cellular phenomena and behavior, learning and development. In
1988, Cold Spring Harbor sponsored the first meeting devoted to work on Aplysia.
Because of the success of this meeting, we decided to convene at two to three-
year intervals at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory and alternate there with the
highly successful Meeting on the Drosophila. The fifth meeting in April, 1995,
drew over ninety participants, and again was highly successful. The proposed
1997 meeting will continue to provide a format for discussing new methods and
findings that have emerged in the cell and molecular biology of Aplysia. The
Meeting will be concerned with different levels of analysis: synaptic
transmission; ion channels and channel modulation; peptides and small molecule
transmitters; cell imaging; circadian rhythms; neuronal circuitry and behavior,
and learning. A trend that was begun in the last meeting was to include a
variety of other model invertebrate systems, which can provide information
complementary to that obtained with Aplysia. This very wellreceived change will
be implemented further in the next meeting, by the inclusion, in each session of
a number of speakers who work with model systems such as crayfish, leech, squid,
Drosophila, Manduca and C. elegans. In addition, particular attention will be
given to the inclusion of junior scientists and women scientists. About 150
participants from approximately 60 laboratories throughout the world are
expected to attend.