* 9603078
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Holocene Taphonomy,   Landscapes &amp; Geochronology of the Rio Quequen Middle Basin  on the Pampas of Argentina
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Eileen Johnson, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 03/31/2000
* USD 30,346.00

9603078 Johnson This Americas Program award will fund a 2-year cooperative
research project between Dr. Eileen Johnson, Texas Tech University, and Drs.
Gustavo Politis, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, Argentina, and Jose Prado,
Universidad Nacional del Centro de la Provincia de Buenos Aires. They will study
the taphonomic processes involved in the creation of Quaternary archaeological
sites in the middle basin of the Rio Quequen Grande in the Argentinean Pampas,
with the goal of increasing the database on prehistoric human subsistence and
land use. The proposed work focuses on the analysis of modified and unmodified
bone recovered from the sites. Modifications will be studied on microscopic,
light microscopic, and scanning electron microscopic levels in order to
determine their type and source. Based on the analysis of the bone material,
buried soils, and radiocarbon dating, the researchers will try to delineate the
formative and disturbances processes at work at sites, the subsistence base and
social structure of the population, and the environmental and climatic setting
of their occupations. The project should advance the comparative understanding
of Middle to late Holocene adaptations to grasslands environments. The linkage
among limnological processes and human activity in the creation of the
archaeological record is crucial to our understanding of early occupations., and
the planned reconstruction of the paleolandscapes will constitute a major
contribution to the geoarchaeology of the region. ***