* 9603740
* Proteolytic Targeting Signals in S-adenosylmethionine       Decarboxylase
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Bruce Stanley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 06/30/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9603740 Stanley Selective protein degradation is an important cellular process
contributing to abnormal protein removal, cell-cycle progression, stress
responses, and normal growth regulation, yet little is known about the molecular
determinants of such selectivity, particularly differences in protein structure
or proteolytic systems that might account for the many-fold range of protein
half-lives in cells. Approaches using in vitro degradation systems or in vivo
destabilization of mutated versions of normally stable proteins may not
represent physiological degradation pathways or targeting signals. This project
will use the polyamine biosynthetic enzyme S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase
(SAMDC), a cytosolic enzyme which is normally rapidly degraded, as a model for
the subclass of proteins which are rapidly turned over in the cytosol, and
examine its degradation in cell culture under a variety of conditions designed
to determine the intracellular effectors of this degradation, the proteolytic
system(s) which degrade SAMDC, and the targeting signal(s) in the SAMDC
structure which cause its rapid degradation. Using specific inhibitors of the
other enzymes of the polyamine biosynthetic pathway, as well as inhibitors of
the production of the SAMDC substrate S-adenosylmethionine, the investigator
will determine which of these substrate products serve as endogenous effectors
of SAMDC degradation. An additional goal of the research will be to determine
the cellular proteolytic systems which normally degrade SAMDC, using specific
inhibitors of the various known intracellular proteolytic activities to look for
SAMDC-stabilizing effects in vivo. Finally, potential targeting signals in the
SAMDC structure will be examined by creating deletions and site-specific
mutations, expressing these mutant SAMDCs in mammalian cells, and measuring the
resulting half-lives. Candidate regions/residues will be chosen in several ways,
including a comparison of the half lives (in mammalian cells) of expressed
SAMDCs fro m other species (which have regions of similarity as well as
dissimilarity with the mammalian enzyme), computer predictions of surface-
accessible regions and experimental determination of surface accessible acidic
and basic residues. Selective protein degradation has become recognized as a
critical process which contributes to the regulation of the amount of specific
proteins present in cells at any time, but very little is known about how this
selectivity occurs. Unstable proteins as a class include many proteins known to
be involved in cell growth, so understanding the processes involved in this
selection for instability is quite important. The present research focuses on a
particular unstable, growth-related protein, SAMDC, with a goal of defining what
actually rapidly degrades SAMDC in cells, as well as what biochemical aspect of
the SAMDC structure makes it a target for this rapid degradation. The
information gained from these studies will help to elucidate the basis of
targeting proteins for degradation, and will lay the groundwork for future
studies of how this degradation process is controlled.