* 9603137
* U.S.-India Collaborative Research:  Low-Temperature Studies of Hall Effect and Specific Heat in Amorphous Alloys, Award in U.S. and Indian Curreny
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Donald Naugle, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2001
* USD 28,294.00

9603137 Naugle Description: This is a U.S.-India research collaboration in
condensed matter physics/materials science under the direction of Donald Naugle,
Texas A&amp;M Research Foundation and A.K. Majumdar, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kanpur. The proposed research entitled Low Temperature Studies of
Hall Effect and Specific Heat in Amorphous Alloys will determine the
correlations between the electrical and magnetic properties of metallic glasses.
While considerable progress has been made in cataloging and explaining
electrical transport in paramagnetic glassy metals, the relative importance of
nonmagnetic processes and those associated with magnetism and magnetic
scattering processes in amorphous magnetic alloys has not been completely
established. The U.S. group has been among the most active studying electron
transport and surface chemistry of nonmagnetic amorphous alloys, and the Indian
group has been a major factor in the study of electron transport in magnetic
glassy metals. The expertise and experimental capabilities of the two groups are
highly complementary and will combine well to accomplish the research
objectives. Scope: In the United States the study of amorphous metals had, at
one time, been far more intensive than in India. However, research priorities in
the United States have shifted to other areas. Presently, no research programs
are funded solely for the study of amorphous metals. The main effort on this
topic in India and perhaps worldwide will be performed by Majumdar and his group
at Kanpur. U.S. collaboration will insure access to major experimental research
on amorphous metals, access to the resulting technology at low cost, and the
furthering of basic understanding on transport in amorphous alloys. ***