* 9603360
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Regulation and Roles of    Signal Transducing
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Michael Frohman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 04/30/2000
* USD 26,150.00

9603360 Frohman This award supports a two year collaborative research project
between Professor Michael Frohman of the State University of New York (SUNY) at
Stony Brook and Professor Yoshinori Nozawa of the Gifu University School of
Medicine in Japan. The project will investigate the biochemical, cellular, and
physiological roles of Phospholipase D (PLD), an enzyme thought to be involved
in signal transduction, vesicular trafficking, and the control of cell division.
The major goals of this project are: 1) to continue structure-function
experiments using site-directed mutagenesis to identify amino acids required for
interaction with cofactors such as protein kinase C and small G- proteins, and
intracellular localization; and 2) to determine whether PLD1 or 2 are activated
by stimulation of specific signal transduction pathways in well characterized
cell lines, and whether such activation is necessary or sufficient to generate
the subsequent cellular responses that have been ascribed to PLD activation in
general. The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
constituted different parts of the process. The Americans have extensive
experience with standard and advanced molecular biology techniques,
microinjection of plasmids and proteins into cells, embryonic in situ
hybridization, and transgenic mouse technology. The Japanese have been using
approaches to study PLD for a decade and have extensive experience with a wide
variety of pharmacological PLD activators and inhibitors, and with measuring the
cellular consequences correlated with PLD activation, such as serotonin
secretion, mast cell degranulation, and diacylglycerol production. PLD
activation has been linked to a wide variety of normal physiological and disease
processes in many different kinds of cells and tissues. Results of the research
will provide realistic expectation about the advantages and limitation of the
different model systems. This would serve as the basi s to determine which
models should be implemented. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. ***