* 9603035
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Pattern Formation and  Complex Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,10/31/2000
* James Glazier, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 10/31/2000
* USD 47,500.00

9603035 Glazier This award supports a three year collaborative research project
between Professor James Glazier of the University od Notre Dame and Professor
Masaki Sano of the Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan. This project provides for
research in the area of pattern formation and complex systems. The researchers
will be studying cell sorting and turbulence. They will study the physical and
biological mechanisms of cell sorting during embryonic development, both
theoretically and experimentally. This should establish detailed quantitative
agreement between experiments and the Potts model simulations and explain
several morphogenic processes. Their next goal is to study turbulence in
Rayleigh-Benard convection in Hg. They will accomplish this by characterizing
the velocity histograms and spectra of hard turbulence using new velocity
probes. They will then determine velocity histograms for the ultrahard
turbulence regime which they expect to differ from hard turbulence. The proposal
brings together the efforts of two laboratories which both work on living and
non-living materials and both combine experimental and theoretical studies of
physical and biological pattern formation. Their equipment and expertise is also
complementary. The results of the research will provide realistic parameters in
their computer models that would allow for full quantitative simulations.
Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base
of basic knowledge and promote international ulderstanding and cooperation.