* 9603807
* The Role of Specific Residues in Protein-Protein            Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Carl Frieden, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2001
* USD 240,000.00

9603807 Frieden The goal of this project is to examine the effect of site
directed mutations on interactions between similar units within a filamentous
protein. The model system to be used is actin. The crystal structure of
monomeric muscle actin is known but it is not necessarily clear what the
important contacts between actin monomers within the filament are. Thus, within
the actin filament the interactions to be examined are those that occur between
actin monomers. For this study it is planned to use mutants of yeast actin, this
protein being approximately 90% identical to muscle actin. Yeast (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae) contains a single actin gene obviating the need for separating
different actin isoforms. A number of yeast strains expressing mutant actins are
already available while others are under construction in this laboratory. Yeast
actin can be obtained in reasonable yields from both wild-type and mutant
strains. The first goal of this project is to examine the effect of site
directed mutations, based on the known monomeric crystal structure, on the
polymerization of actin itself to determine whether the mutation affects the
formation of actin nuclei leading to filament formation or the elongation of the
filament or both processes. Determination of the mechanism of actin
polymerization can be made using sophisticated kinetic studies. Such studies are
to be carried out following the polymerization process either by using a
fluorescent label covalently attached to the actin or the intrinsic fluorescence
of actin. Both these fluorescent methods are applicable because the fluorescence
change is known to follow the incorporation of monomer into polymeric actin.
Actin, a protein that is ubiquitous in all cells from yeast to humans, is a
critical component in metabolic function. In muscle cells it interacts with the
protein myosin to give rise to muscle contraction. In non-muscle cells, either
alone or in combination with other proteins, actin i s responsible for
maintaining the structure of the cell and for many cellular functions. The
polymerization and depolymerization of actin controls such processes as cell
movement, uptake of other molecules and response to extracellular signals such
as hormones. The actin molecule is made up of 375 amino acid residues which fold
together to give a specific three dimensional structure. Specific residues
within this structure play an important role in the interaction of actin
molecules with themselves to form the polymeric species while others are
important for interacting with other protein molecules which control cellular
processes. In this project site-directed mutagenesis,will be used to change
specific residues in the actin molecule. The effect of these changes on the
properties of the actin molecule itself and on its interactions with other
proteins will be determined. The results will help to clarify the general role
of certain amino acid residues in the interactions between proteins.