* 9603028
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Soil Behavior and Ground         Response for Hazard Assessment during Earthquakes
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* I Idriss, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 04/30/1998
* USD 21,384.00

9603028 Idriss This award supports the participation of American scientists in a
U.S.-Japan seminar on Soil Behavior and Ground Response for Hazard Assessment
During Earthquakes to be held in Hokkaido, Japan from July 1-2, 1997. The co-
organizers are Professors I. M. Idriss of the University of California at Davis
and Kenji Ishihara of the Science University of Tokyo in Japan. This seminar
will provide a forum for bringing together up-to-date information on 1)
liquefaction in cohesionless soils, 2) the failure of cohesive soils, and 3) the
response of soil sites underlain by layers of soft cohesive soils or layers that
tend to liquefy when subjected to shaking. Ground failure during earthquakes, as
caused by liquefaction in cohesionless soils and over-stressing of cohesive
soils, results in major damage to ports and harbors, buildings, bridges, and
other civil infrastructure facilities. Gaining an understanding of liquefaction
in sandy soils and failure in cohesive soils subjected to earthquakes is an
important first step in developing design guidelines to mitigate the damages of
earthquakes. Natural disaster reduction is a priority area for U.S.-Japan
Cooperation. The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field
will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage
for future collaborative projects. ***