* 9603520
* Mechanistic Studies of TfdA, an Alpha-Ketoglutarate-        Dependent Dioxygenase
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Robert Hausinger, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 02/29/2000
* USD 270,000.00

Hausinger 96-03520 Hausinger Part 1. Technical This study uses
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D)/alpha-keto glutarate dependent
dioxygenase (tfdA) from Alcaligenes eutrophus as a model protein to examine the
metallocenter properties and enzyme mechanisms in catalysis. This enzymes
catalyzes the first step in biodegradation of the broadleaf herbicide 2,4-D. It
couples the hydroxylation of 2,4-D, forming a compound that spontaneously
decomposes to yield glyoxylate and 2,4-dichlorophenol, with the conversion of
alpha-KG to CO2 and succinate in a ferrous ion-dependent reaction. TfdA is
especially well suited to serve as a paradigm of this enzyme class because it is
relatively small, highly soluble, end readily available in large quantities by
using recombinant cell extracts and a simple two-step purification protocol.
Furthermore, the tfdA gene is easily manipulated by genetic and recombinant
methods. The objectives and approaches are: (1) characterize the metallocenter
in TfdA bond to Fe(Il) or substituted metals by spectroscopic methods such as ,
X-ray absorption, and electron paramagnetic resonance ; (2) Identify the
residues that participate as metallocenter or in substrate or cofactor binding
and enzymatic catalysis by site-directed mutagenesis; (3) define the enzyme
mechanism by examining the reactivity of TfdA towards alternate substrates,
inhibitors, and inactivators; and (4) initiate studies on a related protein from
E. coli, TauD, a sulfonate hydroxylase that degrades sulfonates to form sulfite,
the cellular sulfur source. Results from these studies, designed to further the
understanding of the novel biodegradative chemistry of TfdA, and other enzymes,
may be useful to biotechnological and bioremediative applications such as the
selective hydroxylation or decomposition of other compounds. Part 2. Non-
technical This project seeks to characterize the enzymatic mechanism of TfdA, an
enzyme that catalyzes the first step in the decomposition of the broadleaf
herbicide 2,4D (2,4-d ichlorophenoxyacetic acid), from Alcaligenes eutrophus.
TfdA is a representative of an important, yet poorly understood, class of
ferrous ion-dependent enzymes that couple the oxygen-requiring decomposition of
alpha-ketoglutarate to the hydroxylation of a substrate. Changes occurring at
the metallocenter will be examined by spectroscopy, the roles of selected amino
acid residues studied by molecular biological methods and the enzyme mechanism
deduced by analyzing its reactivity towards substrates, inhibitors, and
inactivators. In addition, the properties of this enzyme will be compared to
those proteins related in sequence. Results from these studies should advance
the understanding of the novel reaction mechanisms of enzymes useful in
biotechnology and biodegradation. 80 Fane The proper assembly of viral proteins
and nucleic acids into a biologically active virion involves numerous and
diverse macromolecular interactions. The main objectives are to elucidate these
critical interactions and to define the structural domains of the responsible
macromolecules. A combination of genetic, biochemical and structural approaches
(X-ray crystallography) will be employed to accomplish the object. Like
molecular chaperones, scaffolding proteins direct other proteins in achieving
their proper three-dimensional conformations. Within the context of this
analogy, the atomic structure of a procapsid offers a depiction of a chaperone-
like protein complexed with its substrate. Prior results suggest that the
Microviridae internal scaffolding proteins, gpB, share many properties with
molecular chaperones. Prior results also indicate that the internal scaffolding
proteins either possess inherent flexibility or interact with their substrates
in nonspecific manners, perhaps via interfaces. Determining the atomic
structures of hybrid procapsids, containing foreign scaffolding proteins, will
directly address this questio n. The present (X174 procapsid structure does not
contain the internal scaffolding protein which is lost during purification.
During the first year of support, alternate genetic and purification strategies
will be explored to stabilize this protein. The current protocols will still be
employed to gather additional data to refine the external scaffolding protein
structure. Also within the first year, the genetic and purification strategies
needed to generate alpha procapsids will be developed. Continuation of the
structural work, done in collaboration with Dr. M. G. Rossmann, will proceed
throughout the support period. The recently solved atomic structure of the
external scaffolding protein, gpD, suggests that it also shares many features
with molecular chaperones. Thus gpD, like a molecular chaperone, can bind to
other proteins in many different ways. While some domains make contact with the
coat protein in varied manners, one of these domains may determine the protein's
substrate specificity for a particular viral coat protein. the plasmid-based
cross complementation system has been extended to this gene. Unlike the internal
scaffolding proteins which exhibit a great deal of divergence in primary
structure, the external scaffolding proteins share 75% sequence identity. The
(X174 protein, however, is unable to productively direct the assembly of other
Microviridae virions. A comparison of the primary structure reveals that the
divergent residues are localized to the NH2 -termini of the proteins which forms
a large (-helix in the (X174 atomic structure. These observations suggest a
model in which the scaffolding's specificity for a particular viral coat protein
resides in this region. This hypothesis will be tested with chimeric
polypeptides. During the first year of support, restriction sites needed to
construct chimeric external scaffolding proteins will be introduced. The (X174
gene will be recloned and clones of other Microviridae D genes will be
generated. Characterization of the chimeric genes and gene products will
commence in the second year. The results of these analyses may also provide
insights into the design of recombinant proteins. All viruses must assemble
themselves by means of multiple protein interactions. viral assembly is often
dependent on proteins known as scaffolding proteins. Analogous to scaffoldings
used in the construction of buildings, scaffolding proteins are found in virus
assembly intermediates but not in the mature viruses. Two different scaffolding
proteins, external and internal, are required for the assembly of the
Microviridae family of viruses. With These viruses we are able to purify viral
intermediates which still include the external scaffolding protein. By examining
the atomic structure of the external scaffolding protein and performing genetic
analyses with both the internal and external proteins, we have determined that
different regions of the scaffolding proteins may have specific and identifiable
functions. Refining the atomic structure of these proteins and testing our
hypotheses regarding their various functions by constructing hybrid Microviridae
scaffolding proteins are the main objectives of the proposed work. The results
of these analyses will provide further insights into virus assembly and the
design of recombinant proteins.