* 9603634
* Rare Radiative Decays of the Phi Meson
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* John LoSecco, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 06/30/1999
* USD 215,000.00

A detector that will be constructed for an experiment at CEBAF to measure rare
radiative decays of the Phi Meson. The experiment is a collaborative effort
involving nuclear and high-energy physicists from several universities. It has
received the highest rating from the CEBAF Program Advisory Committee. The total
cost of the detector will be shared with the Department of Energy and with
several of the universities involved in the project; this funding is already in
place. Partial support will be provided by the NSF Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) as part of an enabling initiative for instrumentation
development. The goal of the experiment is to measure rare radiative decays of
the phi meson in order to study the quark structure of daughter states as well
as to probe possible symmetry violations. Sensitivity to branching ratios at one
part in ten thousand will permit significantly improved charge conjugation
tests, as well as providing important information about the structure of poorly
understood scalar meson states. The detector will consist of an electromagnetic
calorimeter which will detect all-photon decay modes of the phi meson. The
requested funds will be used to construct a charged-particle veto wall to ensure
a neutral final state, a dedicated data acquisition system, and various
ancillary devices such as a suitable target and beam pipe and calibration system
for the calorimeter. Graduate education is a central but implicit element in
this project.