* 9603099
* U.S.-India Collaborative Research:  Design & Analysis of    Highly Available Distributed Systems, Award in Indian       Rupees
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Pankaj Jalote, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/1998
* USD 16,129.00

9603099 Jalote Description: This proposal is for a research collaboration
between Satish K. Tripathi, Chair, Department of Computer Science, University of
Maryland and Pankaj Jalote, Dept. of Computer Science, Indian Institute of
Technology (IIT), Kanpur. This project addresses a number of design and analysis
issues relating to replicated systems. Its basic goal is to enable the designer
to analyze replicated systems for the purpose of predicting performance and
tuning them to obtain the highest availability. The most important issues
include: availability analysis, the effect of parameters such as degree of
replication and node/network reliability, parameters to maximize system
availability, and preferred protocols. Scope: Considering the growing need for
computer systems that offer high availability, this research is timely and has
broad application potential. The P.I.s have complementary expertise in two areas
critical for the research. Jalote is internationally known in fault-tolerance
and software engineering. Tripathi is an accomplished computer scientist and
well known for his work in performance evaluation. Computer science is an area
of exceptional strength in India and the IIT Kanpur one of the top research
institutions in this field. The collaboration should be productive with many
mutual benefits anticipated. ***