* 9603639
* Task Allocation in Social Animal Colonies
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Deborah Gordon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2000
* USD 188,760.00

Gordon 9603639 Like a brain or an embryo, a social insect colony functions
without central or hierarchical control. Simple decisions by individual units,
the workers, lead to the complex behavior of the colony, though no individual
directs the behavior of others. Colonies perform a variety of tasks outside the
nest, including foraging, nest maintenance work, and patrolling. As conditions
change, the numbers of ants required for each task also change. Task allocation
is the process that results in the right numbers of ants performing the right
tasks for the current situation. How do colonies accomplish this without central
control? Individuals make decisions based on local information. These decisions
determine whether an individual will switch tasks, an whether it will pursue a
task actively or instead remain inactive inside the nest. The proposed work will
investigate what cues ants use in making task decisions. The proposed research
explores the possibility that the rate or number of interactions among nestmates
is one of the cues involved in tasks allocation decisions. The work will use
laboratory colonies of marked individuals, in which all behavior inside the nest
is visible, and computer simulations based on a mathematical model of task
allocation. Because the rate of encounter among ants depends on how they move
around, an image analysis system will be employed to track the paths of ants as
they move around the laboratory nest and arena. How ants respond to the rate of
brief interactions with other ants, will be examined in undisturbed colonies and
in experiments that manipulate worker density, and thus encounter rate. Chemical
analysis of the hydrocarbons on the surface of an ant s body will test whether
ants engaged in a particular task might carry an odour specific to that task,
which other ants could use to distinguish the task of the ants they meet. This
research should provide new insight into the ways that fairly simple individ ual
behavior can generate the complex behavior of social systems.