* 9603215
* Phonological Analysis of Indigenous Languages of Eastern    Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Megan Crowhurst, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 04/30/2000
* USD 147,709.00

This NSF grant will fund the PI's work in documenting and analyzing the sound
patterns of indigenous languages of Bolivia's eastern lowland. This region, also
called Amazonia, is a rich and ethnically diverse area where more than twenty-
five distinct indigenous groups engage in an ongoing struggle to preserve the
routine, every-day use of their ancestral languages. To this end, recent years
have witnessed internationally-supported efforts to develop bilingual education
programs in Bolivia in which children will be educated partly in Spanish (the
geographically dominant language) and partly in the traditional indian language
of their communities. Leaders of such programs have sought to involve North
American and European linguists as consultants in ongoing efforts to create
linguistically informed materials (such as, grammars, dictionaries, readers)
that can be used to educate children in indigenous languages. In exchange for
our labor as consultants, the PI for this project and other linguists are
gaining the opportunity to study a variety of indigenous languages for purposes
that benefit the North American scholarly community. As most languages of
eastern Bolivia are understudied to date, the detailed information to be
acquired as part of this project is expected to contribute to linguists'
understanding of what human languages are like from a structural point of view;
the similarities and differences that exist between languages spoken in diverse
regions of the world; and what this information might tell us about the
cognitive underpinnings of our linguistic systems. The PI's role in the ongoing
research just described is tied to her experience as a phonologist--a linguist
who analyzes aspects of sound structure in human languages, from the basic
inventories of consonants and vowels used, to the stress and intonation contours
imposed upon them in running speech. The funds awarded by NSF will be used to
cover costs associated with travel to Bolivia for stu dy and data acquisition;
to purchase equipment needed to analyze sound structures in these languages; to
employ a graduate student at the University of North Carolina to assist in this
analysis (a valuable aspect of that student's training); for travel to scholarly
conferences at which the results of this work may be presented; and to assist in
preparing work for publication in scholarly journals and in magazines more
accessible to the general public, such as Science.