* 9603744
* Dynamics of Elementary Processes in Solutions of Biopolymers
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2000
* J. Michael Schurr, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2000
* USD 315,000.00

9603744 Schurr Several problems concerning the structures and thermodynamics of
supercoiled plasmids, bending- and temperature-induced perturbations of DNA
secondary structure, and the dynamic bending rigidity of DNA will be
investigated by a variety of modern optical techniques and simulation methods.
Rotational, translational and deformational Brownian motions of particular DNAs
and DNA/intercalator complexes will be assessed by time-resolved fluorescence
polarization anisotropy (FPA), dynamic light scattering (DLS), a transient
polarization grating (TPG) method currently under development, and a transient
photodichroism (TPD) method to be developed. DNA is significantly deformed by
twisting and/or bending in many of its biologically important states, for
example in supercoiled DNAs. The global (tertiary) structures of such
supercoiled DNAs facilitate important biological functions, such as
recombination, and the deformational strain energy stored in such molecules is
used to drive important biological processes, such as the opening' of the
double-helix prior to DNA replication. Understanding the contribution of
deformational strain to the energetics and structures of such species requires
knowledge of the DNA elastic constants for twisting and bending. Those same
elastic constants also provide information about 'switching' of the local
(secondary) structure of the DNA. It has been proposed that a regulatory protein
might enhance the rate of gene expression via some alteration of the DNA
secondary structure at its binding site and long-range (equilibrium)
'transmission' of that altered structure along the DNA to the binding site of
the 'informationreading-proteins'. Since many proteins that enhance gene
activity also bend the DNA in one way or another, there is some suggestion that
bending of the DNA might be involved in secondary structure 'switching'. The
research planned will investigate the twisting and bending elastic constants and
the energetics of supercoiling over a wide range of temperatures. It will also
examine the 'switching' of DNA secondary structure that is induced by bending
and other perturbations, and some of the factors that might control the
secondary structure 'switching' equilibrium.