* 9603993
* Molecular Basis of Self-Incompatibility in Petunia
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Teh-hui Kao, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 04/30/2001
* USD 379,125.00

Teh-hui Kao 96-03993 Petunia inflata possesses gametophytic self-incompatibility
which is controlled by a polymorphic locus, the S locus. Matching of S alleles
carried by the pollen and pasta results In Inhibition of pollen tube growth in
the style. The goal of this proposal is to understand how a pistil distinguishes
between self and non-self pollen. Because so far only the products of pistil S
alleles, S proteins or S RNases, have been identified, the first two objectives
of this proposal are the identification of the pollen S gene and its allelic
products. In the first objective, four approaches will be used to identify
potential candidates for the pollen S gene: S protein affinity chromatography,
the yeast two-hybrid protein-protein interaction assay, peptide display library
screening, and mRNA differential display. cDNAs for the proteins peptides, and
PCR fragments identified will be isolated and examined to determine whether
their corresponding genes co-segregate with S alleles and show sequence
variation between alleles, two criteria for the pollen S gene. The second
objective is to use gain-of-function and loss-of-function approaches to
ascertain whether any of those pollen genes that meet the above two criteria is
the pollen S gene. The third objective is to use two approaches to ascertain
whether allele specific inhibition of pollen lies in selective uptake of self S
proteins into pollen tubes. The first approach is to examine whether production
of a mutant S3 protein lacking RNase activity in the cytoplasm of S3 pollen of
transgenic plants has a dominant negative effect on the self-incompatibility
behavior of S3 pollen. The second approach is to examine whether S3 protein is
taken up by S2 (non-self) and/or S3 (self) pollen tubes by immunolocalization of
microscopic sections of pollen tubes that grow out of cut ends of S3S3 pistils
that have been pollinated with S2 and S3 pollen, separately. The use of RNases
as recognition molecules is unique to the type of self-incompatibility studied
here, thus this proposed research when completed will uncover a new paradigm for
cellular recognition in biological systems and expand the scope of the
understanding of the biological functions of RNases. On the practical side, once
the pollen S gene is identified, one can explore the possibility of restoring
the self-incompatibility trait to self-compatible cultivated species to
facilitate hybrid seed production. If successful, this will have a very
important impact on agriculture.