* 9603780
* Neurochemical Correlates of Prolactin Secretion
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Lori Badura, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Roy L. White
* 05/31/2000
* USD 150,000.00

Badura 9603780 Prolactin, a protein hormone secreted by the anterior pituitary
gland, is involved in modulating a large variety of physiological and behavioral
states in mammals, including lactation, estrous cyclicity, maternal behavior,
and immune system function. While prolactin is clearly involved in many
different physiological processes, the precise mechanism of action and the ways
in which prolactin secretion is controlled under various conditions is not well
understood. The primary approach has been to examine how various factors affect
the surges of prolactin that occur during stress, lactation, or during the
estrous cycle. The problem is that surges of prolactin involve the activation of
multiple systems and, therefore, the results from this approach can be very
difficult to interpret. Dr. Badura seeks to enhance our understanding of the
role of individual modulatory systems to the prolactin response by examining
changes in basal prolactin levels that fluctuate throughout the year. She is
taking advantage of the fact that prolactin shows a marked annual fluctuation
that corresponds with changes in photoperiod, most likely daylength. Indeed Dr.
Badura has demonstrated that nonstimulatory daylengths will induce naturally
occurring declines in circulating prolactin. Using this model, she will
characterize the neurotransmitters within the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus, a major neuroendocrine brain region that regulates pituitary
function. Using in vivo microdialysis and HPLC-EC techniques, Dr. Badura will
correlate the release and metabolism of neurotransmitters with alterations that
are seen in basal prolactin release under different photoperiod conditions. She
will also use this model and protocol to untangle some of the potential effects
of gonadal steroid hormones on this system in both males and females. In
addition, Dr. Badura will examine how these regulatory factors influence
pituitary function directly under different environmental conditions. The
results from these studies will provide new knowledge in our understanding of
neuroendocrine processes. Dissecting the mechanisms by which prolactin regulates
apparently unrelated physiological systems will enhance our understanding of the
adaptive significance of evolving hormonal systems that possess multiple targets
and function.