* 9603638
* Allele Interactions that Heritably Alter Transcription
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Vicki Chandler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/2000
* USD 184,400.00

9603638 Chandler Technical The b regulatory gene of maize encodes a basic-helix-
loop-helix protein, which together with other regulatory proteins, activates the
transcription of genes encoding the anthocyanin biosynthetic enzymes. Different
b alleles activate the pathway in distinct tissues and at different
developmental times. Because the alleles are differentially expressed and the
amount of pigment produced is a sensitive indicator of regulatory protein
levels, such expression can be studied at the plant level. It has been found
that specific alleles, when in the same genome with other alleles can alter the
second allele in a stable fashion and such alteration cannot be explained by
Mendelian concepts. The name given to such phenomena is paramutation. Previous
studies have shown that the sequences required for paramutation of b are tightly
linked to the locus and lie in the 5' flanking region. However, DNA sequencing
and extensive restriction mapping have not identified structural differences
between the b alleles undergoing paramutation. Two models are proposed and
experiments are devised to test the models. One model is that of unidirectional
gene conversion which is consistent with the stability of the altered allele.
The other model suggests that changes in chromatin structure may cause the
heritable alterations in transcription that occur during paramutation. Questions
to be asked are: What cis-acting sequences and other genes participate in
paramutation? What cis-acting sites are required for b transcription? Do
chromatin, DNA methylation or structural differences correlate with
paramutation? Are b sequences in ectopic locations able to participate in
paramutation? A variety of mutagenesis strategies are proposed to identify cis-
acting sites and trans-acting loci required for the establishment or maintenance
of paramutation and for b transcription. Non-technical Transcription can be
altered by chromosome position or exposure to alternate alleles, suggesting that
genes are not regulated just by local cis-acting sequences and factors that
interact with those sequences. Examples of chromatin environments regulating
gene expression come from studies of mammalian X-chromosome inactivation, genome
imprinting, silencing of yeast mating-type loci, position effect variegation in
Drosophila, paramutation and gene silencing in plants. Mechanisms are not
understood in any system, although evidence suggests that either DNA or
chromatin modification, or both, could be involved. The proposed studies to
probe allelic interactions that alter transcription at a corn regulatory gene
should help to address this deficiency.