* 9603515
* The Molecular Genetics of the Yeast RAD52 Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Dennis Livingston, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2002
* USD 300,000.00

Livingston 9603515 The research investigated in this project utilizes classical
genetic and molecular genetic techniques to examine the yeast RAD52 gene. This
gene is important to protect yeast cells from ionizing radiation and to aid them
in recombining their chromosomes. By mutagenizing a cloned copy of the gene,
rad52 mutants with varying properties can be recovered. Temperature sensitive
mutations have already been made and characterized. These mutants are
conditionally sensitive to ionizing radiation but can recombine their
chromosomes, suggesting that the protein product of the RAD52 gene (Rad52p) may
have more than one role. The current project intends to examine three aspects of
the biology of RAD52. First, why do mutations altering amino acid residues in
the N-terminal domain of Rad52p have a drastically different effect from those
that change C-terminal residues? Second, what genes encode proteins that
interact either directly by physical interaction with Rad52p or indirectly by
circumvention of the RAD52 recombinational repair pathway? Third, what role does
Rad52p play in processing of double strand breaks made to initiate meiotic
recombination? The experimental plan begins with a focus on cold sensitive rad52
mutations and extragenic suppressors of these mutations. Another set of
experiments will utilize in vitro mutagenesis to explore the interaction between
Rad52p and Rad51p, the protein product of another gene important in repair and
recombination. Finally, rad52 mutants will be examined for their inability to
process meiotic double strand breaks in recombinant chromosomes. The need of all
organisms to defend themselves from natural radiation and to properly disjoin
their chromosomes during gamete production has been evidenced by the recent
discovery of RAD52 genes in may other organisms including humans.