* 9603048
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: The Westpac Project         Investigations of the Low-Latitude Ionosphere
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Roland Tsunoda, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/2000
* USD 17,190.00

9603048 Tsunoda This award supports a two year collaborative research project
between Dr. Roland Tsunoda of Stanford Research Institute (SRI) International
and Professor Shoichiro Fukao of Kyoto University in Tokyo. The focus of this
project is a study of the low-latitude ionosphere. The major goals of this
project are: 1) to initiate discussion among scientists from Japan and the
western Pacific region; and (2) to develop a cooperative plan that will lead to
the establishment of a chain of ionospheric monitoring stations that will extend
from Taiwan in the northern hemisphere, through the Philippines and eastern
Malaysia, and into Indonesia in the southern hemisphere. Cooperative research
with scientists from developing countries il the western Pacific region is
expected to have important mutual benefits. For scientists from developed
countries, the monitoring stations will provide unique and important
measurements, which can be used to address some of the outstanding questions
that remain in low-latitude ionospheric physics. An additional benefit will be
the local support provided by scientists from those regions in the operation of
the monitoring stations. Scientists from the developing countries will benefit
from establishment of important research facilities in their region and the
availability of data from the monitoring stations. Through the exchange of ideas
and technology, this project will broaden our base of knowledge and promote
international understanding and cooperation. ***