* 9603747
* RUI: Mutational Analysis of Gene Regulation in Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1997,10/31/2000
* Mary Alleman, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 10/31/2000
* USD 279,840.00

Alleman 9603747 r is one of four loci in maize that regulates the expression of
the genes in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway through the function of its
product, helix-loop-helix transcription factor. r determines the timing and
tissue-specificity of anthocyanin deposition during development. By analyzing
mutants affecting the regulation of single transcriptonal unit r alleles, the
principal investigator has established the basis for investigating tissue-
specificity of r. The R(Sc) gene of the R-st complex specifies pigmentation in
the aleurone layer of the kernel and the coleoptile and scutellar node of the
young seedling. On going studies have identified a 493 bp sequence (B' not)
which is located in putative enhancer element in the Sc regulatory region. This
segment can be regularly deleted in certain heteroallelic combinations via a
proposed gene conversion event with a displaced proximal region to produce
enhanced Sc expression Sc|P(enhanced) . Alternatively, the B'not element or the
surrounding enhancer region can be disrupted by transposable element Ds
mutagenesis. Ds insertions within this region block pigmentation slightly when
they are in one orientation or totally when they are in the other orientation,
possibly by disrupting the normal domain boundary. The upstream DNA sequence Ds
insertional mutants, their derivatives, and a selected group of three variant
alleles representing perturbation in strong seed color alleles (Sc) to determine
the relationship between the structure and function of one class of r alleles.
Using this DNA sequence analysis, it will be determined the mechanism for
Sc|P(enhanced) derivative production is by gene conversion. Chromatin structure
will also be analyzed for a class of alleles for which pigment is conditionally
blocked. An established collection of races of maize differing only by the r
allele will be screened using a phenotypic assay and eventually DNA gel blot
analysis to locate other related Sc-type alleles. A genetic screen will be
region in order to localize other regions that are involved in developmental
gene expression. The studies constitute a detailed genetic dissection of the
regulatory sequences controlling gene expression in higher plants and are of
fundamental importance for understanding how genes are regulated during plant
development. By using mutagenesis in which the starting material is a series of
variant alleles and single transcriptional unit r alleles determining
pigmentation in the same that tissue. The identification of tissue-specific
regulatory elements in maize is crucial in order to genetically engineer this
agronomically important species.