* 9603173
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Structure and Chemistry of Single Crystal Surfaces of Metal Borides
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Michael Trenary, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 04/30/2000
* USD 15,933.00

9603173 Trenary This award supports a three-year collaborative research project
between Professor Michael Trenary of the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC)
and Dr. Takaho Tanaka of the National Institute for Research in Inorganic
Materials (NIRIM) in Tsukuba, Japan. The researchers will undertake experimental
studies of the structure and chemistry of single crystal surfaces of metal
borides. An essential component of the surface science studies of the boron-rich
solids is the use of large single crystals of these materials. These crystals
were developed at NIRIM and both researchers are using them in their
experiments. The proposal brings together the efforts of two major laboratories
that have constituted different parts of the process: The UIC surface science
studies make use of the techniques of low energy electron diffraction (LEED),
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and
reflection absorption infrared spectroscopy (RAIRS). The NIRIM group has
provided the cut and polished single crystal samples of yttrium boride, hafnium
diboride and lanthanum hexaboride. The researchers also plan to initiate joint
publications and identify ongoing experiments. Through the exchange of ideas and
technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
international understanding and cooperation. ***