* 9603684
* Single-Strand DNA-Binding Proteins and Deoxyribonucleotide  Enzyme Organization
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Christopher Mathews, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 02/28/1998
* USD 132,036.00

9603684 Mathews This project tests a model of DNA replication in which the
deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate precursors to DNA are synthesized by enzyme
complexes linked to the replication machinery, allowing thereby the efficient
delivery of building materials to DNA replication sites. In T4 bacteriophage-
infected Escherichia coli, the enzymes of dNTP biosynthesis form a complex,
called dNTP synthetase, which contains at least eight virus-coded enzymes and
two enzymes of host cell origin. In vitro, the complex displays kinetic
coupling, i.e., the ability to catalyze multi-step reaction pathways efficiently
and with little accumulation of intermediates. Thus, the complex behaves in
vitro as it must behave in vivo if it is to serve as a DNA substrate shuttle,
synthesizing dNTPs in the immediate vicinity of replication sites. Purified
recombinant enzymes from the T4 dNTP synthetase complex have been shown to
associate, directly or indirectly, with the T4 single-strand DNA-binding
protein(SSB) encoded by gene 32. This suggests a model for DNA replication in
which multiple dNTP synthetase complexes are drawn to replication forks by their
attraction for T4 SSB. This project will test that model by physical and enzyme
kinetic analysis of association among proteins in the complex and the T4 gene 32
protein; investigations of the role of gene 32 protein in drawing dNTP
synthesizing enzymes to replication sites; investigation of the role the acidic
C-terminus of gene 32 protein upon interactions with dNTP-synthesizing enzymes;
and attempted reconstitution of parts of the dNTP synthetase complex. If
resources permit, this investigation will be extended to vaccinia virus, which
also encodes an SSB that interacts with enzymes of DNA precursor synthesis. Many
cellular metabolic processes are being found to involve organized protein
assemblies, which increase the efficiency of cellular function by preventing
diffusion of intermediates away from sites of utilization. Because DNA
replication occurs at a limited number of sites (as few as two replication forks
per chromosome in bacteria), there is a special need for organization of enzymes
of dNTP synthesis, to deliver precursors to those few sites rapidly enough to
support observed high rates of DNA replication and to maintain high accuracy in
the transfer of genetic information. Moreover, because dNTPs have no known
metabolic roles other than their use as DNA precursors, the synthesis of those
precursors must be closely coordinated with DNA replication. Understanding that
coordination may lead to a greater understanding of the intracellular
organization of a fundamental biological process.