* 9603555
* Thyroxine and Seasonality in American Tree Sparrows
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Fred Wilson, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2001
* USD 228,000.00

9603555 Wilson Most species of animals breed seasonally, thus discontinuously.
Seasonal reproduction is an adaptation to a seasonal environment and is timed to
occur when environmental conditions are optimal for raising young. This project
explores the physiological mechanisms that turn seasonal breeding on and off in
American tree sparrows, a species whose reproductive cycle (1) is driven by the
annual cycle in daylength, and (2) can be simulated in the laboratory simply by
manipulating the daily ration of light and darkness. Long daylengths (as during
spring) induce gonadal growth and, several weeks later, gonadal regression and
postnuptial molt. Short daylengths (as during winter) restore sensitivity to
long days, thereby permitting gonadal growth to begin anew once daylength
exceeds a critical duration. Recent work on seasonally breeding birds and
mammals has established that the transition from the breeding state to the
nonbreeding state is thyroid dependent. In American tree sparrows, the thyroid
is not only required for that transition, but plays an even more pervasive role
in seasonality, influencing the initiation of breeding and the onset of molt as
well. Indeed, as shown earlier, long days and thyroid hormones interact to
program male tree sparrows for seasonal reproduction and molt. Conceptualization
of "seasonality" as the expression of a suite of long day--thyroid hormone-
dependent processes is a novel contribution to reproductive endocrinology. The
proposed research seeks to validate the PI's conceptual model of seasonality by
rigorously challenging it. If male tree sparrows are, in fact, programmed for
seasonal reproduction and molt only when exposed simultaneously to long days and
thyroid hormones, then withdrawing one or both of the programming stimuli (that
is, withdrawing long days and/or thyroid hormones) after they have been
programmed should not compromise later expression of programmed responses. In
previous experiments, the PI tested this corollary by withdrawing thyroid
hormones. Now the PI will test it by withdrawing, in separate experiments, long
days and both long days and thyroid hormones. In an attempt to generalize the
model's applicability, the PI will test it on photostimulated female tree
sparrows. The goal is to ascertain whether seasonal reproduction and molt are
programmed and thyroid dependent, as in males. The proposed research also seeks
to identify the thyroid hormone that is instrumental in programming seasonality,
and to show whether its actions are consistent with a genomic model or with a
nongenomic model. Understanding the mechanisms that turn seasonal reproduction
on and off may enhance humankind's ability to preserve endangered species (for
example, in zoos), manage game and pest species, manipulate domestic species for
economic gain, and minimize the effects of environmental toxins that mimic
thyroid hormones. ***