* 9603986
* Nineteenth Fungal Genetics Conference, Asilomar, CA,        March 18-23, 1997
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Richard Weiss, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

Weiss 9603986 The Nineteenth Fungal Genetics Conference, is being held at the
Asilomar Conference Center at Asilomar, California on March 18-23, 1997.
Approximately 540 scientists and students from around the world are expected to
attend. The conference focuses on the molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry
and cell biology of filamentous fungi. The nineteenth meeting will consist of
four plenary sessions, four sessions devoted to concurrent workshops in
specialized areas, three poster sessions, and informal discussions. Topics to be
covered in plenary sessions are: gene regulation and metabolism, cell biology
and pathogenesis, sexual and asexual development, and evolution and population
genetics. Specialized informal concurrent workshops are planned to cover:
Agaricus/Basidiomycetes, Aspergillus, Fusarium, Neurospora, Biotechnology,
Citric Acid Fermentation and Ageing, Fungal Genomes, Fungal Melanin and
Pathogenesis, Fungal Transposons, Horizontal Gene Transfer, Hyphal Growth and
Polarity, Medical Mycology, Mycorrhizae, Neurospora/Aspergillus Model Systems,
Oomycetes, Photobiology, Population Genetics, and Self/Non-self Recognition.
Strong emphasis is placed on the participation of young scientists and students,
particularly those from underrepresented groups. The award helps defray the
travel and participation costs of students, postdoctorals and invited speakers.
Fungi are found throughout our environment, and an understanding of their
genetics has wide applications in biotechnology and agriculture.