* 9603893
* Mechanism and Function of Polyadenylation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* J. Scott Butler, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 01/31/2001
* USD 334,000.00

9603893 Butler The goal of this research is to understand the role of
polyadenlyation in eukaryotic mRNA biogenesis and function. This goal will be
achieved by characterizing defects in poly(A) function and by identifying and
characterizing specific classes of new mutations that affect the mechanism and
function of polyadenylation in yeast. Dominant negative mutations of the gene
encoding poly(A) polymerase will be identified, characterized and used to study
the mechanism and function of polyadenylation in vitro and in vivo. New mRNA
3'-end processing mutants will be selected using a recently developed system to
identify temperature sensitive mutations that cause defects in mRNA 3'-end
processing. These mutations also will be characterized in vitro and in vivo and
the corresponding normal genes cloned by complementation. %%% Modification of
most eukaryotic messenger RNAs by addition of polyadenylic acid or poly(A) to
the RNA 3'-end is essential for normal mRNA synthesis and function. The goal of
this research is to understand the role of polyadenlyation in normal eukaryotic
mRNA biogenesis and function. This goal will be achieved by characterizing
defects in poly(A) function and by identifying and characterizing specific
classes of new mutations that affect the mechanism and function of
polyadenylation in yeast. ***