* 9603611
* General Monte Carlo Computer Simulation of Subcellular Biochemical Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Terrence Sejnowski, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 04/30/2001
* USD 448,760.00

9603611 Sejnowski MCell is a general purpose software tool that allows users to
accurately simulate a wide variety of the signaling processes carried out by
living cells. Many cells secrete signal molecules that are detected by receptor
molecules on the surfaces of other cells. Since this involves diffusion of the
signal molecule over a distance between the cells, it is necessary to take into
account the shapes of the cells and the locations of the molecules to accurately
predict the speed and strength of signaling. MCell is unique in its generality
and in the way it simulates cellular signaling using random numbers and
probabilities, a so-called "Monte Carlo" method. MCell has already been used to
simulate synapses, which are specialized microscopic structures where
communication takes place between nerve cells, called neurons. It can also be
used for more general cellular signaling between and within cells, not just
neurons, so it will be useful to a wide range of scientists who are interested
in problems such as how cells divide and how this process may be subverted in
the case of cancer. MCell will be tested initially by a group of scientists who
want to use it to answer questions that arise in their research into signaling
between neurons. This will help in making the program easier to use and more
flexible in its application to an even wider range of biological and chemical
problems. Two educational workshops will be held to teach scientists how to use
MCell and to exchange ideas and results obtained with MCell.