* 9603675
* Genetic Study of Contractile Vacuole Membrane Function
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2003
* Peter Luykx, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/2003
* USD 240,000.00

9603675 Luykx Technical The function of the contractile vacuole will be analyzed
through the study of Chlamydomonas mutants. Although contractile vacuole
function(s) have been studied in Chlamydomonas and other biological systems from
a number of approaches, such as electron microscopy, a systematic genetic
approach has not hitherto been used. The Principal Investigator has already
isolated several osmoregulatory mutants by means of UV mutagenesis and
insertional (plasmid) mutagenesis. The research in this proposal aims to: (1),
characterize the mutants genetically and morphologically (by video- and electron
microscopy); (2), isolate additional mutants with impaired osmoregulatory
function; (3), employ the mutants to define basic processes of the contractile
vacuole cycle; and (4) isolate genes regulating water transport and associated
membrane fusion events. The information obtained from this work will be helpful
in understanding these important and widespread membrane processes in eukaryotic
cells generally. Non-Technical Water is required to maintain the living state of
cells. All cells regulate the amount of water contained within them by
regulating the rate of water exchange with the external environment. Thus,
control of cell water content is an important phenomenon in living cells, yet it
remains poorly understood. In the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas, as in many
other unicellular organisms, cell water content is controlled by the contractile
vacuole system, which entails a system of membrane permeability, membrane
transport, and membrane fusion. The function of the contractile vacuole involves
the segregation and expulsion of water that enters the cell continuously by
osmosis. Although it has been studied to some extent by electron microscopy, it
has not been subjected to experimental approaches such as genetic analysis. The
advantage of using Chlamydomonas for this type of project is that its genetics
and cellular biology in general is well described and therefore the contractile
vacuole is amenable to efficient investigation. This project will focus on
characterizing mutants of the contractile vacuole, which will lead to
identification of genes whose products are involved in the control of water
balance. The results of this work should have broad significance in the
fundamental aspects of water regulation in living cells. ***