* 9603899
* Investigation of the Transport of Nitric Oxide by Myoglobin Using Sol-Gel Glass Encapsulation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Jon Fukuto, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 02/28/1999
* USD 50,000.00

9603899 Fukuto In spite of the intensive studies on the physiology of nitric
oxide(NO), some basic and fundamental questions regarding the lifetime and
delivery of NO in biological systems remain unknown. This study is designed to
test the hypothesis that myoglobin(Mb) facilitates diffusion of NO in the
direction of smooth muscle cells, and a sol-gel encapsulation methodology can be
developed for its detection. This is based on new findings by the P.I. on the
unique characteristics of O2 transport by Mb, and its associated physiological
conditions. The objective is to determine whether Mb transports NO under
selected conditions similar to physiological ones, with focus on the transport
of NO by deoxymyoglobin (deoxyMb) via nitrosylmyoglobin formation, but not the
interaction of NO with oxymyoglobin. The proposed role of deoxyMb in
facilitating transport involves the spatial movement of NO from one location to
another in the presence of deoxyMb at a rapid rate, as is O2 transport. Unlike
the binding and dissociation, the investigation of the transport of NO requires
the examination of spatial movement of NO by deoxyMb molecules. As demonstrated
with the O2 transport, the sol-gel encapsulation methodology not only provides a
simple and effective means for determining spatial movement, but also its
experimental conditions can be readily adjusted to physiological. This work may
define another fundamental and vital role for Mb (and possibly other
hemoproteins) in controlling and directing the biological effects associated
with NO, fundamentally changing the way in which NO physiology is viewed, i.e.
directed instead of random. Because of the importance of NO chemistry in
numerous biological processes, evidence for Mb to play a major role in NO
transport will have an immediate, profound, and broad impact. Nitric oxide (NO)
has recently been found to be an endogenously generated molecule with a diverse
array of biological activities, such as in the cardiovascular, the brain and the
immune systems . As a non-polar, small diatomic species, NO can freely diffuse
from its site of biosynthesis. Since the biological targets for NO (for example,
the enzyme guanylate cyclase) are located in distinct and defined locations
relative to NO biosynthesis, if NO were allowed to freely diffuse, only a small
amount of the biosynthesized NO would ever reach it's target or receptor,
resulting in an incredible waste of biosynthetic effort (NO biosynthesis is a
multi-step process which requires the use of NADPH). This apparent inconsistency
with the parsimony of Nature suggests that NO diffusion is unlikely to be free,
but rather is facilitated towards the direction of its targets. This proposal
aims to address the mechanism of facilitated diffusion for NO by the hemeprotein
myoglobin by a new detection method, using sol-gel encapsulation. The results
derived from this study may lead to a greater understanding of the role of
myoglobin and of biological transport. *** 9604680 Fane The proper assembly of
viral proteins and nucleic acids into a biologically active virion involves
numerous and diverse macromolecular interactions. The main objectives are to
elucidate these critical interactions and to define the structural domains of
the responsible macromolecules. A combination of genetic, biochemical and
structural approaches (X-ray crystallography) will be employed to accomplish the
objectives. Like molecular chaperones, scaffolding proteins direct other
proteins in achieving their proper three-dimensional conformations. Within the
context of this analogy, the atomic structure of a procapsid offers a depiction
of a chaperone-like protein complexed with its substrate. Prior results suggest
that the Microviridae internal scaffolding proteins, gpB, share many properties
with molecular chaperones. Prior results also indicate that the internal
scaffolding proteins either possess inherent flexibility or interact with their
substrates in nonspecific manners, perhaps via interfaces. Determining th e
atomic structures of hybrid procapsids, containing foreign scaffolding proteins,
will directly address this question. The present (X174 procapsid structure does
not contain the internal scaffolding protein which is lost during purification.
During the first year of support, alternate genetic and purification strategies
will be explored to stabilize this protein. The current protocols will still be
employed to gather additional data to refine the external scaffolding protein
structure. Also within the first year, the genetic and purification strategies
needed to generate alpha procapsids will be developed. Continuation of the
structural work, done in collaboration with Dr. M. G. Rossmann, will proceed
throughout the support period. The recently solved atomic structure of the
external scaffolding protein, gpD, suggests that it also shares many features
with molecular chaperones. Thus gpD, like a molecular chaperone, can bind to
other proteins in many different ways. While some domains make contact with the
coat protein in varied manners, one of these domains may determine the protein's
substrate specificity for a particular viral coat protein. the plasmid-based
cross complementation system has been extended to this gene. Unlike the internal
scaffolding proteins which exhibit a great deal of divergence in primary
structure, the external scaffolding proteins share 75% sequence identity. The
(X174 protein, however, is unable to productively direct the assembly of other
Microviridae virions. A comparison of the primary structure reveals that the
divergent residues are localized to the NH2 -termini of the proteins which forms
a large (-helix in the (X174 atomic structure. These observations suggest a
model in which the scaffolding's specificity for a particular viral coat protein
resides in this region. This hypothesis will be tested with chimeric
polypeptides. During the first year of support, restriction sites needed to
construct chimeric external scaffolding proteins will be intro duced. The (X174
gene will be recloned and clones of other Microviridae D genes will be
generated. Characterization of the chimeric genes and gene products will
commence in the second year. The results of these analyses may also provide
insights into the design of recombinant proteins. All viruses must assemble
themselves by means of multiple protein interactions. viral assembly is often
dependent on proteins known as scaffolding proteins. Analogous to scaffoldings
used in the construction of buildings, scaffolding proteins are found in virus
assembly intermediates but not in the mature viruses. Two different scaffolding
proteins, external and internal, are required for the assembly of the
Microviridae family of viruses. With These viruses we are able to purify viral
intermediates which still include the external scaffolding protein. By examining
the atomic structure of the external scaffolding protein and performing genetic
analyses with both the internal and external proteins, we have determined that
different regions of the scaffolding proteins may have specific and identifiable
functions. Refining the atomic structure of these proteins and testing our
hypotheses regarding their various functions by constructing hybrid Microviridae
scaffolding proteins are the main objectives of the proposed work. The results
of these analyses will provide further insights into virus assembly and the
design of recombinant proteins.