* 9603884
* Significance of a Novel Light-Regulated Apyrase for Plant  Growth and Development
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Stanley Roux, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/2001
* USD 377,500.00

9603884 Roux The detection of a plant apyrase, formally an enzyme that
hydrolyzes NTPs/NDPs, to be located both in the cell wall and in the nucleus
provides the basis for a proposal to study the function of the enzyme. The
enzyme is light-induced. Localization of the protein in either wall space or
nucleus is regulated by a calcium/calmodulin-dependent signaling process and
binds DNA and calmodulin. Transgenic antisense-apyrase Arabidopsis show
developmental abnormalities which can be mediated by the external addition of
ATP. The hypothesis based on such findings assumes a role for the enzyme in
meristematic tissues that regulates cell growth dependent on light and internal
hormonal changes that control amounts of free calcium. The proposed work
approaches the functional characterization from different angles:
immunocytological localization, knock-out experiments, and biochemical and
physiological studies in transgenic plants. One aspect, documented very
recently, is that the enzyme is abundant in cells that are undergoing apoptotic
death, for example in cells in developing xylem vessels. The work combines
several approaches to a functional characterization of a unique enzyme that has
all the characteristics as a major player in developmental decisions, including
apoptotic cell death.