* 9603703
* A Cell Wall Associated, Receptor Like Kinase
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Bruce Kohorn, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1998
* USD 34,872.00

Iohorn 9603703 Technical We have identified a family of Arabidopsis thaliana
proteins, designated Waks for Wall Associated Kinase, that are tightly
associated with the cell wall, and that have cytoplasmic kinase domains. The
cell wall bound, extracytoplasmic domain of each family member contains several
Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) repeats. Waks differ, however, in the
extracellular domain . In different 100 amino acid blocks one Wak has 54%
identity (perfect spacings) to tenascin. In another there is identity with a
neurexin and in another there identity with extensin. The Wak family is
expressed in all vegetative tissues of Arabidopsis, and has relatives in other
Angiosperms. Based on immunoelectron microscopy and biochemical analysis, Waks
provides a physical continuum between the cell wall and the cytoplasm. Since the
kinase is cytoplasmic it also has the potential to mediate signals to the
cytoplasm from the cell wall. Indeed, we find that at least one Wak interacts
with a cytoplasmic type 2C protein phosphatase that is likely the first step in
the transduction pathway. Future experiments will focus on the genomic
organization and specific expression of each family member, and their
interaction with each other and cytoplasmic proteins. We have isolated a T-DNA
disruption of the Wak locus that is tightly linked to an embryonic lethal
phenotype, and we plan to use this mutant background to assay functional domains
of the Waks. Moreover, expression of dominant negative Wak mutations also show
that the family is essential for viability, and genetic screens will be used to
identify interacting proteins. Non-Technical Extrinsic signals impinging upon
plant cells first interact with the cell wall that surrounds the cell. Many of
these extrinsic signals induce overt alterations in a plant's physiology and
morphology. The site of detection of these most of these signals is unknown. Dr.
Kohorn has discovered a class of signaling proteins (cell-wall associated kinase
or Wak) that app ear to be associated with the inner surface of the cell wall
directly adjacent to the cell surface. With this award Dr. Kohorn will
characterize the genes encoding Wak and to examine how Wak interacts with other
proteins to create a coupled cascade where signals perceived by Wak are
transmitted into the cell to exert physiological effects. ***