* 9603010
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Studies of Upper Atmospheric     Physics using Long Duration Balloons in the Polar Regions
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Edgar Bering, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 04/30/1998
* USD 6,715.00

9603010 Bering This award supports the participation of American scientists in a
U.S.-Japan workshop on Studies of Upper Atmospheric Physics using Long Duration
Balloons in the Polar Regions to be held in Tokyo, Japan in November, l997. The
co- organizers are Professor Edgar Bering of the University of Houston and Dr.
Akira Kadokura of the National Institute of Polar Research in Tokyo, Japan. This
seminar will identify the current major scientific questions in the areas of
ionospheric and magnetospheric physics that can best be addressed using
stratospheric balloon flights of several weeks duration. The Polar Patrol
Balloon (PPB) program is one of long duration balloon flights that the National
Institute of Polar Research of Japan has conducted for nearly a decade. Three of
these flights have carried an experiment supplied by the U.S. investigator.
Results of the workshop will include a detailed review of possible scientific
objectives, instrumentation options and future launch sites. Coordinated
proposals for further research will be initiated and developed. One such
priority might be the preparation and review of a list of intervals of
interesting ULF wave activity observed during these flights. The exchange of
ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants
to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative
projects. ***