* 9603585
* Genetic Analysis of Hin-Mediated Site-Specific Recombination
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,06/30/2001
* Bradley Cookson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/2001
* USD 345,655.00

Hughes 9603585 The Salmonella Hin recombinase catalyzes a site-specific DNA
recombination event resulting in the reversible inversion of a 1-kilobase
segment of the chromosome. This reversible chromosomal inversion event results
in a regulatory switch known as flagellar phase variation, which is the
alternate expression of either one of two antigenically distinct flagellin
antigens expressed on the bacterial cell surface. The long-term goal of this
project is to understand in molecular detail the mechanism of DNA strand
exchange catalyzed by the Hin recombinase during the chromosomal inversion
process. The approaches described in this project are novel and involve the
development of sophisticated genetic tools that allow the dissection of
individual steps of the DNA inversion reaction in vivo. DNA inversion is thought
to occur in the following steps: 1) Hin dimerizes and binds to 26 base pair hix
recombination sites that flank the invertible segment of the chromosome; 2) Fis
(Factor for inversion stimulation) then binds its target DNA sites within a DNA
sequence known as the recombinational enhancer; 3) Synapsis occurs: Hin dimers
interact to form tetramers bringing hix recombination sites within local
proximity; 4) Invertasome formation: Hin bound to hix sites interacts with Fis
bound to the DNA enhancer segment to generate the formation of a nucleoprotein
intermediate competent for DNA cleavage; 5) DNA cleavage; 6) DNA strand rotation
and exchange; 7) DNA religation; 8) Nucleoprotein complex dissolution. In this
project genetic tools are described that allow the identification of mutants in
Hin and Fis that cannot catalyze one of the steps in the recombination reaction.
Using these tools, the step for which a specific hin or fis mutant is defective
can be identified directly, without requiring protein purification and
biochemical characterization of each mutant. Through standard molecular
techniques the specific amino acid defect in Hin and Fis is determined. The
characterization of a large number of mutants allows the identification of the
amino acids in Hin and Fis required for specific steps in the recombination
process. Finally, this collection of mutants will be used in structure/function
studies as part of a detailed molecular characterization of each step in the
Hin-mediated DNA recombination reaction. This work will provide insight
applicable to areas of biology in which DNA strand exchange is a fundamental
component of the biological process under investigation.