* 9603034
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Molecular Organization of        Photosynthetic Antennas
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1998
* Robert Blankenship, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1998
* USD 15,000.00

9603034 Blankenship This award supports the participation of American scientists
in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Molecular Organization of Photosynthetic Antennas to
be held in Hawaii from April 16-20, l997. The co-organizers are Professor Robert
Blankenship of Arizona State University and Dr. Mamoru Mimuro of the National
Institute for Basic Biology in Japan. The seminar will address most of the known
types of photosynthetic antennas, including integral membrane antennas from
bacterial plant and algal systems as well as peripheral antennas such as
chlorosomes and phycobilisomes. Approaches will include spectroscopy, structure
determination, molecular biology, protein chemistry, model systems and theory.
Particular attention will be paid to new concepts on the regulation and
protection of antenna systems as well as to evolutionary aspects. This area of
research has seen exceptionally rapid progress in recent years, with the
determination of several structures of antenna complexes and the maturing of
ultrafast spectroscopic and molecular biological techniques for investigation
and manipulation of photosynthetic systems. All the areas and approaches are
well represented among the participants from both countries. The exchange of
ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants
to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative
projects. The seminar will involve active participation by junior investigators
and postdoctoral researchers, and the results of the meeting will be widely
disseminated via a World Wide Web homepage. ***