* 9604528
* RUI: Green Fluorescent Protein as a Whole Plant Scorable    Marker: A Powerful Ecophysiological Tool
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Neal Stewart, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 02/28/1999
* USD 121,000.00

9604528 Stewart The proposed research will develop green fluorescent protein
(GFP) as a whole-plant fluorescent marker for use in subsequent physiological
and ecological research. GFP when engineered into plants cause the plants glow
green in the presence of an ultraviolet or blue light, thereby enabling them to
be distinguished from wild-type pink plants. This system would allow researchers
to detect GFP-genetically engineered plants very easily in vivo and in real time
in a mixed population containing non-GFP plants. Also plant responses to
biological or environmental stimuli could also be studied using such an in vivo
marker. The PI (Nature Biotechnology 14:682, 1996) has demonstrated the
feasibility of using GFP technology for ecological work. However, many of the
details controlling expression and fluorescence of GFP in whole plant
applications are unknown. Some of the unknown factors revolve around the
following questions: Which GFP gene is most useful in whole plant studies? What
is the threshold expression/fluorescent level necessary for visual observation:
What are the environmental controls of expression and fluorescence? How stable
is GFP in plant cells, and what is the response time for induced expression? Are
there any fitness costs associated with high expression and fluorescence in GFP
transgenics? What are fluorescence patterns in the field? Experiments are
proposed that will directly answer all these questions in 2 years. These
questions must be answered before this powerful technology may be used
effectively in physiological ecology research.