* 9604813
* RUI: Planning Visit to Initiate Interdisciplinary           Paleoclimatic Investigations in the Peninsula de Mejillones Region, Northern Chile
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1996,12/31/1996
* Steven Emslie, Western Colorado University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 12/31/1996
* USD 9,815.00

9604813 Emslie This Americas Program award will support travel and related
expenses for five senior researchers and two graduate and one undergraduate
students from Western State College, Colorado, the Paleontological Research
Institute, New York, and the Florida and New Mexico Museums of Natural History
to travel to Antofagasta, Chile, to plan a collaborative interdisciplinary
research project with the Universidad de Antofagasta on the paleontology of
marine shell beds in northern Chile. The major objectives of this planning visit
will be to gain insight on the stratigraphic sequence of marine shell beds and
seabird guano deposits exposed on the coast and in the Atacama Desert. Small
samples of marine vertebrates and invertebrates from selected stratigraphic
units within these deposits will be collected to determine their significance
for future investigation. The visit will allow the establishment of professional
relationships between U.S. and Chilean scientists and initiation of a long- term
research program that will benefit researchers and their students in both
countries. Climate on the west coast of South America fluctuates considerably
today under the influence of shifting ocean currents and temperatures from the
El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events. The impact of these events not only
affects human responses to the environment, but also the entire marine
ecosystem. The planned project will be to document the long-term climatic record
in this dynamic region in an effort to determine how climate change has
influenced marine communities and faunal turnover. ***