* 9604641
* Young Investigator Symposium at the 1997/8/9 Workshop on    Steroid Hormone√ê and Brain Function: April 2-6, 1997:       Breckenridge, CO
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* James Roberts, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 03/31/1998
* USD 9,281.00

Roberts IBN 9604641 Steroid hormones are integral modulators of neural
communication and development. These simple molecules, acting as hormones, have
the potential to influence all neural functions from initiation of neural
development to the activity of individual synapses in adults. Recent advances in
knowledge about non-genomic actions of steroid hormones, the interactions with
glial cells, and the role of steroid hormones on neural organization, have had
striking effects on neuroendocrine physiology, neuronal cell biology,
reproductive physiology and non-reproductive behaviors such as learning and
memory, aging, aggression, social context, feeding, and emotion. This action
will provide support for a Young Investigator Symposium to be held at the 1997,
1998, and 1999 Workshop on Steroid Hormone and Brain Function. This workshop
brings together scientists of varied scientific backgrounds and perspectives in
order to integrate aspects of molecular biology, anatomy, physiology, and
behavior within a single session focused on an important and timely issue
concerning steroid hormones and brain function. Topics have ranged from
extranuclear steroid hormone receptors to a comparative approach to sexual
differentiation to steroid modulation of neuronal survival. Each year, new
symposia are presented on interdisciplinary topics in a field that is rapidly
changing and advancing. The inclusion of the Young Investigator Symposium
provides a mechanism to ensure the strong participation of beginning scientists,
to recognize their achievements and potential, and to facilitate collaborative
efforts that may significantly enhance our understanding of fundamental
neurobiological mechanisms. ??