* 9604466
* RUI:  Central Projections of the Octavolateralis System
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2002
* Catherine McCormick, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Linda M. Kennedy
* 01/31/2002
* USD 263,245.00

Catherine A. McCormick IBN-9604466 Lay Summary This project investigates the
organization of the central nervous system auditory circuits in various species
in order to determine if primitive features of the auditory system are present
in land vertebrates. The nervous system circuits underlying hearing are known to
have a superficial similarity in all vertebrates. The classes of vertebrates
differ, however, in the specific portions of the inner ear that are responsive
to sound and, at least in part, in the specific cell populations of the brain
that participate in auditory processing. The experiments in this project utilize
modern neuroanatomical methods to map the auditory circuits in various species
and to determine how other brain areas interface with them. The specific
connections of the primitive vertebrate auditory receptors, the saccule and
lagena, are being compared with the connections of the more recently developed
auditory receptor, the basilar papilla. The results will broaden the
understanding of the neural systems responsible for hearing as well as provide
insights into primitive characteristics of the auditory circuits in early
vertebrates. These results will contribute to the understanding of the changes
that occurred as the auditory circuits evolved n land vertebrates and may reveal
that primitive circuits persist along with more recent ones. Should such
primitive circuits exist, they may subsequently be found to have a unique role
in the hearing of land vertebrates, including humans. Such information could
inform new approaches to understanding hearing deficits. This project is being
performed at an institution oriented toward undergraduate education.
Undergraduates participate in these studies, leering all of the surgical,
laboratory, and analytical skills involved. The active involvement of
undergraduates in original research enhances their science training and
encourages them to pursue postgraduate training in science or science education
at precollege as well as colleg e levels.