* 9604797
* A Preparative Ultracentrifuge and Rotors for Separation and Analysis of Biological Samples
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Donald Burgess, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 52,150.00

Funds are requested to purchase a new preparative ultracentrifuge and three
ultracentrifuge rotors which will be used by four laboratories in the Department
of Veterinary Molecular Biology at Montana State University. Ultracentrifuges
are essential equipment for all research in biochemistry and molecular biology.
Currently, there is only one ultracentrifuge in this Department, a 22 year old
Beckman L5-65, which is not capable of meeting the Department's current and
future needs. In addition, the L5 is rapidly becoming obsolete, and new drives
will no longer be available for repairing this centrifuge. The increased demand
for ultracentrifugation resulting from the additional faculty added to this
Department over the last year (both Dr. Quinn and Dr. Pascual were hired in
1995) and in the coming year (another faculty member will be added to the
Department in the next year) further emphasizes our need for the requested
equipment. The Department also lacks sufficient rotors to carry out the proposed
research, and this proposal includes 3 new rotors. Currently, this Department
has an older fixed-angle rotor (&gt;10 years old), a swinging bucket rotor, and
a derated Type 50 rotor. None of these rotors are capable of running at speeds
over 60,000 r.p.m. and probably should not be used over 45,000 r.p.m. The rotors
requested in this proposal are capable of much higher speeds and would
facilitate faster and more efficient separations. The new equipment will be used
primarily by the labs of Drs. Quinn, Jutila, Pascual, and Burgess, so this
proposal contains descriptions of their projects that utilize
ultracentrifugation. These projects are all funded by research grants from a
number of agencies such as the N1H, NSF, and USDA. Ultracentrifugation is
required as part of these projects for density gradient analysis of proteins and
protein complexes, subcellular fractionation, membrane purification, and DNA
purification. In addition, a small amount of centrifuge time (&lt;5%) will be
available for use in Departmental classes for training students in the use of
modern biological instrumentation.