* 9604497
* Integrating Multiple Stress Factors in the Alpine TimberlineEcotone:  Direct Linkage Between Adaptive Biology and GlobalChange
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1997,04/23/1999
* Thomas Vogelmann, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 04/23/1999
* USD 135,000.00

9604497 Smith The ecophysiological effects of multiple stress factors have been
recognized as an important omission in studies of plant adaptation to the
environment and effects on abundance and distribution patterns. Cold
temperatures, in combination with high sunlight levels, is a particularly
important combination of stress factors that results in severe inhibition of
photosynthesis in numerous agricultural and the few native species that have
been studied. This project will investigate the adaptive responses of native
alpine/subalpine plants to one of the most extreme, naturally-occurring
combinations of low temperature and high sunlight found in any habitat. By
evaluating plant responses to this extreme stress combination, we hope to
establish an estimate of the maximum adaptive capabilities to this multiple-
stress scenario that currently exists among terrestial vascular plants. The
study will focus on photosynthetic responses that we believe are critical to
plant survival under these extreme multiple-stress conditions. In addition, the
impact of future changes in global climate on cold temperature photoinhibition
will be evaluated using two atmospheric parameters which are known measures of
global atmospheric change, atmospheric warming and increases in UV radiation.
The results will be evaluated on a leaf, whole-plant, and landscape level.