* 9604394
* Malpighian Tubule Transport Physiology: Mechanisms and Regulation
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1997,11/30/2000
* Klaus Beyenbach, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 11/30/2000
* USD 238,000.00

9604394 Beyenbach The function of insect kidneys is remarkable in that urine is
produced entirely by secretory mechanisms and not by filtration as in human
kidneys. Secretion is regulated by hormones such that the insect is neither
under- nor over-hydrated. One recently discovered hormone, Culex-diuretic
peptide, protects the insect against over-hydration, particularly important for
blood-feeding insects. Taking a blood-meal, the mosquito takes on a payload more
than twice its own body weight threatening flight with disastrous consequences
were it not for extremely fast processing of the meal. Astonishingly, much of
the ingested blood is digested, absorbed and excreted from the kidney while the
meal is still in progress with the effect of urinating on the host from mne end
while sucking blood from the other end, adding insult to injury. Doing so, the
mosquito gets rid of the unwanted salt, water and weight of the blood meal and
then flies away keeping sugars, fats, and proteins for its own use. High rates
of salt and water transport in the kidney apparently are triggered by the
hormone Culex-diuretic peptide which stimulates transport through the cells of
the kidney and, surprisingly, also between the cells of the kidney! Transport
between the cells of kidney and its regulation by a hormone is a new phenomenon
in biology with potentially important lessons for our understanding of tranpsort
functions in all epithelia, from kidney to intestine, stomach, pancreas, and
secretory glands. Potential biomedical and clinical applications of
understanding the mechanism and regulation of epithelial transport between cells
cannot be denied.