* 9604124
* Diadenosine Oligophosphate Catabolic Enzymes in Yeast and   Humans
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Larry Barnes, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Continuing grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 01/31/2000
* USD 311,000.00

9604124 Barnes Diadenosine tri- and tetra- phosphates (Ap3A and Ap4A) are
present in all organisms examined. They may serve one or more functions, and
they are degraded by specific enzymes in those organisms. In humans, a gene
designated FHIT encodes a candidate tumor suppressor, Fhit. Fhit is an Ap3A
hydrolase that catalyzes the degradation of Ap3A. The goal of this research is
to determine the catalytic mechanism of specific enzymes from yeast and humans
that degrade these dinucleotide phosphates. The hydrolases will be analyzed for
formation of covalent enzyme intermediates during catalysis as has been
indicated for Ap4A phosphorylase I. The amino acid residues required for the
binding and catalysis of substrate will be identified. Participation of
postulated histidine residues and others will be tested by site-directed
mutagenesis. Enzymes that process dinucleotide polyphosphates (ApnA) and related
compounds in yeast and mammals will be examined. The roles of dinucleotide
polyphosphates in regulation of cell growth and proliferation are postulated,
but not known. These include, intracellularly, regulation of DNA replication and
the stress response. Extracellularly, they act via purinogenic-type receptors.
This area has become important in the past few years with the discovery, by
Barnes, that the tumor suppresser gene FHIT encodes an Ap3A hydrolase (Fhit).
Abnormal FHIT transcripts are found in 50%of some common cancers. The hydrolase
enzymes are a family of nucleotide-binding proteins whose catalytic action is
likely to be linked to regulation of cell proliferation. ***