* 9604354
* Embryo Defenses Against Toxins
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1999
* David Epel, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1999
* USD 95,000.00

Epel 96-04354 This one year grant will fund a pilot project aimed at
understanding how embryos defend themselves against environmental toxins. Dr.
Epel hypothesizes that the P-glycoprotein drug transporters provide this
protection, acting as a first line of defense to keep toxins out of the cell. It
is present in embryos and adults of a mud-dwelling worm, Urechis caupo, and its
activity protects its embryos against added test toxins. This protection might
account for the ability of Urechis embryos to develop normally in pore water
(the supernatant sea water from the mud flat sediments). The embryos of starfish
and sea urchins do not possess this transporter and their embryos cannot develop
in pore water from the mud flats. If this drug transporter in fact protects
embryos, then expression of the transporter in the embryos of the sea urchin or
starfish should confer protection against environmental toxins. The major goal
of this one year pilot study is to express this transporter, using the gene
cloned from the mouse or nematode worm, in starfish or sea urchins oocytes and
to determine if the resultant embryos will develop. If so, a large number of
questions can then be asked and answered about the role of this transporter in
protection of embryos and also about protection against toxins in the marine
environment in general. This transporter is not ubiquitous in the marine
environment, and our limited survey indicates its presence in filter and
suspension feeders but not in sea urchins or starfish. A second question we wish
to address in this pilot study relates to the distribution of this transporter.
It is present in an echiuroid worm which lives in sediments. Is having this
transporter a general attribute of being an echiuroid? Or is it something
restricted to animals whose lifestyle exposes them to toxins (such as sediment
dwelling or filter feeding)? To provide an answer to this question, a minor
component of this pilot study will determine whether the transport protein is ex
pressed or over expressed in members of this group that live in clean habitats
or have different lifestyles. Providing answers to these two questions,
especially information about the expression of the cloned transporter gene in
echinoderm embryos, will indicate will indicate the feasibility of research
approaches using expressed genes in embyros. These approaches, if feasible,
would provide rigorous information on the biology of embryo defense mechanisms
in general and the role of this drug transporter in particular