* 9604682
* A Fluorescence Light Microscope for Subcellular Localization Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Hsing-Jien Kung, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1999
* USD 43,293.00

This group of researchers is interested in diverse aspects of fundamental cell
biology. Dr. Lemmon studies vesicular transport in yeast. Dr. Brady-Kalnay
investigates lgsuperfamily protein tyrosine phosphatases and their link to the
cytoskeleton through an association with cadherin adhesion molecules. Dr. Kung's
research focuses on transcription factors and their regulation by the cell
cycle. Dr. de Boer studies the mechanisms of cytokinesis and septum formation in
bacteria. Each of the researchers uses immunocytochemical approaches to address
issues of protein localization. This group of investigators require full access
to a light microscope in order to explore basic cell biological questions. A
committee, of the Pl and Co-Pls of this grant, was formed to do an extensive
analysis of the available microscopes that have phase, fluorescence and DIC
capabilities. Week long demonstrations were given by the following
manufacturers: Nikon, Olympus, Leica, and Zeiss. During these demonstrations
each of the investigators examined samples from their particular research
applications. A consensus was reached that the Zeiss microscope best suited the
needs of all the investigators. A quote was issued by Zeiss that included only
the parts that we required to visualize each of our samples. This quote is
included in the application.