* 9604200
* Rapid Signaling Pathway for Corticosteriods
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Miles Orchinik, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 12/31/2000
* USD 357,775.00

IBN-9604200 Orchinik Steroid hormones are among the most powerful regulators of
brain function and behavior known. For this reason, understanding the mechanism
for steroid actions is a fundamental problem for neuroendocrinology and
behavioral neuroscience. Until recently, steroids were thought to act through a
two-step process. Steroids, such as estradiol, testosterone, and corticosterone,
first enter the brain and bind to specific receptors found within target
neurons. The steroid-receptor complex is then activated and binds to DNA, which
in turn, regulates gene expression and alters protein synthesis. It is the
increase or decrease of proteins that bring about the physiological and
behavioral response to the steroid hormones. This is referred to as the genomic
mechanism of steroid action and the time frame of action requires anywhere from
hours to days. A conceptual problem exists since many neural actions of steroid
appear and decrement very rapidly. This is especially true for corticosterone,
an adrenal steroid, that is released during stress. Indeed, it has been known
for years that under stressful conditions, corticosteroids levels rise
dramatically within 2-5 minutes, peak within 30 minutes, and return to basal
levels almost as quickly with the cessation of the stressful event. Dr. Orchinik
believes that under acute stress conditions, corticosteroid is acting through a
non-genomic mechanism and this award addresses this important question. He
hypothesizes that corticosteroids are eliciting rapid neuronal responses by
first binding to receptors in the neuronal membranes rather than within the
neuron. Dr. Orchinik will carry out a series of studies that systematically
investigate the molecular mechanisms that underlie neurophysiological and
behavioral responses to corticosteroid that are too rapid to be accounted for by
the genomic mechanism of action. Initial studies will establish and
characterized the presence of corticosterone r eceptors in neuronal membranes.
The membrane-bound and intracellular corticosteroid brain receptors will then be
compared. Using an array of techniques, Dr. Orchinik will then examine the
events that occur after corticosterone binds to the membrane receptors. He will
determine whether the signal transduction initiated by the membrane-bound
steroid involved receptor interactions with GTP binding proteins, similar to the
action of neurotransmitters. The results from these studies will identify the
biochemical pathways involved in the rapid corticosteroid action. The new
knowledge gained from these studies will help us decipher both the genomic and
non-genomic mechanisms of steroid action which is essential if we are to
understand of how hormones modulate brain function and behavior, in particular,
neural responses to stress.