* 9604994
* US-Jordan Cooperative Research: Development of              Turbulence Models for Non-equilibruim Flows
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Hassan Nagib, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2000
* USD 25,000.00

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative research by Dr. Hassan
Nagib, Professor and Director of the Fluid Dynamics Research Center, Dr. Ahmed
Naguib, Assistant Professor, both in the Department of Mechanical, Materials and
Aerospace Engineering at Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago, and Dr.
Suhil M. Kiwan, Assistant Professor in the Mechanical Engineering Department at
the Jordan University of Science and Technology in Amman, Jordan. The research
aims at refining and extending an anisotropic turbulence model which has been
recently developed at IIT. Dr. Kiwan, who developed the initial model and
demonstrated its efficient use, will work on the enhancement and refinement of
the model and will calculate predictions from the model for experimental work
being carried out by the IIT team. The model is specifically targeted to the
study of turbulence of non-equilibrium, complex flows, which are important in
designing aerodynamic vehicles, gas turbines, and flows in pipes with complex
geometry. Scope: This research project will be useful in promoting the
development of modeling of turbulence in flows, for accurate design calculations
in many engineering applications. It involves US and Jordanian scientists with
complementary expertise and laboratory facilities, in the field of aeronautical
engineering, at the two participating universities. The project involves two
junior scientists, Dr. Naguib of IIT and Dr. Kiwan of JUST, both of whom
received their Ph.D.'s recently. This proposal meets INT objective of increasing
U.S.-foreign collaboration in areas that benefit both sides, and in enhancing
junior scientists' international experience.