* 9604135
* The Drosophila Centromere Protein MEI-S332 and Sister-      Chromatid Segregation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,04/30/2002
* Terry Orr-Weaver, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 04/30/2002
* USD 720,000.00

9604135 Orr-Weaver The Drosophila MEI-S332 protein is essential for sister-
chromatid cohesion in meiosis. During meiosis the sister chromatids must remain
attached as the homologs segregate in meiosis I, retaining cohesion until their
separation in meiosis II. The phenotype of mutations in mei-S322 predicted that
the protein was required to hold the sister chromatids together at their
centromeres. MEI-S322 indeed localizes onto the meiotic centromeres and persists
there until the sister chromatids separate in meiosis II. The mutations in
MEI_S322 reveal domains of the protein crucial in male and female meiosis, as
well as regions necessary for centromere localization. Unraveling the mechanism
by which MEI_S322 maintains sister-chromatid cohesion and isolating other
proteins that participate in the process will provide a crucial link in
understanding chromosome segregation. With the isolated protein, it is possible
to determine how it localizes onto centromeres and how once localized it
maintains cohesion. The domains of the protein needed for localization will be
further delineated and modifications of the protein accompanying localization
will be investigated. Experiments are designed to distinguish whether MEI_S322
acts on the centric heterochromatin or controls the kinetochore. Several
approaches will be used to recover proteins that interact with MEI_S322 to
maintain cohesion. Proper segregation also necessitates precise release of
sister-chromatid cohesion and the domains needed for delocalization will be
mapped and modifications of the protein associated with chromosomal dissociation
will be analyzed. Genetic screens will identify genes that regulate MEI-S322.
Genetic and cytological tests are designed to detect proteins with analogous
functions in mitosis which may either interact or control MEI-S322. Physical
association between the sister chromatids, sister-chromatid cohesion, is
essential for proper segregation during cell division. Sister-chromatid cohesion
enables the sister chr omatids to attach to microtubules from opposite spindle
poles and thus partition away from each other. In addition, the release of
sister-chromatid cohesion must also be precisely regulated. In order to
understand the underlying molecular basis for this precise regulation, it is
critical to define the proteins that mediate such attachments and release.