* 9604298
* Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Anaerobic Iron-Dependent  Respiration in Shewanella Putrefaciens MR-1
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1997,09/28/1998
* Daad Saffarini, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Shiladitya DasSarma
* 09/28/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9604298 Saffarini Anaerobic metal reduction is a major respiratory process in
aquatic environments and in some instances it can account for 80-90% of the
total organic carbon that is oxidized. Although this process is widespread in
aquatic environments, very little is known about the mechanisms of iron
reduction. Iron oxides and oxyhydroxides are solids and highly insoluble.
Contact with the iron particles is required for reduction to occur. This raises
the question as to the mechanisms used for solid Fe(III) reduction. Is the iron
reduced outside the cell, on the outer membrane as has been suggested
previously, or is it solubilized first and then transported to the inner
membrane where it is reduced? Shewanella putrefaciens is an iron reducer that
can use amazingly large number of terminal electron acceptors, both soluble and
solid. The organization and localization of the electron transport chain
components, and the mechanisms for dealing with soluble vs. solid terminal
electron acceptors are intriguing problems. S. putrefaciens serves as an
excellent model system to study iron reduction. It is a facultative anaerobe,
and therefore amenable to genetic manipulations. Other metal reducers identified
so far are strict anaerobes. The goal of the project is to elucidate the
mechanisms of iron transport and reduction and to identify the genes involved.
Transposon mutants deficient in iron reduction have been isolated. These mutants
will be complemented and the genes sequenced. DNA sequences will be analyzed to
determine similarities to other reductase systems. The genes encoding the ferric
reductase will be expressed in E. coli and antibodies will be generated for
immunolocalization of the enzymes in the cell. The factors involved in
regulating the expression of the iron reductase will also be investigated.
Anaerobic metal reduction is a major respiratory process in aquatic environments
and can account for 80-90% of the total organic carbon that is oxidized.
Furthermore, an increasingly large number of bacteria are being identified that
are capable or iron reduction. One such organism is Shewanella putrefaciens
which has been isolated from a variety of different environments. Although iron
reduction is widespread in aquatic environments, very little is known about the
mechanisms by which bacteria use this metal for respiration. This project will
shed light on the mechanisms of iron reduction and its regulation using
molecular biological techniques. In addition to providing a basis for
understanding of a novel enzyme, a detailed study of the iron reductase will
provide insights into the physiology and genetics of an environmentally
significant organism. Iron reducing bacteria are being considered as agents of
bioremediation because of their ability to anaerobically oxidize aromatic
compounds coupled to the reduction of iron. These bacteria cannot be used or
manipulated unless the processes by which iron is reduced and regulated are
understood.