* 9604938
* Genetic and Molecular Approaches to Signaling by            Intracellular Receptors
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1997,10/31/2004
* Keith Yamamoto, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2004
* USD 725,000.00

9604938 Yamamoto Technical Section There are five specific aims for this
continuing investigation into the molecular mechanisms at several levels whereby
signaling information is integrated by transcription regulators. 1. Extend the
analysis of a specialized molecular chaperone complex, which includes Hsp90 and
other components, to approach the mechanism by which it 'poises' the largest
known class of regulators, the intracellular receptors (IRs)to be sensitive to
their hormonal ligands, and to test the possibility that the chaperone complex
is itself a signaling component that conveys information to aporeceptors; 2.
Pursue findings that response elements, genomic sites to which IRs bind, confer
signaling information that influences the mode of transcriptional regulation,
e.g., activation or repression, that is imposed from the element; analyze both
the signals intrinsic to the response elements and the sensing and
interpretation mechanism within the receptors; 3. Carry out extensive analysis
of the hormone binding domains of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the
thyroid receptor (TR), seeking common and unique features of their mechanisms;
4. Isolate and characterize a mammalian homolog of an ABC transporter first
isolated in yeast that selectively exports certain steroids; seek other
components that affect intracellular efficacy and potency of steroids, and
ascertain whether such membrane components contribute to the cell specificity of
hormone activity; 5. Investigate the functional consequences of GR
phosphorylation, and test the possibility that recently detected interactions of
GR and TR with cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors termed INKs result in
alterations of receptor and/or CDK activities and thereby comprise a signal
integration circuit. Non-technical Section Genes in multicellular eukaryotes are
subject to complex regulation, typically being regulated differentially in
different cell types, developmental stages or physiological conditions.
Understanding the mecha nisms of this complexity is an overarching problem in
modern biology. It is apparent that many transcription regulators, factors that
interact directly or indirectly with the RNA polymerization machinery, are at
the distal end of signal transduction pathways that sense various biological
signals and pass that information along a network.