* 9604654
* Role of Glutamate Metabotropic Receptors in Synaptic        Function in the Spinal Cord
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Mirjana Randic, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Roy L. White
* 02/29/2000
* USD 255,000.00

9604654 Randic The perception of pain requires excitatory synaptic transmission
from primary afferent sensory fibers to secondary projection neurons in the
dorsal horn (DH) region of the spinal cord. It is now well established that the
primary afferent fibers use glutamate, or related amino acid, to mediate this
initial excitatory step in the pain pathway. Glutamate produces its effects
through two broad categories of receptors called ionotropic and metabotropic.
The activation of ionotropic glutamate receptors is essential for fast
excitatory transmission in the brain and spinal cord. Multiple metabotropic
glutamate receptors (mGluRs) are expressed in neurons of the spinal cord dorsal
horn (DH), the site of processing of sensory signals, but their roles in
synaptic function, and contribution to the spinal somatosensory transmission,
including nociception, have yet to be elucidated. Until recently, progress in
identifying the physiological and pathophysiological roles of mGluRs has been
hindered by the lack of selective agonists and antagonists. The recent
development of ligands that bind specifically to these receptors has provided a
means of characterizing the important roles they may play in tuning of fast
synaptic transmission, including the induction of long-term changes in synaptic
efficacy. Three major objectives of the proposed study are: 1. To
pharmacologically identify mGluR subtype(s) involved in modulation of primary
afferent neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity in the spinal cord dorsal
horn (laminae I-II). 2. To examine whether activation of the Group I mGluRs
(mGluR1 and/or mGluR5) mobilizes Ca2+ from internal stores in LI-II neurons. 3.
To study characteristics of Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release mechanism in the
generation of Ca2+ signals in LI-II neurons. A combination of fura-2 imaging,
extracellular, intracellular (sharp microelectrodes) and whole-cell and
perforated-patch recordings, and pharmacological techniques, will be employed to
study the effects of selective mGluR agonists and antagonists on excitatory
synaptic responses and mobilization of Ca2+ from internal stores in the in vitro
preparations of acutely isolated DH neurons (LI-II), and also in the LI-II
neurons within rat spinal cord slices. LI-II cells in the spinal slices will be
visualized using infra-red videomicroscopy and intracellular labeling with
biocytin and rhodamine. Delineating the physiological roles of individual
subtypes of the mGluR in the spinal DH, and cellular and molecular mechanisms
underlying their actions, is an important step toward understanding of
implications of glutamate-mediated transmission in the spinal cord DH synaptic
function, but in particular for synaptic plasticity. Finally, this study may
contribute to our understanding of pathophysiological processes in the spinal
cord, especially pain, and thereby may lead to the development of rational
therapies.