* 9604194
* Telomere Structure and Function in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Arthur Lustig, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 12/31/2000
* USD 377,201.00

Lustig 9604194 In this project, a series of molecular biological, genetic and
biochemical approaches will be used to develop a clearer understanding of the
mechanism of telomeric silencing in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The
current view is that the telomere binding protein Rap1 p recruits Sir3p to the
telomere, after which silencing is nucleated, spreading unidirectionally from
the telomere. Three interrelated approaches will be taken. First, a Sir3p
tethered silencing assay will be used to address several fundamental questions
concerning the mechanism of Sir3p in silencing. Two questions will initially be
addressed: What is the role of Sir3p in the formation and inheritability of the
silent state?; and Is the function of Sir3p regulated by the cell cycle? Two
models that may explain the function of Sir3p will also be tested: a) the
possibility that Sir3p nucleates silencing by acting as a bridge between
telomeric and subtelomeric sequences and b) the hypothesis that Sir3p nucleates
silencing by recruiting histone deacetylases. Second, the role of the Sir3p
N-terminus in telomeric silencing will be investigated. This region has been
implicated by our previous genetic assays as being critical for telomeric
silencing. The tethering assay will first be used to dissect the N-terminus of
Sir3p using both deletion analysis and the generation of N-terminal mutations.
In addition, N-terminal fusions will be characterized functionally in terms of
a) their role in formation and inheritability of the silent state, b) the link
between nucleation of silencing and the distance silent chromatin is propagated,
c) their role in subtelomeric/telomeric interactions and d) the dependence of
N-terminal Sir3p tethered silencing on other gene products involved in telomeric
silencing. Third, in vivo and in vitro techniques will be used to define the
proteins that interact with N-terminal Sir3p domains. The in vivo techniques
will rely on both immunological techniques for known proteins and two-hybrid
analysis for novel proteins. The in vitro techniques will be designed to test
for direct interactions between protein candidates suggested by the in vivo
studies. Telomeres, the protein-DNA structures present at the termini of
eukaryotic chromosomes, confer transcriptionally silent states onto adjacent
subtelomeric sequences; a likely reflection of the role of the telomere in
establishing the spatial arrangement of chromosomal domains. The goal of these
studies is to understand the long-range position effects conferred by the
telomere using the genetically-manipulatable yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a
model eukaryote. Findings in this yeast are likely to serve as a paradigm for
the behavior of the telomeres of higher eukaryotes and are likely to be highly
informative in elucidating the protein/protein and protein /DNA interactions
taking place at the telomere.