* 9604511
* Structure-Function Studies on Phytochrome
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* J. Clark Lagarias, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2001
* USD 259,375.00

9604511 Lagarias The overall goal of these studies is to define the structural
basis for photosensory and regulatory functions of the phytochrome
photoreceptor. These investigations rely on the ability to express, assemble and
purify recombinant phytochromes. Previous biochemical and genetic studies have
delimited the phytochrome molecule into two major domains, a highly conserved
photosensory domain at the molecule's N terminus and a C-terminal domain which
plays a key role in the regulatory function of phytochrome. These two domains
are the focus of these studies. Experiments outlined in Part 1 seek to identify
specific amino acid residues in the photosensory domain of phytochrome that are
important to chromophore-protein interactions. These studies will exploit the
techniques of chemical cross-linking, site-directed and random mutagenesis, and
resonance Raman spectroscopy. These studies also represent a prelude (and
adjunct) to x-ray crystallographic analysis of phytochrome. Experiments outlined
in Part II address the hypothesis that phytochrome functions as a light-
regulated enzyme. The exciting discovery of phytochrome-related genes in
cyanobacteria, which share structural motifs with higher plant phytochromes and
the transmitter protein kinase family of prokaryotes within the regulatory
domain region, has provided renewed impetus for testing this controversial
theory. Experiments seek to establish whether phyto*-chrome is a light-regulated
transmitter kinase and if so, to define the structural basis for its enzymatic
activity. Parallel studies to test for biochemical and functional `cross-talk'
between eukaryotic and prokaryotic phytochromes, also outlined in this section,
will provide insight into the evolution of phytochrome structure and function.
The ability to adjust to changes in their external light environment is
essential to plant survival because, unlike animals, plants must have sunlight
for photosynthesis and they lack the ability to move to a more optimum light
environment. Plants therefore possess light-sensing molecules which enable them
to adapt to suboptimal light conditions in their environment, one of which is
called phytochrome. Among the many phenomena mediated by phytochrome include the
induction of seed germination, rapid stem elongation in response to the shade of
neighboring plants, regulation of the timing of flowering and growth towards
light. Phytochrome is a protein that contains an attached pigment which is
responsible for its ability to absorb visible light. Upon light absorption,
phytochrome is converted to an active form which regulates the course of plant
growth and development. This work seeks to dissect the anatomy of the
phytochrome molecule and to characterize the structural features that enable it
to convert a light signal into a chemical signal. A better understanding of the
mechanism of phytochrome action should lead to novel approaches to improve plant
growth and development.