* 9604139
* Lysosomal Proenzyme Sorting:  A New Receptor
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Ann Erickson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 03/31/2002
* USD 394,125.00

9604139 Erickson Technical: We have identified a new intracellular receptor that
binds the lysosomal cysteine protease procathepsin L, but not the mature enzyme,
to microsomal membranes at an acid pH . Binding to this 43-kDa integral membrane
protein is mediated by a 9-residue propeptide sequence that showq homology to
yeast vacuolar sorting sequences. The aspartic protease procathepsin D undergoes
similar pH-dependent membrane association. Our data suggest that lysosomal
proenzyme receptors (LPRs) are alternate targeting receptors which mediate
mannose 6-phosphate-independent transport of lysosomal proenzymes from the trans
Golgi to endosomal vesicles. Failure of the proteases to bind to LPRs in tumor
cells and activated macrophages correlates with increased enzyme secretion. The
goal of this project is to determine the physiological function(s) of the
procathepsin L lysosomal proenzyme receptor (LPR). In order to accomplish this
objective the lysosomal proenzyme receptor for procathepsin L will be purified.
Antiserum specific for the mouse procathepsin L LPR will be prepared by
immunization of rabbits. The N-terminal sequence of the procathepsin L LPR will
be obtained by Edman degradation. If the N-terminus is blocked, peptides
prepared by protease treatment of the receptor will be purified by HPLC and
subjected to N-terminal sequence analysis. The intracellular localization of the
LPR and its ligand will be determined by ultrastructural studies using
antibodies raised against procathepsin L and the purified LPR. The physiological
function of the LPR will be studied using eucaryotic expression systems Mouse
procathepsin L will be expressed in mouse macrophages which do not produce
endogenous protease and the membrane association and efficiency of lysosomal
targeting of the protease will be determined. The mouse procathepsin L
propeptide will be expressed in mouse fibroblasts to determine if the propeptide
has a dominant-negative effect, altering proprotease targeting by competing fo r
the LPR in vivo. Regulation of LPR binding will be studied by determing why ATP
added to the exterior of intact microsomes causes procathepsin L to be released
from the membranes to the vesicle lumen. Initial studies indicate the release is
not blocked by bafilomycin, which inactivates the vacuolar ATPase, suggesting
that the effect is not merely due to modulation of intravesicular pH. Non
Technical: The protease cathepsin has a critical role in degrading cellular
proteins during development and in response to injury. Cathepsin is localized in
a discrete cellular compartment termed lysosomes that functions to degrade
nonfunctional and nonessential cellular components. Degradative enzymes are
targeted for inclusion into lysosome by a modification of the enzymes that
attaches a sugar that provides addressing information. The preliminary results
of thiq project indicate that the cathepsin protease is targeted to lysosomes by
an entirely different mechanism that involves a specific receptor that
recognizes part of the cathepsin protein. During the grant award period Dr.
Erickson will identify and characterize the cathepsin targeting receptor and
demonstrate its function in lysosome assembly.