* 9604168
* Microglial Factor(s) Regulate Differentiation of Cholinergic Neuronal Precursors
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Gene Miller Jonakait, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 05/31/2002
* USD 329,526.00

ABSTRACT 9604168 Jonakait Dr. Jonakait's laboratory is interested in finding out
what molecules prompt developing neurons to acquire their mature
characteristics. They examine developing neurons using cultured cells from
embryonic rat brains, and have been particularly interested in a population of
cells located in the front part of the base of the brain that use acetylcholine
as their chemical transmitter. A neuron that uses acetylcholine as its
transmitter is called a "cholinergic" neuron. Having studied this population for
some time, they now know that particular kinds of non-neuronal cells in the
culture -- cells called microglia -- can be stimulated to produce a molecule
that causes immature brain cells in this brain area to become cholinergic. The
biochemical nature of this molecule is unknown. Thus, a major goal of this
project is to find out, using biochemical techniques, the identity of the
molecule. Toward that end, Dr. Jonakait has established a collaboration with
Drs. John Winslow and Glenn Hammonds at Genentech, Inc., who are trained
biochemists. While the biochemical identity of this possibly novel molecule is
being determined, the investigators will ask other biological questions: Will
all immature brain cells -- no matter what their normal fate -- be prompted by
this molecule to become cholinergic neurons? Alternatively, does the molecule
have a more general effect on development, coaxing all immature cells to develop
more quickly and efficiently? Importantly, they will also ask whether immature
cells, now known to be present even in adult brain, respond to the molecule by
assuming cholinergic characteristics.