* 9604382
* Two-Photon Single Protein Spectroscopy:  An Application in  Protein Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* peter so, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/2000
* USD 368,000.00

9604382 So The development of single molecule imaging and spectroscopy
technology has the potential to revolutionize the study of proteins. One of the
most promising approaches utilized two-photon excitation. By focusing a high
peak power laser to a diffraction limited spot, chromophores can be effectively
excited by the simultaneous absorption of two photons each having half the
energy needed for the excitation transition. Because of the high power density
requirement, the two-photon effect is confined to a sub-femtoliter volume at the
focal point. For single molecule study, this localization ensures that the
ubiquitous background fluorescence does not overwhelm the fluorescence from a
single protein molecule. Compared with other approaches, two-photon excitation
has the added advantages that Raleigh and Raman scattering can be easily
eliminated, and proteins outside the excitation volume will not be
photobleached. Further, the 3-D confinement of the two-photon excitation volume
offers the opportunity to study these protein molecules in their natural
aqueous, bulk environment. Detection and imaging of a single protein molecule
should be possible by incorporating two-photon excitation with high sensitivity
microscopy. Detection is only the first step in the study of single protein
states. Fluorescence spectroscopy is required to diagnose molecular
conformation. Wavelength and lifetime-resolved spectroscopy will be implemented
in this project. Wavelength resolved spectra will be collected by and
intensified, low noise CCD camera. Fluorescence lifetime data can be obtained by
correlated single photon counting. The impact of this new methodology will be
felt in many biological applications. If a single nucleotide can be detected by
fluorescence, the efficiency of DNA and RNA sequencing techniques can be greatly
enhanced. Further, the combination of single molecular detection and
fluorescence correlation spectroscopy will allow the protein aggregation and
association reactions to be studied at dilutions down to the pico-molar level.
Finally, the development of single molecule detection and spectroscopy may aid
in the study of protein folding which involves a sequence of genetically
programmed conformation changes. In an ensemble, the asynchronous nature of
individual protein motion prevents an examination of these individual steps and
only the average protein activity can be measured. However, studying one
molecule at a time will resolve these individual folding steps.