* 9604226
* Selection on Natural Preference Behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* William Wagner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 05/31/2001
* USD 141,500.00

Proposal No. 9604226 PI: William Wagner "Selection on natural preference
behaviors" NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT In many animals, females select mates based on
variation in traits possessed by males. Numerous hypotheses have been proposed
to explain the evolution of such preferences, and many studies have examined the
benefits that females receive from mating with males with particular traits.
However, there have been few detailed studies of both the costs and benefits of
female preferences. This study will begin a detailed analysis of selection on
female mating preferences in the variable field cricket, Gryllus lineaticeps.
Males of this species call to attract females, and females select mates, in
part, based on variation in male calling song. Females tend to prefer males that
produce chirps at higher rates, and they tend to prefer longer chirps. Higher
chirp rates are energetically more expensive to produce, and males in better
nutritional condition are capable of sustaining higher chirp rates. First,
variation between females in their preferences will be examined. Selection can
act on female preferences only if different females possess different
preferences. Second, correlations between preferences based on different aspects
of male calling behavior will be examined. Selection on one preference can
result in indirect selection on other preferences if preferences are correlated.
Third, the relationship between female preference and searching behavior during
mate choice will be examined. If females with stronger preferences engage in
riskier searching behavior, search costs can act against the evolution of strong
preferences. Fourth, the direct benefits of female preferences will be examined.
Specifically, the correlation between a mate's call type and female fitness (egg
number, egg size, egg hatching success, offspring development rate and offspring
survivorship) will be tested. Males transfer a spermatophore to females during
mating, which females eat approximately 40 minutes after attachment. There is
thus the potential for nutritional benefits that accrue to females or to
offspring. If females that mate with preferred males obtain a benefit from doing
so, selection can favor the evolution of strong preferences. This research
promises to increase our understanding of why females prefer certain male
traits, and the factors that act against the evolution of such preferences.