* 9604862
* Mechanism of Glutamate Release from Astroglia
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Ksenija Jeftinija, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 01/31/2001
* USD 255,000.00

9604862 Jeftinija Two of the most important excitatory neurotransmitters in the
brain are the amino acids glutamate and aspartate. The effectiveness of
information transfer within the brain depends on the release of these excitatory
amino acids from neurons, the interaction of these amino acids with specific
receptors on target cells, and the termination of these interactions by the
uptake of glutamate and aspartate from the extracellular milieu. This latter
function is accomplished by glial cells. However, recent in vitro studies have
shown that glial cells can also release these excitatory amino acids when
stimulated by specific neuroligands such as bradykinin, and in turn cause
neurons to release their neurotransmitters. Neuroligand-stimulated glial release
of glutamate and aspartate is receptor mediated and calcium dependent,
resembling neurotransmitter release from neurons. Glia may thus be far more
important for normal brain function than previously imagined, and may even serve
to convey information in the nervous system, a role previously reserved for
neurons. The main objective of this proposal is to determine how glial cells
actually release glutamate. There are three possible mechanisms: (i) neuroligand
binding may cause reversal of the cross-membrane glutamate transporter which is
know to be present in glial cells; (ii) neuroligand binding may cause glial
swelling, which in turn might release glutamate through pores formed in the
stretched cell wall; (iii) neuroligand binding may cause glutamate release by an
exocytotic mechanism similar to that which neurons use to release glutamate and
other neurotransmitters. It will be determine which of these possible mechanisms
is responsible for neuroligand-stimulated release of glutamate from glial cells,
studying isolated cultured glial cells as well as brain slice preparations in
which glial cells maintain their relationships with surrounding cells.
Understanding the mechanism of rel ease of excitatory amino acids from glial
cells will allow us to elucidate the crucial roles of these cells in the
transmission of information within the brain.