* 9604505
* Collaborative Research:  Spatially Distributed Computation  in a Small Neural Network
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Petra Lenz, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2002
* USD 158,642.00

9604505 Hartline For a long time, neurobiologists have viewed the nerve cell as
being the fundamental unit of function in the nervous system. In this view, a
cell (or "neuron") receives inputs from selected sources (sensory cells, other
nerve cells, hormones in the blood), processes the information contained in the
totality of these inputs and sends out a signal to other neurons or to muscles
that represent a unified result of the processing. However, it is becoming
increasingly apparent that this unity of function of the single neuron may in
some cases, and perhaps in many, be incorrect. Instead, different parts of one
cell may each be sending out its own signal based on processing of a selected
"local" sampling of inputs received by the whole cell. This research will assess
the possibilities for such "local" computation in cells from a small neural
network. This network is particularly suited to the research because it has few
enough neurons that activity from all cells having input onto a particular
target neuron can be monitored physiologically. Experience has shown repeatedly
that principles learned more easily in this simple model system (a ganglion from
a crab termed the "stomatogastric ganglion"), can be applied to more complex
systems, including the nervous system of mammals and man. Single neurons will be
injected with a fluorescent dye that makes them visible in a "confocal"
microscope. The confocal microscope will record the fluorescence coming from the
multitude of branching extensions possessed by each cell and thus will allow
accurate reconstruction of the complex shape of the cell. From this, and from
some simple electrical measurements that can be made at the same time the
fluorescent dye is injected, a computer model will be constructed of the
predicted spread of voltage signals through the different parts of the cell. If
the signals generated at any one point in the cell are changed relatively little
in traveling to other parts of the cell, this will be evidence that there is
little likelihood of "local" computation in the cell, since all parts will
receive the same processed signal. If, as preliminary data suggest, signals can
be significantly altered in passing from one point in a cell to another, the
likelihood of local computation is much greater. Much of the research focuses on
how sensitive the local computation capabilities are to various physiological
factors. For example, as input from other nerve cells becomes stronger, the
electrical properties of the target cell change so that it is more likely to
break up into small local computational regions. On the other hand, if the input
from other cells is broadly distributed over the surface of a target neuron, the
target cell may act in a more unified fashion. The project is investigating how
such different parameters influence the computational style of real neurons and
how computational styles of a single neuron may change as the state of activity
of the nervous system changes.