* 9604175
* The Post-Transcriptional Regulation of GAP-43 Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Henry Furneaux, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 04/30/2000
* USD 280,380.00

PI: Furneaux IBN-9604174 Furneaux Brain cells respond to stimuli by rapidly
changing the expression pattern of a small subset of genes. Recently, it has
become clear that the alteration of mRNA stability is an important contributor
to this rapid response. The mechanisms that regulate the stability of mRNA in
brain cells are poorly understood. Dr. Furneaux will investigate the factors
that regulate the stability of GAP-43 mRNA. GAP-43 is an important protein that
is crucial for neuronal function. Dr. Furneaux has previously cloned a family of
neuronal specific RNA binding proteins (the Elav-like proteins) which
specifically bind to GAP-43 mRNA. In this project he will test the hypothesis
that these proteins are the factors that regulate GAP-43 mRNA stability. To do
this he will use a biochemical approach. A cell-free system has been established
that can recapitulate the regulation of mRNA stability in vitro. Dr. Furneaux
will now directly test whether the addition of the Elav-like proteins will
affect the stability of GAP-43 mRNA. If the hypothesis is correct, the Elav-like
proteins can be used to identify other components in this important signaling
pathway. In addition he will investigate the structure of the Elav-like
protein/GAP-43 mRNA complex. These studies will provide a more detailed picture
of how the Elav-like proteins selectively bind to GAP-43 mRNA.