* 9604942
* US-Myanmar Workshop:  Circulation and Mixing of the         Andaman Sea - Yangoon, Myanmar, August 1997
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Arnold Gordon, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1998
* USD 23,500.00

Description: This award is to support participation by six scientists from the
United States in a workshop with scientists from Myanmar, to be held in Yangon
in August 1997. The US team leader is Dr. Arnold Gordon from the Lamont Doherty
Earth Observatory of Columbia University, and the Leader of the Myanmar team is
Dr. Swe Thwin, Department of Marine Science, University of Mawlamyine in Yangon.
The purpose of the workshop is to formulate a research program whose goal is to
develop a regional circulation model for the Andaman Sea, forced by wind, river
plume, tidal mixing, sea-air heat and fresh water fluxes. The model of choice is
the Princeton Ocean Model. The model will have application to studies of
spreading of pollutants, primary productivity research and meteorological
phenomena in the Myanmar region. A broader application is to better assess the
role of the Andaman Sea in the larger scale climate system, primarily the Asian
Monsoon. The specific interest in the Andaman Sea stems from the effects of
suspected internal wave and tidal derived elevated vertical mixing processes,
which may alter the regional vertical stratification and circulation pattern. It
is anticipated that the result of the workshop will be a plan for a joint
research project. Scope: This award is to fund travel of five of six U.S.
scientists who will meet with approximately fifteen scientists from Myanmar in a
workshop where discussions will deal with a topic of great importance to
oceanographers and atmospheric scientists in the US, and in Asia. The meeting is
expected to result in a proposal to be submitted to the Foundation, to support
joint research that will include American scientists and scientists from
Myanmar. This activity is particularly worthwhile because it opens avenues for
American scientists to work in Myanmar and with scientists from that country.
The project meets the objectives of the Division of International Programs in
promoting collaboration with foreign scientists in areas of mutual interest.