* 9604981
* Ethnography of Collaborative College Teaching
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2002
* Jane Korey, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* WALTER C. ERMLER
* 07/31/2002
* USD 318,712.00

9604981 Wallace This project will document the process by which
interdisciplinary mathematics and science courses are collaboratively created
and taught at the undergraduate level. Dartmouth College is now beginning the
second year of a five-year, NSF-funded "Mathematics Across the Curriculum"
project which involves fifty faculty in the creation of over twenty new and
revised courses. In one way or another, all involve the application of
mathematics to problems outside its traditional academic domain; almost all
involve the collaboration of a team of faculty in the design and teaching of the
course. Although educational research suggests that integrating content across
disciplines enhances retention and transfer of material and improves higher-
order thinking skills, little information is available about how this is best
accomplished at the college level. This study aims to give college faculty
information that will help them do collaborative, interdisciplinary teaching and
do it well. The investigation poses four questions: _How do collaborating
professors face two major challenges that make integrating mathematics seem
especially problematic: coordinating mathematical sequences with those of other
subjects and allaying students' apprehensions about mathematics? _What does the
process of collaboratively developing and teaching an interdisciplinary course
look like as an intellectual and sociological experience, from beginning to end?
_ How are various collaborative strategies linked with student outcomes? _ How
do professors themselves characterize their experience? The research
"triangulates" data from faculty interviews, ethnographic observation. and
student interviews and records to answer these questions. A semi-structured
interview will be conducted with each professor individually before and after
the planning and teaching of each interdisciplinary course. These recorded
interviews will explore their experiences, motivations, and goals in teaching
these courses and their assessme nts of the results for themselves and their
students. The ethnographer will also observe and take notes on planning sessions
and other group meetings. These data should yield practical information about
special issues encountered in integrating mathematics content, in working with
colleagues from other disciplines, in addressing student responses to novel
pedagogy, and in working within the established institutional organization. The
interviews will also illuminate the subjective experiences of initiating this
kind of reform. Data about student learning in these courses (available from
pre- and post-tests, student interviews, and academic records collected in the
already-funded evaluation of the MATC project) will be linked to information
from faculty interviews and to results of weekly classroom observations of each
MATC course. These linkages will be explored to draw conclusions about what
pedagogical approaches seem most effective in improving mathematics and science
learning. Administrators and college faculty outside the MATC will also be
interviewed to document the cultural milieu within which reform of mathematics
teaching takes place. By probing attitudes about mathematics and science of
those outside its precincts and analyzing institutional organization, this study
will explore the implications of college culture for interdisciplinary,
collaborative teaching, and vice versa. This project thus will provide two kinds
of information professors need: (1) practical information about problems
encountered and solutions devised and (2) a "sense of the experience," a preview
of what interdisciplinary teaching involves in personal as well as intellectual
terms. The examination of university culture_focusing on the belief system about
mathematics and on the institutional organization_addpesses reform issues on
another level by placing mathematics reform in context and identifying factors
that inhibit or promote reform efforts. The results of this research will be
published widely in journal ar ticles in mathematics and education journals,
through presentations at meetings, workshops and institutes, and in the form of
a short, readable "how-to" manual to accompany the shelf of paperbacks produced
from MATC courses.