* 9604669
* Functional Analysis of the Eukaryotic Signal Peptidase      Complex
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2003
* Hong Fang, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 03/31/2003
* USD 586,735.00

9604669 Green Technical abstract: Signal peptidase complex (SPC) from the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a multisubunit enzyme functioning in the cleavage
of N-terminal signal peptides and the degradation of some abnormal membrane
proteins. As the bacterial counterpart to the SPC, leader peptidase, is a
monomeric enzyme, the specific SPC subunits may have individual roles. To
identify these roles, the PI and co-PI, Drs. Green and Fang, will test existing
models and a new hypothesis for the presence of a multisubunit signal peptidase.
They have cloned the genes encoding three subunits of the yeast SPC and have
analyzed these subunits functionally, and they have evidence that two homologous
subunits of the mammalian SPC are functionally distinct. The following three
objectives are proposed for the next five years of study: 1. Genetically and
biochemically examine the function of each subunit of the yeast SPC. The SPC of
yeast is comprised of at least four subunits. The gene encoding one of these,
Sec11p, has been cloned and sequenced. Recently, the genes encoding the other
three subunits have been identified. Specific mutations will be constructed, and
cell growth, signal peptidase activity, and protein degradation will be examined
in mutant cells. The analysis of mutations in these genes will help to test two
existing models: (i) that one or more subunits may be important for protein
translocation across the ER membrane, and (ii) that different subunits may be
required to cleave signal peptides from non-overlapping sets of precursors. The
hypothesis that two subunits of ER signal peptidase perform the role played by
leader peptidase will also be tested. 2. Use newly constructed yeast mutants to
examine the function of mammalian SPC subunits. The canine SPC contains five
subunits, two of which are homologous to Sec11p. Methods will be developed to
express genes encodes these proteins in yeast, in order to determine whether the
canine proteins function in the heterologous system , and whether one, or both,
of the Sec11p homologues functionally replaces Sec11p in yeast. They will also
determine whether the two mammalian Sec11p homologues are functionally
equivalent, and whether yeast cells containing mammalian subunits of signal
peptidase are better hosts for the expression and secretion of mammalian
proteins than currently available systems. 3. Functionally characterize new
suppressors of conditional defects in the yeast SPC. Five distinct multicopy
suppressors of a sec11 mutant have been identified, including SPC1 encoding the
smallest subunit of the SPC and SPC3 which encodes the largest subunit of the
SPC. Other suppressors do not appear to encode characterized subunits. One of
these suppressors encodes a 13 kD membrane protein with a similar membrane
topology as Spc1. They will determine whether these suppressors are important
for signal peptidase activity, and whether they physically and genetically
interact with the SPC. Recently, a spc3-ts mutant was constructed by in vitro
random mutagenesis. New suppressors of this conditional mutant will be isolated.
The goal of this objective is to identify new proteins interacting with or
functionally equivalent to subunits of the SPC. Lay language abstract: The
signal peptidase complex (SPC) is a very important piece of the cellular
secretion machinery. Proteins destined for secretion carry a "signal peptide" at
their amino terminus, which is unrelated to the protein's ultimate function but
which contains the targeting information for insertion of that amino terminus of
the nascent protein through the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum. This
insertion is the key first step in the secretion pathway. After this insertion,
as the protein continues to be synthesized, it continues to be threaded at the
insertion site and thereby is translocated from the cytoplasmic side of the
membrane (where it is being synthesized) to the interior, or lumenal, side,
where further processing steps necessary for its secretion subsequently take
place. The SPC is on the lumenal side of the ER membrane, and its role is to
remove the signal sequence once it is inside the ER. Drs. Green and Fang have
identified the genes encoding the polypeptide subunits that comprise the SPC in
yeast, and have begun to define the function of each subunit. The proposed work
will greatly expand our understanding of how the SPC functions in yeast and
other cells. One of the potential benefits of the results might be the
development, by genetic engineering, of improved strains of yeast that are more
efficient at overproducing and secreting mammalian proteins of commercial
interest. ***