* 9604645
* Pollen-pistil Interactions in the Genus Nicotiana
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Bruce McClure, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 03/31/2001
* USD 360,000.00

McClure 9604645 Pollen-pistil interactions provide an important avenue for
controlling plant reproduction. The factors controlling intraspecific and
interspecific pollen recognition in the genus Nicotiana provide an excellent
system for exploring these interactions. A great deal is known about S-RNase
mediated intraspecific pollen recognition in self-incompatible Nicotiana alata.
Furthermore, the interspecific crossing relationships between N. alata and its
self-compatible relatives have been well described. Both types of pollen
recognition clearly entail interactions between the pollen and the pistil. This
research project uses biochemical and molecular biological tools to understand
the molecular details of these interactions. In the previous funding period,
cloned S-RNase genes from N. alata were expressed in transgenic plants to
examine their role in controlling pollination. The key results were: 1) that
S-RNases control the specificity of intraspecific pollination, 2) that
recognition information is diffusely encoded in the S-RNase molecule, 3) that at
least three genetically distinct mechanisms contribute to controlling
interspecific pollination between N. alata and its self-compatible relatives,
and 4) that S-RNase was implicated in interspecific pollen recognition and
rejection. These results are important because they imply that S-RNase helps to
define a window of genetic relatedness for compatible pollination. It has a role
in rejecting self-pollen, and thus prevents inbreeding. It also has a role in
rejecting interspecific pollen, and so acts to prevent very wide crosses. The
major goals in this new proposal are: 1) to identify and characterize non-SRNase
factors that contribute to pollen recognition, and 2) to examine the specificity
of RNase dependent interspecific pollen rejection. One putative factor has
already been identified by differential cDNA cloning. This new sequence will be
characterized using immunological and transgenic plant methods. The cDNA cloning
appr oach will be extended to identify further non-S-RNase factors related to
pollen recognition. The specificity of interspecific pollen recognition will be
addressed by comparing the pollination behavior of transgenic plants expressing
a bacterial RNase with plants expressing S-RNase or recognition defective
S-RNase. By understanding the natural mechanisms that control intraspecific and
interspecific pollen recognition in the genus Nicotiana, these studies may
contribute to efforts to artificially manipulate the breeding behavior of
economically important plants.