* 9604634
* Japan STA Program:  Modeling and Analysis Support of        PREASA Initiative
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,08/31/1998
* David Crain, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 08/31/1998
* USD 22,200.00

Crain 9604634 This award supports a 12 month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. David James Crain at the
Communications Research Laboratory (CRL), Tokyo, Japan. Dr. Crain will work with
Kiyoshi Igarashi, Director of the Upper Atmosphere Section, Space Science
Division, on a research project entitled "Electro-dynamic Processes of the
Equatorial and Mid-Latitude Ionosphere in the Pacific Region." The PREASA
(Pacific Region Equatorial Anomaly Studies in Asia) initiative is a multi-site,
multi-instrumented, multi- year campaign to observe the dynamics and the
electro- dynamics of the Equatorial regions of the ionosphere and test
established theories on the relevant processes involved in determining motions
and irregularity development. The research will allow observations that are
unique in their location and their methodology and, thus, will allow the
creation of databases of the ionosphere and upper atmosphere that are especially
useful. The primary goal of the research is to integrate the growing PREASA
observational database into a comprehensive model of the electrodynamics
(Ionospheric Motions) and Ionization Distribution throughout the Pacific
Longitude region. It is anticipated that such a model will aid in the
development of a regional capability to predict Ionosphere electrodynamics and
Irregularities which effect radio and HF propagation. These models will also aid
in the analysis of future PREASA databases and help understand the general
mechanisms responsible for Low and Mid-Latitude irregularities throughout the
world. ***