* 9604090
* Establishing the First Neuronal Fate in the Developing      Drosophila Retina
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Ross Cagan, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 299,652.00

ABSTRACT 960490 CAGAN Normal fetal development requires a carefully
choreographed interplay of many molecules. One of the most important discoveries
biologists have made in recent years is that these molecules seem to arrange
themselves as pathways or 'cassettes': one cassette of molecules allows cells to
communicate with one another while another cassette might direct cell movement.
Dr. Cagan's laboratory is studying one of the most widely used cassettes in
development, the Notch pathway. The Notch pathway plays a central role in the
making of most tissues in a wide variety of organisms, including insects and
humans. This includes our immune system, musculature, skin, heart, nervous
system, etc. Defects in the Notch pathway have been implicated in leukemias and
are undoubtedly involved in a host of other diseases as well. Dr. Cagan's
laboratory uses a model system, the developing eye of the fruitfly, Drosophila,
to investigate the role of the Notch pathway in development. They are using a
variety of tools to understand how the different molecular components of the
'Notch cassette' interact with one another. Abnormal Notch function results in
an abnormal eye. By shedding light on this critical pathway in the eye, Dr.
Cagan's research will further our understanding both of how the eye is made and
how structures of the body are properly assembled.