* 9604856
* Molecular Analysis of Mating Type Loci in Heterothallic and Homothallic Cochliobolus spp
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* B. Gillian Turgeon, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 09/30/2001
* USD 300,000.00

Turgeon 9604856 Filamentous fungi typically reproduce by both sexual and asexual
processes. Sexual ascomycetes may be either heterothallic (require a partner for
mating) or homothallic (mate without a partner). The term homothallic as used
for filamentous fungi means that a single individual is capable of completing
the sexual cycle, usually, but not always, because each nucleus carries both
mating type (MAT) genes. In the yeasts, homothallism refers to a change in
mating type in some of the cells within a culture of a formerly uniform mating
type, followed by mating of "switched" cells with "unswitched" cells. Certain
genera of filamentous ascomycetes contain both heterothallic and homothallic
species. One of these, Cochliobolus, a pathogen of maize, has been chosen for
this study because of its natural diversity of life styles (asexual vs. sexual,
heterothallic vs. homothallic, saprophytic vs. parasitic), ready availability of
field isolates from a variety of natural habitats and geographical locations,
and amenability to molecular genetic manipulation. Like other ascomycetes, the
type species (heterothallic C. heterostrophus) has a single mating type locus
(MAT) with alternate forms (called idiomorphs and designated MAT-1 and MAT-2)
which are each about a kilobase in size, unrelated at the nucleotide level, and
encode different transcriptional regulators. The idiomorphs are highly conserved
among all Cochliobolus species; in heterothallic species each strain carries a
single MAT idiomorph, whereas in homothallics each strain has both idiomorphs
within about a kilobase of each other. The sequences on both flanks of the
idiomorphs are nearly identical between mating types of the same species and
well conserved among species. However, it has recently been found in Neuropora
species that one flank of the idiomorph carries a variable region which is about
twice as large (7 kb) in homothallic species as in heterothallic (3-5 kb). In
addition, the variable region is adjacent to a short ( 57-59bp) constant region
which is highly conserved in both mating types and among all species. Although
the function of the MAT idiomorphs is clear, the significance of the variable
and constant regions is unknown and not easily tested in Neuropora because the
genus is not readily amenable to efficient gene targeting. Preliminary evidence
suggests variable and constant regions in Cochliobolus analogous to those in
Neurospora. One goal of this project is to utilize the efficient gene-targeting
ability of Cochilobolus to investigate the functions of these regions: are they
important in mating, in the homothallic vs. heterothallic life style, in
speciation, or are they dispensable for all of these processes? The analyses
will be performed by a combination of sequence analyses, heterologous expression
in various genetic backgrounds and by specific gene deletions, replacements, or
nucleotide substitutions. Another goal is to construct a phylogeny based on
sequences of MAT idiomorphs and flanking regions from a large number of
heterothallic and homothallic strains. The intention is to track the
evolutionary histories of the various Cochliobolus life styles mentioned above.
A practical benefit of the project will be the demonstration, if successful,
that a homothallic species can be converted to heterothallic by differential
disruption of its MAT genes. This would facilitate genetic analysis of
homothallic plant-pathogenic fungal species by forcing crosses and eliminating
selfs.