* 9604188
* Catalytic Mechanism of Vaccinia Virus Protein VP39 in       2
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1997,12/31/2000
* Paul Gershon, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 12/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9604188 Gershon Part 1-Technical RNA methyltransferase, viz. vaccinia virus
protein VP39, methylates the ribose 2'-O- of the penultimate nucleotide of the
mRNA cap structure leading to formation of the type I mRNA cap. The three-
dimensional structure of this enzyme, recently determined by the P.I., affords a
structural basis on which to investigate the catalytic mechanism of RNA
methylation. Since other structurally-defined methyltransferases methylate base
rather than sugar moieties, this system provides also an unusual opportunity to
examine nucleic acid ribose methylation. VP39 is a bifunctional protein whose
second function is as a poly(A) polymerase processivity factor, interacting with
both mRNA ends. This study investigates whether VP39 possesses more than a
single RNA binding site to satisfy its dual function, using competition assays
between polyadenylation and methyltransferase substrates for wild-type VP39 and
mutants with substituted surface residues at possible RNA binding sites.
Functional and RNA binding assays will also be done. Due to the greater affinity
of monomeric VP39 for capped than uncapped RNA, the effect on capped RNA binding
on VP39 interaction with its dimerization partner, VP55, will also be
investigated. Further experiments will aim at the study of the bimolecular
methylation reaction sequence for the interaction of VP39 with capped RNA, such
as the involvement of substrate ionization, and of specific residues in
catalysis. Whether cap 2'-0-methylation correlates with inversion at the methyl
carbon center will also be determined. Part 2 Non -Technical Vaccinia virus is a
benign poxvirus whose notoriety stems from its extensive use as the vaccine that
led to the first global eradication of a human disease, namely smallpox.
Vaccinia is virtually unique in its ability to express its genes autonomously,
without needing most of the machinery present in the cells it infects. It does
this by carrying its own analogs of host cell enzymes that it would other requi
re. Many of these analogs are much easier to study than the host cell
equivalent, because they can more easily be produced in large quantities and
purified, yet maintain an equally informative, molecular information. One of
these enzymes, named "cap specific 2'-O-methyltransferase", plays a role in the
expression of all genes, and is considered a prototype for this class of
enzymes. This study is aimed at understanding the precise mechanism by which the
enzyme operates.The three-dimensional structure of RNA methyltransferase, viz.
vaccinia virus protein VP39, affords a physical basis on which to investigate
the catalytic mechanism of RNA methylation. The elucidation of the interaction
of VP39 with capped RNA, structurally and biochemically, is one example of
advances in Molecular Biochemistry towards the understanding of reaction
mechanisms.