* 9604681
* Plant Protein Farnesyltransferase: Role in the              Cell Cycle Control
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1997,04/30/1998
* Zhenbiao Yang, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 04/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9604681 Yang Protein farnesyltransferase (FTase)-mediated attachment of a lipid
(i.e., farnesyl) moiety to proteins facilitates translocation to the plasma
membrane and thus activation of signaling proteins such as p21ras. As a result,
FTase plays an important role in many signaling pathways. Recent studies suggest
that FTase plays a critical role in abscisic acid signaling and cell cycle
control in plants. However, farnesylated proteins involved in these plant
signaling events have not been identified. In our preliminary studies, an
Arabidopsis Ras-like small GTP-binding protein (RLP1) was shown to be
farnesylated in vitro, and its full-length cDNA was sequenced. This represents
the first plant signaling protein known to be farnesylated and provides a strong
candidate for a farnesylated protein in ABA signaling or cell cycle control. In
this revised objective, we will investigate the function of this G-protein in
plants. Two specific experiments will be conducted. 1) RLP1 will be fused to the
jellyfish green fluorescence protein and expressed in tobacco BY-2 cells to
demonstrate in vivo farnesylation of RLP1 and to determine its subcellular
localization. 2) Dominant negative and constitutively active mutant forms of
RLP1 will be created by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in BY-2 cells to
directly assess its role in plant signaling pathways such as ABA or mitogenic
signaling. This work will provide significant new insight into the role of
farnesylation and farnesylated proteins in signal transduction. This project
will examine the a signal processes that are involved in regulating cell
division in plant cells. Understanding how plant cell division is regulated is
an important fundamental process with implications in biotechnology and
agriculture. Dr. Yang has discovered that one protein that may be involved in
signaling during cell division is modified with the attachment of a lipid. The
attachment and removal of the lipid may be one of the essential steps in the
signali ng process. This project will provide detailed information on the
correlation between lipid modification of the protein and the regulation of
plant cell division.