* 9604614
* US-Japan Center-to-Center Cooperative Research on Advanced  Technologies for Earthquake Disaster Mitigation
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2001
* Masanobu Shinozuka, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/2001
* USD 500,000.00

9604614 Shinozuka This is a three-year continuing award supporting a
collaboration between engineering research centers in the United States and
Japan. The U.S. principal investigator is Professor M. Shinozuka, Chairman of
the Southern California Earthquake Center's (SCEC) Standing Committee on
Advanced Technologies for Earthquake Disaster Mitigation. This Center is located
at the University of Southern California. The Japanese collaborator is Professor
K. Irikura who is located at Kyoto University's Disaster Prevention Research
Institute (DPRI). The project is jointly funded by the Japan Program of the
Division of International Programs and the Earthquake Hazard Mitigation Program,
Division of Civil and Mechanical Structures, Directorate for Engineering. The
grant aims at developing new strategies for earthquake disaster prevention and
mitigation based on experiences gained during the Kobe and Northridge
earthquakes. Research will involve utilizing advanced and emerging technologies
including smart materials, micro-sensors, precision actuators, micro-computers,
GPS, wireless and telemetric communication and advanced robotics technology. The
objectives of the project are: 1) to establish a university- based US-Japan
center-to-center research entity that will identify, develop, and promote
advanced technologies for earthquake disaster mitigation; 2) to develop a
computer- aided support system that provides prompt and effective emergency
response and crisis management decisions based on the rapid assessment of many
factors for coordination uses by national, regional and local governments; 3) to
develop a prototype integrated real-time monitoring system to detect post-
earthquake fire, damage, and malfunction; and 4) to develop prototype
intelligent robots to be used for search and rescue, fire-fighting, and
emergency demolition and repair. The Principal Investigators will be supported
by an Executive Committee consisting of eight researchers, four from each
country, with responsibility for major research management, policy, and strategy
development and a Technical Committee consisting of twenty experts on various
fields, ten from each country, with responsibility for advice on technical
issues. Three workshops will be held, one a year, to disseminate research
results and accelerate the development and utilization of the advanced
technologies in both countries and then throughout the world. This award
supports research visits within Japan by U.S. senior investigators, postdoctoral
researchers and graduate students.