* 9605050
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Finite Element             Superconvergence in Computational Mechanics
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Zhimin Zhang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 04/30/2001
* USD 35,989.00

9605050 Zhang This award supports extension of work funded under DMS 9626193 to
include cooperation with researchers at China's National Laboratory of
Scientific and Engineering Computing, Institute of Computational Mathematics.
Zhimin Zhang, Texas Tech University, intends to pursue collaboration with Shi
Zhongci, Director of the National Laboratory for Scientific and Engineering
Computing, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing. The U.S. PI plans to involve
one U.S. undergraduate and one U.S. graduate student in the project. The
students will join the P.I. in research visits to China to develop their own
research in computational mathematics. The primary objective of this project is
the study of derivative superconvergence and its recovery in finite element
computations. Such study is of fundamental importance in computational mechanics
in that engineers are interested in more effective ways to estimate stress,
strain energy, etc. At present, most commercial codes used in engineering are
required to have adaptive capabilities which allow computations to be performed
in the most efficient way. Knowledge of superconvergence is necessary for this
adaptivity design. The results of this research will have significant impact on
large-scale scientific computing problems arising in structural mechanics.
Support on the Chinese side will be provided by the National Natural Science
Foundation.