* 9605037
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Investigations of           Atmospheric Chemistry - Aerosols - Climates Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Venkatachalam Ramaswamy, NOAA/Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2000
* USD 8,300.00

9605037 Ramaswamy Description: This award supports the "U.S.- India Cooperative
Research: Investigations of Atmospheric Chemistry-Aerosols-Climate
Interactions". The collaborators are V. Ramaswamy, NOAA/Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL), Princeton, New Jersey and P.C.S. Devara, Indian
Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune, India. The PIs will study
aerosols and the effects of radiative forcing on the weather and climate
systems. Using a unique long-term data set collected at IITM, the PIs will
employ sophisticated radiative transfer modeling tools available at the GFDL to
determine the radiative effects of aerosols,typical of Indian subcontinental
urban locations. This research will improve current estimates of radiative
forcing which are inadequate due to limited knowledge of physical-chemical
variability in atmospheric composition at tropical urban sites. Scope: This
award provides initial support for a new U.S.-India research collaboration on
the environment and global change. The field of investigation is critical for
the South Asia region. This project promises to stimulate further international
collaborative research in a strategically important area. The project is
supported by NOAA/GFDL and the Division of International Programs. ***