* 9605826
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Chinese(vs. North       American) Perception and Decision Making Concerning Fairnessand Framework to Incorporate Culture into Decision Modeling
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* L Keller, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 02/28/1999
* USD 9,030.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Chinese (vs. North American) Perception and
Decision Making Concerning Fairness and a Framework to Incorporate Culture into
Decision Modeling In this doctoral dissertation research the PIs propose to
study fairness as a factor in decision making in the People's Republic of China
(PRC). Four experiments are planned. In the first experiment the doctoral
student will administer a questionnaire developed by his advisor and a co-
author. The goal is to study similarities and differences between American and
PRC students in their decision making concerning societal equity and public
health and safety risks. In the second study interviews will be conducted using
government officials and business executives to examine their decision processes
in situations involving fairness and the distribution of safety risks. In the
third study students will be surveyed to assess their attitudes regarding fair
prices in economic transactions. In the fourth study ordinary Chinese citizens
and students will be interviewed regarding fairness issues in their changing
society. A goal of this group of studies is to propose a framework to model
cultural influences on decision making. ¢Á ¢¥┐┤╣Á¢ /┤┤╝Á¢¢ ▓?¥©
Â┐&gt;┤/_Á&gt;¥/% ╣¢¢┐Á¢ ╝ÁÀ/╝┤╣&gt;À ¥©Á │©Á_╣¢¥╝` ?Â │/╝▓Á&gt;Á¢ /&gt;┤
║╝/│¥╣│/% ╣¢¢┐Á¢ ╝ÁÀ/╝┤╣&gt;À ¥©Á ┐¢Á ? Â │/╝▓Á&gt;Á¢ ╣&gt; ¥©Á │?&gt;¥╝?%%Á┤
¢`&gt;¥©Á¢╣¢ ?Â ╣_║?╝¥/&gt;¥ ?╝À/&gt;╣│ │?_║?┐&gt;┤¢