* 9605196
* Fourth International Marine Biotechnology Conference 1997   to be held in Sorrento, Paestrum, Capo Rizzuto, Otranto,    Pugnochiuso, and Rome, Italy; September 22-29, 1997
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Harlyn Halvorson, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* A Berry
* 07/31/1998
* USD 38,400.00

9605196 Kuzirian This award will enable U.S. scientists to participate in the
International Marine Biotechnology Conference (IMBC'97), which is to be held in
southern Italy from Sept. 22 through Sept. 29, 1997. The specific objectives of
IMBC'97 follow: a. Present the latest discoveries and applications of marine
science with an emphasis on biotechnology. b. Familiarize industrial and
academic scientists and biotechnology policymakers with advances in all aspects
of marine biotechnology. c. Bring together colleagues from all over the world so
that the latest science can be critically evaluated. d. Facilitate the
development of joint ventures and research partnerships by providing
opportunities for making contacts through scientific discussions and informal
social gatherings. e. Assemble a volume of extended abstracts so that the
science presented at this conference will be readily available. f. Provide
material that will lead to creative new ideas and applications for products and
profits. This innovative conference has been designed to develop a
multidisciplinary, highly interactive program. The topics chosen for the
conference reflect the great interest among scientists in exploring the nature
of biological interactions between organisms living in the diverse and often
extreme habitats of the marine world. Basic research on biological mechanisms
and molecular interactions related to a life in aquatic systems continues to
yield valuable information about fundamental biological principles. Such studies
on the processes and products of marine organisms have led to new and sometimes
unexpected applications in many fields - including medicine, production of
marine food and chemicals, and sequestration of mineral resources. The emerging
science of marine biotechnology is being applied to the management of marine
biological resources and to the monitoring and cleaning up of the marine
environment.