* 9605183
* Japan STA Program:  Non-Invasive Measurement of the         Dynamic Nature of Human Brain Functions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1997,08/31/1999
* Tom Holroyd, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 8,300.00

Holroyd 9605183 This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Tom Holroyd at the Behavior Control
Laboratory (BCL), National Institute of Bioscience and Human-Technology,
Tsukuba, Japan. Dr. Holroyd will work with Dr. Tsunehiro Takeda, director of the
BCL, on a research project entitled, "Non-invasive Measurement of the Dynamic
Nature of Human Brain Functions." The proposed research will investigate the way
that different brain areas interact during perceptual and behavioral tasks by
measuring the magnetic field of the brain. The techniques used are completely
non-invasive: the tissues of the head are transparent to magnetic fields,
allowing relatively accurate mapping of the magnetic field produced by
electrical activity in the brain, with millisecond time resolution. The research
focuses on the reorganization of brain processes, and is motivated by
theoretical work on pattern formation and change in complex systems. Changes in
a subject's perceptions or behavioral patterns will be experimentally induced,
and observations will be made of corresponding reorganization of the magnetic
field. By combining these observations with spatial information from control
conditions, researchers will be able to determine the dynamics of different
brain areas during the perceptual or behavioral reorganization. Reproducible
dynamic relations among interacting brain areas will provide insight into how
the brain organizes and reorganizes itself during typical cognitive functions.
***