* 9605828
* Japan JSPS Program:  First Feeding and Nutrient Uptake by   Paralavae of the Squid Todarodes Pacificus
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1997,07/31/1999
* John Bower, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 07/31/1999
* USD 3,000.00

Bower 9605828 This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. John Bower at Hokkaido
University, Hakodate, Japan. Dr. Bower will work with Dr. Yasunori Sakurai,
Associate Professor in the Faculty of Fisheries, on a research project entitled,
"First Feeding and Nutrient Uptake by Para-Larvae of the Squid Todarodes
Pacificus." The larvae of many soft-bodied marine invertebrates are apparently
capable of absorbing dissolved organic materials directly from sea water to meet
nutritional requirements. The proposed research will build upon existing
research and examine if hatchling squids of the family Ommastrephidae can
transport amino acids from sea water. Hatchlings reared through artificial
fertilization will be exposed to radio- labeled substrates in a sea water medium
to determine if an increase in radioactivity in the sea water medium occurs. To
investigate the relationship between influx and net flux, the uptake of amino
acids will be measured by determining the rate of removal of amino acids from
solution by high- performance liquid chromatography. In addition, the stomachs
of field-caught hatchlings will be examined to identify early prey. At present,
rearing ommastrephidae young in captivity is the only way to study early stages
of life. A further goal of this research is to develop a method to rear
ommastrephidae hatchlings for extended laboratory studies. If successful rearing
methods are developed, specific aspects of the early life stages of this
commercially important family can then be ascertained. ***