* 9605181
* US-India Cooperative Research: Laser and Plasma Deposition  and Adhesion of Diamond and Diamondlike Films, Award in     Indian and US Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Jagdish Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 05/31/2002
* USD 82,564.00

9605181 Narayan Description: This award is for the US-India Cooperative Research
research collaboration in materials science under the direction of Jagdish
Narayan, North Carolina State University, Raleigh and S.C. Agrawal, Indian
Institute of Technology, Kanpur. The research entitled Laser and Plasma
Deposition and Adhesion of Diamond and Diamondlike Films will Effect and
Specific Heat in Amorphous Alloys will determine the correlations between the
electrical and magnetic properties of metallic glasses. While considerable
progress has been made in cataloging and explaining electrical transport in
paramagnetic glassy metals, the relative importance of nonmagnetic processes and
those associated with magnetism and magnetic scattering processes in amorphous
magnetic alloys has not been completely established. The U.S. group has been
among the most active studying electron transport and surface chemistry of
nonmagnetic amorphous alloys, and the Indian group has been a mahor factor in
the study of electron transport in magnetic glassy metals. The expertise and
experimental capabilities of the two groups are highly complementary and will
combine well to accomplish the research objectives. Scope: In the United States
the study of amorphous metals had, at one time, been far more intensive than in
India. However, research priorities in the United States have shifted to other
areas. Presently, no research programs are funded solely for the study of
amorphous metals. The main effort on this topic in India and perhaps worldwide
will be performed by Majumdar and his group at Kanpur. U.S. collaboration will
insure access to major experimental research on amorphous metals, access to the
resulting technology at low cost, and the furthering of basic understanding on
transport in amorphous alloys. This award is jointly funded by the Division of
International Programs and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems. ***