* 9605028
* NSF-CGP Fellowship:  Development of Power System Intelligent Coordinated Control
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Kwang Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 06/30/2000
* USD 170,026.00

9605028 Lee This award provides funds to support a long-term research visit by
Dr. Kwang Y. Lee, Intelligent Distributed Controls Research Laboratory,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Pennsylvania State
University, for collaboration with Dr. Takashi Hiyama, Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. Their research
is concerned with the development of power system intelligent coordinated
control. The purpose of intelligent coordinated control is to improve power
generation reliability, economy, and safety through the implementation of modern
control technologies and artificial intelligence. The research will be conducted
primarily in the Kumamoto Electric Power Systems Laboratory at Kumamoto
University. During the visit, Dr. Lee also will be working with the Kyushu
Electric Power Company in experimenting with the power system intelligent
coordinated control concepts in its Power System Analysis Simulator. The U.S.
and Japanese collaborators have been engaged independently in parallel research
in this area and share a common interest in training students and other
researchers in the required skills to develop, test, and implement advanced
control techniques in actual power plants and power systems. The collaborators
expect the present collaboration to allow them to expand their current research
from the power plant to the power system level and integrate their various
capabilities for mutual benefit. This project is supported under the Science
Fellowship Program between the National Science Foundation and the Japan
Foundation Center for Global Partnership. ***