* 9605176
* US-Gabon Cooperative Research:  Molecular and               Physiological Approaches to the Study of Electrogenesis
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Carl Hopkins, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Alice W. Leeds
* 05/31/2000
* USD 45,036.00

This award supports a three-year collaborative research project between Dr.
Carl D. Hopkins, Professor of Neurobiology at Cornell University, and Dr. Brahim
Ibrahim, of the Department de Biologie at the Universite des Sciences et
Techniques in Gabon. The investigators will study waveform variations in the
electric organ discharges (EOD) of various species of mormyrid fishes to
determine the phylogenetic history of the variations and the roles that
evolution and sex differences have in the EOD waveform in order to produce an
understanding of the morphological and physiological basis for the variations.
The mormyrid fishes, which comprise the largest group of freshwater fish in
Africa, are only found in West Africa, and little research has been done on
them. This cooperative project combines the expertise in electric fish
neuroethology of Dr. Hopkins with Dr. Ibrahim's expertise in electrophysiology
and pharmacology. This study will contribute important new information to the
existing knowledge about the mormyrid fishes in West Africa and how they have
evolved. The grant will also provide support for a junior investigator to
participate in an international research activity. ?/¢¥???¥??Á í` ???????>À /
¢?__Á? ?Á¢Á/??© Á??Á??Á>?Á Â?? ??¢?¥?>À Â/??%¥` Â??_ ?>?Á?À?/??/¥Á ?>¢¥?¥?¥??>¢
¥©/¥ ©/?Á >?¥ ©/? / ?Á¢Á/??© Á??Á??Á>?Á Â?? ¥©Á?? ¢¥??Á>¥¢ ???????%?_
?_????Á_Á>¥¢ /¥ ¥©?¢Á ?>¢¥?¥?¥??>¢ ?/> ?Á Á>????/ÀÁ? />? ??¢?¥??Á ?©/>ÀÁ¢ ?> ¥©Á
Á>????>_Á>¥ ¥? Á>????/ÀÁ ¢¥??Á>¥¢ ¥? ???¢?Á ?/?ÁÁ?¢ ?> ?©Á_?¢¥?` ?Á¢?%¥