* 9605190
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Multiclass Queueing      Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Jiangang Dai, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/2001
* USD 12,412.00

9605190 Dai This award supports a three-year collaborative research project
between Dr. Jian-Gang Dai, Georgia Institute of Technology, and Dr. Bok Sik
Yoon, Hong-ik University, Seoul, Korea, on multiclass queuing networks. The
focus of this research is the investigation of several aspects of multiclass
queuing networks that arise from complex manufacturing systems. The scope of the
research will range from the development of fundamental mathematical models of
such networks to the computer implementation of the models for some real world
applications. Specific research topics to be investigated include the scheduling
of wafer fabrication lines, stability of multiclass queuing networks, Brownian
models under non-first in first out (non-FIFO) policies, heavy traffic
convergence, and computation of stationary distribution for a reflected Brownian
motion (RBM). Brownian models have been proved to be effective for the
approximate analysis of queuing networks. It has also been proved that FIFO
which most Brownian models to date employ may be unstable in some networks.
Brownian models also play important roles in both performance analysis and
optimal or near optimal scheduling of queuing networks. The Brownian
approximation will be used to analyze most queuing network models that are
interesting in practice. The computer implementation of the Brownian
approximation scheme will be used to predict the performances of a variety of
queuing networks, including those that arise in manufacturing and
telecommunication systems. This research effort will combine the expertise of
the U. S. and Korean research scientists in a project of mutual interest and
benefit. Korean participation is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF). This project adds an international cooperative dimension to
research supported by NSF Grant No. DMI-9457336. ***