* 9605063
* Undergraduate Research in Molecular Genetics
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Mark Muller, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* William R. Gordon
* 05/31/2000
* USD 150,000.00

9605063 Johnson This is an REU Site in the field of Molecular Genetics.
Participants will be recruited from high-quality institutions that focus
primarily on undergraduate education. The students will undertake an intense
10-week summer research program that introduces them to a research problem,
trains them in the experimental approaches that are used to attack the problem,
stimulates them to develop independence, and enhances their ability to
communicate scientific information to others. The research projects in which the
students will participate will focus on the use of molecular-biological
approaches to solve problems in genetics, cell and developmental biology.
Particular emphasis will be placed on the students' independent planning of
experiments, interpretation of experimental data and presentation of their
observations to other students and faculty. The REU students will participate in
the weekly meetings of each research group as well as the weekly REU seminar
series to share their experiences and broaden their exposure to different
research areas. At the end of the summer, the students will write a summary of
their experimental results and present their results to the entire department in
a poster format. The REU experience is designed to expose the students to an
intense yet rewarding research experience and to encourage them to pursue a
career in biological research.