* 9605200
* U.S.-Thailand Cooperation Research: Cave Fishes of Thailand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Richard Borowsky, New York University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 05/31/2000
* USD 64,936.00

9605200 Borowsky This is a 36-month award proposed by Dr. Richard Borowsky, New
York University collaborating with Professor Visut Baimai of Mahidol University
in Thailand. Dr. Borowsky requests funds for student support and for travel and
field costs in Thailand to carry out a project to assess the genetic diversity
of five cave fishes of the genera Noemacheilus, Homaloptera, and Barbus, and
their relationships to other close relatives of these fishes in Thailand. The
results from this study can provide an answer to the question of the origin of
cave fishes, their adaptations to cave life and, in particular their loss of
vision (regression evolution). This study addresses a very important fundamental
question in the origin of genetic diversity in cave fishes and will contribute
to Thailand's biodiversity research efforts. The Biodiversity Research and
Training Program of the Thailand National Science and Technology Development
Agency will provide matching support for the Thai students to allow them to
participate in this project. This project addresses two major focus areas: a
unique site in a remote area with little or no data, and supporting the
participation of a U. S. graduate student in international cooperative studies
in developing countries and the training of Thai students.