* 9610030
* Experimental &amp; Theoretical Studies of Selectivity &amp; Heats   of Adsorption of Gaseous Mixtures in Zeolites: Effect of    Pore Size and Electric Field
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Alan Myers, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1999
* USD 190,000.00

Abstract CTS 9610030 The PIs propose to develop theories of multicomponent
adsorption capable of making reliable predictions of selectivity and heats of
adsorption. Since reliable experimental data are scarce, the objective of this
proposal is to measure thermodynamic excess functions: the excess Gibbs free
energy ((Ge) and heat of mixing ((He). The excess Gibbs free energy contains
information about adsorbed-phase activity coefficients and the selectivity; the
heat of mixing is needed to determine the change in temperature of the system
during adiabatic operation of pressure-swing-adsorption (PSA) processes. These
excess functions of adsorbed mixtures will be determined with a microcalorimeter
which measures simultaneously the selectivity and the individual heats of
adsorption of the components of the mixture. Statistical mechanical theories of
adsorption lead naturally to the prediction of theoretical values of excess
functions. Therefore precise experimental data on selected real measures are
desirable as test material against which the usefulness of competing theories
can be judged. The systems chosen for initial studies are: 1. CH4 and C2H6 in
silicate at low loading. 2. CO2 and C2H6 in NaX. 3. CO2 and C2H4 in NaX. 4.
CHF2CHF2 (HFC-134) and CF3CH2F (HFC-134a) in Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs cation-exchanged
forms of X and Y zeolites. 5. CH4 and SF6 in cylindrical, one-dimensional pored
composed of 10, 12, and 14 membered rings. These five systems were selected to
isolate the principal variables which determine selectivity: the pore size and
electric field inside the micropores of the zeolite and the polarity, size, and
shape of the adsorbate molecules. The significance of the proposed measurements
is that they will provide a systematic way of handling the temperature
dependence of adsorption of single gases and multicomponent mixtures, which is
critical for the design of adsorptive separation processes.