* 9610049
* Structure in Power System Analysis and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* John Zaborszky, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Gwendolyn Owens
* 05/31/2001
* USD 188,497.00

ECS-9610049 Zaborszky In previous work the mathematical structure of the large
power system as differential-algebraic system with or without the presence of
hard limits has been studied in the context of an overall taxonomy. Along with
their mathematical structure, physical systems have a wide spread of physical
structure ranging from unstructured to hierarchical or very strict structures.
The large power system model has a very strong segmental (network) structure.
The dynamic equations typically separate into segments (which are physically
defined by the buses in the power system), tied together only through non-
dynamic relations (in the network). This geographic structure becomes of great
importance in questions related to control. In this project, along with
completing certain aspects of the mathematical theory, the taxonomy theory will
be studied for segmental systems in the context of control problems, specially
in the control of power systems. In view of the power system's geographic
structure many control problems can be addressed decentralized. For instance,
the problem of stabilizing control can be formulated as tracking a moving target
which has a single component for each segment and thus can be easily computed
locally. The systemwide stability of such an observation decoupled control will
be analyzed. The segmental structure of the power system also leads to various
clustering approaches built on rudimentary clusters of observation decoupled
single bus clusters. Clustered control schemes will be analyzed on the basis of
the taxonomy theory. The convergence and accuracy of various control approaches
will be studied and the most desirable approaches for various circumstances-such
as fast, medium and slow control (tasks) will be sought. The fast control
objectives are mostly connected to preserving the stability of the power system.
We have formulated it as a problem of tracking a moving target vector. This
objective readily breaks up into interconnected segmen tal problems and
identifies the stable equilibrium point when the tracking is successful (note
that it is not practical to identify the equilibrium on the time scale of the
disturbances fact conveniently ignored in most of the literature). However, the
equilibrium is found precisely at the end of successful tracking. This invites
the design of effective approximate tracking schemes which lead in this case to
precise results. It is important, however, to find such tracking schemes and
establish precisely their convergence. This will be done in the project. The
medium fast control for the problems of the automatic generation control (ACC)
readily settles into a three layer segmented scheme both for the traditional AGC
(equipment at individual buses, segments called Areas for individual power
companies connected with tie lines and nationwide setting of desired frequency
by NERC) and the new deregulated scheme (generating stations, national
transmission company and distribution companies). Although needs are different,
the structural similarity implies connections in the theory. These will be
analyzed and the most desirable schemes sought. Clustering of the large system
will be the basis of this work involving thorough and precise analysis and
technique development. New taxonomy concepts such as observability region and
controllability region within the state-parameter space will be defined and
analyzed at the thoroughness and precision corresponding to our earlier Taxonomy
work. The ongoing development of the power system away from local power
companies and regulation connected AGC control to layers of generation,
transmission and distribution companies based on a real time commodity trading
nationally makes this proposed study quite important and potentially very
useful. At present the final shape of the reorganized system which will
eventually dictate the structure of its control needs is not yet emerging. Hence
the flexibility of the taxonomy approach which can accommodate a grea t variety
of needs and structure will make it an ideal vehicle for searching for the most
desirable structures and objectives.