* 9610545
* Hydromechanical Evaluation of Flow Behavior in Rock         Foundations of Concrete Gravity Dams
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Gabriel Fernandez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 05/31/2000
* USD 195,755.00

9610545 In the U. S. and world-wide, there are many existing dams that need to
be inspected for potential deterioration of materials, to verify compliance with
upgraded design requirements, or to respond to long term loss in performance or
safety. In response to the increasing demand for electricity, new dams will be
needed around the world. The foundations of large dams are key to the
performance of the overall structure. Changes in stress levels (e.g. from
changes in reservoir levels or temperature) can be responsible for changes in
permeability due to joint opening and closure. Joint and rock mass permeability
affects the magnitude and distribution of the uplift pressure at the foundation,
as well as the efficiency of grout and drainage curtains. The uplift pressure,
in turn, determines the stability of the dam against sliding. Thus, development
of a realistic uplift pressure distribution is a significant consideration in
the design of new dams and/or in the evaluation of existing dams to satisfy
higher seismic or hydraulic design requirements. The research includes: 1) case
studies of joint opening and closure under foundations of dams; 2) development
of realistic uplift pressure distributions under flood conditions; 3)
improvements in monitoring plans for dam foundations; 4) determinations of
field-scale hydromechanical properties for the foundation rock mass and the
dam/rock interface; 5) investigate the influence of factors such as dam geometry
on dam performance and effectiveness of various remedial measures; and 6)
improve understanding on the nature and basic characteristics of flow through
jointed rock. ***