* 9610312
* Dissertation Research:  Agricultural Change in the Bolivian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1997,11/30/1999
* Clark Erickson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1999
* USD 3,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Clark Erickson, Mr. John Walker will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. As part of Dr. Erickson's larger project, Mr. Walker
will examine the practice of prehistoric raised field agriculture in the Lllanos
de Moxos region of eastern Bolivia. This area is located in the low-lying Amazon
basin and characterized by large expanses of carefully constructed and now-
abandoned agricultural fields. Earth was dug to create drainage ditches and then
mounded to form raised areas suitable for agriculture. This technique was widely
used in Western South America as well as the lowlands of Middle America and
experimental work has indicated that such systems can provide effective means
for crop production. In South America this approach was discontinued in either
prehistoric or early historic times and in Bolivia people now graze cattle on
naturally growing grasses which cover field surfaces. Mr. Walker wishes to
understand how raised fields were integrated into a larger social and economic
context and also why they were abandoned. A number of explanations have been
proposed. They include a postulated prehistoric breakdown in social
organization: climate change related to an El Nino event: and either the direct
or indirect influence of Spanish colonization. To address these questions Mr.
Walker will use aerial photographs to locate and verify on the ground the
position and extent of raised fields. He will conduct a surface survey to locate
habitation sites, determine their relationship to agricultural features and
reconstruct population density. He will also carry out limited excavations
within the fields themselves. It is essential to determine both when the fields
were constructed and abandoned and this can be extremely difficult to do. NSF
support will allow Mr. Walker to obtain radiocarbon dates on organic materials
recovered in the course of excavation. This research is important for several
reasons. It will shed new light on subsistence adaptations in inhospitable
lowland tropical environments. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists and assist in training a promising young scientist. including
faunal remains in an excellent state of preservation. Although many
archaelogical sites have been discove red in this part of Alaska, the Cape
Addington rockshelter is unique in the protected nature of the sediments and the
high degree of preservation of the contents. Based on the presence of well dated
beachline features, it i quite possible that the shelte r preserves terminal
Pleistocene/Early Holocene materials. It thus would have the potential to shed
light on the entire prehistory of the region. One of the primary goals for
fieldwork during the summer of 1977 will be to etermine the total depth of the
archaeological deposit. A trench will be excavated in stratigraphic units to
bedrock and all cultural material as well as shells, faunal and floral remains
will be collected. Surface mapping will also take place. Material ill be
identified and samples s ubmitted for radiocarbon dating. Isotopic analysis of
shell will permit investigation of climate change. Coastal Alaska is of
anthropological interest for several reasons. It is highly likely that the
earliest humans to ener the New World from Asia util ized a route through this
region and Dr. Moss' work has potential to shed new light on the peopling of the
New World. Rich coastal resources permitted hunting and gathering peoples to
reach a level of cultural complexity unnown elsewhere in the world at this level
of subsistence and for decades anthropologists have studied this unique
phenomenon. In Alaska however knowledge is severely limited because of the
generally poor state of archaeological preservation and thereforethe discovery
of a `dry` rock s helter is extremely important. This research will provide
unique data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also, hopefully, set the
stage for a larger research project. q ^