* 9610387
* Residual Spectrum of Quasi-Split Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Henry Kim, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2000
* USD 53,200.00

Kim 9610387 A central problem in the theory of automorphic forms is to decompose
square integrable automorphic forms of a reductive group. While the continuous
part of the spectrum can be deduced from the theory of Eisenstein series, the
discrete spectrum is very hard to study. It is the purpose of Arthur's trace
formula to study this part. However, the trace formula will not separate the
cuspidal part from the residual part, and one needs to study the residual
spectrum by computing the residues of Eisenstein series. Moreover, the first
exotic example of the residual spectrum of the split group G_2, which was
discovered by Langlands and further studied later by Moeglin and Waldspurger,
was significant to Arthur in formulating his conjectures. Computing residues of
Eisenstein series is a very difficult problem and requires both the knowledge of
the poles of corresponding automorphic L-functions, as well as handling very
difficult computational combinatorics. These computations are already highly
non-trivial even for rank 2 split groups. On the other hand, Arthur's
conjectures are aimed at parametrizing the discrete spectrum in terms of
representations of a certain profinite arithmetic group. While parametrizing
most of it requires the introduction of this hypothetical group, there are parts
of it that can be parametrized by our existing knowledge. In particular, this is
the case if the Eisenstein series is built out of minimal parabolics. Moeglin
proved that for split classical groups, the local components of the residual
spectrum coming from the trivial character of the torus, are parametrized by the
distinguished unipotent orbits O of the dual group and Springer(O) , where
Springer(O) is the set of characters of the component group that are in the
image of the Springer correspondence. The PI verified that the same thing
happens for the split group G_2 and plan to show that the same thing would
happen for all split groups. The fact that the component group of the Arthur
parameter for G_2 is non-abelian explains the "bizarre" multiplicity condition
in Moeglin-Waldspurger's work on G_2. The PI showed, in joint work with F.
Shahidi, that for an arbitrary unitary character, the local components of the
residual spectrum attached to certain unipotent orbits, are parametrized by the
Knapp-Stein R-group of the character. In general, the Knapp-Stein R-groups are
not enough. We have to combine the R-group and Springer(O). In this way, the PI
plans to show that the quadratic unipotent Arthur parameters in the sense of
Moeglin exhaust the residual spectrum coming from the torus. The investigator
will carry the above projects to quasi-split groups. A similar thing happens to
U(n,n), but the global Weil group W_F comes into play. Therefore we expect that
the action of the global Weil group will play a role in parametrizing the
residual spectrum. The groups U(n,n) and E_7,3 all have a relative root system
of type C_n, and the technique of symplectic groups will be applied directly.
This proposal is in the part of mathematics known as the Langlands program. The
Langlands program is part of Number Theory. Number Theory is the study of the
properties of the whole numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics. From
the beginning problems in number theory have furnished a driving force in
creating new mathematics in other diverse parts of the discipline. The
Langland's program is a general philosophy that connects number theory with
calculus; it embodies the modern approach to the study of whole numbers. Modern
Number Theory is very technical and deep, but it has had astonishing
applications in areas like theoretical computer science and coding theory.