* 9610416
* SGER: Paleogenetics of Quaternary Coleoptera
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Rebecca Reiss, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/1999
* USD 7,724.00

9610416 Reiss A central issue in biogographic research is the response of
organisms to climatic changes. This research project addresses the question of
the molecular genetic response of organisms to climate change. It is proposed
that paleogenetics, the combination of paleontological and genetical techniques,
will detect genetic changes over time and will facilitate the measurement of the
force of climate change as an agent of natural selection. Th late Quaternary is
a epoch that exhibits climatic warming and has a good fossil record. Especially
well represented are species of Coleoptera (beetles), many of which are present
in extant populations (Elias 1994). DNA sequence analysis on extant populations
and fossil assemblages from this period of climate change will allow an
assessment of the effect of climate change on the genetic constitution of
natural populations. This rsearch will contribute to predictions regarding
future global warning. This project will continue molecular biogeographic work
on alpine-arctic beetle species begun as a postdoctoral research project (Reiss,
unpublished data). Dr. A. Ashworth and Dr. D. Schwert (Quaternary Entomology
Lab, Fargo, ND) will continue to collaborate and provide both extant and fossil
specimens. Preliminary efforts at amplifying DNA from fossil chitin collected
from bogs in the midwestern United States are encouraging, but are as of yet
unconfirmed. The DNA in fossil chitin isolated from bogs may be sufficiently
degraded to preclude extensive molecular analysis. However, a rich source of
well-preserved fossil chitin is available from packrat midden researchers
(Betancourt et al. 1990). Collaborators Dr. J. Betancourt (U.S. Geological
Survey) and Dr. S. Elias (University of Colorado) have agreed to provide fossil
beetle specimens sorted from packrat middens. This material is carbon-dated, and
an independent assessment of the local ecossystem is available from studies of
plant macrofossils present in the same midden. Packrat urine has dehydrating and
antimicrobial activity, which preserves DNA structure. Other researchers have
isolated plant and mammalian DN from middens. It is anticipated that arthropod
DNA is also preserved. The first experiments will optimize DNA isolation and
amplication techniques using an abundant fossil beetle species. Contemporary
material is available to confirm that amplified DNA is from beetles, and not
from other contaminating DNA sources. In order to detect genetic changes in the
relatively short time span represented in the midden record, the mitochondrial
DNA rgions amplified will be those that evolve quichly, such as the A+T rich
region, which contains the origin of replication (Simon et al. 1994). Once
molecular techniques are established, attention will be focused on species whose
dispersal has been traced through time in the Chihuahuan Desert. A previously
developed biogeographic model will be used as a guide (Elias 1992), and the
molecular genetic data will be used to follow the movement of species through
time. By comparing extant populations with fossil assemblages, the proportion of
genetic variation represented in the fossil record will be calculated. Questios
regarding the correlation of species richness and genetic variation will also be
addressed. The tools to accurately calculate the microevolutionary rates of
specific regions will be developed and used to detect changes in rate of
response to climate change. Eventually, this data will be used to predict
response of species to contemporary global change.