* 9610501
* Dynamics and Spectroscopy in the Semiclassical and Extreme  Quantum Regimes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Eric Heller, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 08/31/2000
* USD 462,700.00

*** 9610501 HELLER The Theoretical and Computational Ahemistry program is
supporting Professor Eric Heller at Harvard University to work on scattering
theory. First, Heller will take a new look at scattering theory at extremely low
energies. This regime has become important because of laser cooling and trapping
of atoms, as well as carrier gas cooling and trapping of molecules. In this
"cold collision" regime, Heller will study ultra-low energy, three-atom
collisions and recombination (molecule formation), proximity resonances, which
are a new class of low energy multiple scattering resonances related to Efimov
states, and ultra-low energy molecule-molecule collisions, with an eye to the
formation of long lived resonances. Common to these areas is the concept of
"boundary condition engineering," wherein the effect of short range potentials
can in fact be ascribed to a change in boundary conditions on the wavefunction.
In a related study Heller will extend and apply the theory of multiple
scattering and conductance in "quantum corrals" and other arrangements or arrays
of atoms into walls and sheets. He will also investigate novel approaches to
dynamical tunneling in polyatomic molecules, and its effect on high resolution
spectra, deflection of beams in inhomogeneous fields, and quantum control in
Landau-Zener crossing. This work, like the ultra-low energy scattering theory
above, addresses the extreme quantum regime. In a second class of problems, at
the opposite end of the scale at higher energy, Heller will extend his
fundamental research in semiclassical approximations to chaotic systems to
include the theory of scarring by classical periodic orbits and semiclassical
quantization of chaos. In particular he is looking for an appropriate nonlinear
theory of wavefunction scarring. Finally this work will undertake several
projects involving fundamental issues of quantization, including quantization on
constrained non-Euclidian spac es, and quantization of chaos in maps such as the
whisker map. This research involves fundamental studies of quantum mechanics,
and the profound effects quantum mechanics has on matter, as energy is lowered
almost to absolute zero. At very low temperatures, matter wave-like behavior
dominates over particle-like behavior. Wavelengths get extremely long. The waves
have to obey "boundary conditions," which are rules on how the waves behave when
one atom or molecule approaches another, or approaches a wall. At ultra-low
energies these boundary conditions are uncommonly important, often determining
the way the matter behaves. In this strange "tail wagging the dog" regime,
anything that can be done to change the boundary conditions may have profound
effects. For example, normal boundary conditions in quantum mechanics forces
minimum energy upon the system known as the zero point energy. Removing the zero
point energy, by using walls made of special atoms, may drastically affect the
usefulness of small devices such as wires, and may profoundly affect the outcome
of the slow collision of two cold molecules. Related work involves the issue of
quantization; that is, how do we take a given system and correctly endow it with
the proper quantum behavior. There are rules on how to do this in simple cases
but the rules are ambiguous when constraints are present, for example (requiring
that a given bond length to be a certain fixed value). Heller is developing some
ideas which bootstrap the ambiguous cases as limits of the easy cases, thus
removing the ambiguity. ***