* 9610297
* Engineering Research Equipment: Advanced Servohydraulic TestInstrument for In-Situ Ice Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* John Dempsey, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel C. Davis
* 03/31/1999
* USD 65,600.00

9610297 Dempsey The Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at
Clarkson University will purchase an Advanced Servohydraulic Test Instrument For
In-Situ Ice Testing which will be dedicated to support research in engineering.
The research will be used for several research projects, including in particular
the constitutive behavior and fracture of single- cum-multiple ice crystals,
scaling laws for the fracture and constitutive behavior of sea ice and
structural composites, and the time dependent creep and fracture of freshwater
ice. This advanced test instrument will have to be constructed by the assembly
and fabrication of specific components; it is not possible to purchase an "off-
the-shelf" in-situ ice testing instrument with the capabilities required. The
purpose is to test ice as it exists in nature -- with the resident temperature,
grain size, and density profiles, as well as the varied grain orientations that
occurs with the growth of an ice sheet-at the warm (just a few degrees below
freezing) temperatures that are of practical interest in ice engineering. It is
very difficult to test sea ice above -15 C, or freshwater ice above -8 C, in the
conventional laboratory setup because the ice is changing as a material.
Impurities on the grain boundaries are melting, brine pockets are changing shape
and migrating downward. In addition, from the viewpoint of an adequate specimen
size, the test specimen sizes that can be tested in the laboratory have been
shown to be sub-size. For this reason, there exists an urgent, need for an
advanced in-situ ice test instrument at Clarkson University to augment the
research currently being carried out for several funded projects. The test
instrument will be used to test ice grown in a specially designed 3 x 3 x l.2 m
test basin.