* 9610442
* Summer Research Program in Chemical Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Michael Sepaniak, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 03/31/2000
* USD 220,000.00

Prof. Kelsey D. Cook of the University of Tennessee is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program as the Principal Investigator for this
Research Opportunity Award (ROA). This award enables visiting faculty from
institutions involved primarily in undergraduate education to come to the
Tennessee campus for a summer research experience in analytical chemistry.
Important additional components of the program include interactions with
scientists at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and an interface with summer
undergraduate research programs at Tennessee which can include students from the
campus of the visiting faculty member. Among the goals are enhanced quality of
undergraduate education in chemistry at the visitors' home institutions,
enhanced student interest in careers in analytical chemistry, exchange of ideas
concerning teaching matters, and career-enhancing opportunities for under-
represented groups. Visitors are able to participate in a research project
available from among a dozen research programs of faculty at Tennessee and staff
at Oak Ridge all of which are focused on various aspects of analytical
chemistry. The main thrust of this project is focused on the scientific
infrastructure. By providing a summer research experience for visiting faculty
from undergraduate institutions that have not had a research experience for
their students, curriculum improvements at those institutions can be encouraged
and positive changes in the environment to encourage students to pursue careers
in chemistry result.