* 9610219
* CRB: The Impact of Forest Fire Management on the Population Structure of Crotaphytus collaris
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2002
* Alan Templeton, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2002
* USD 242,000.00

9610219 Templeton Is landscape management a more effective and efficient
approach to the conservation of endangered species and habitats than strategies
which focus solely on the species or habitats themselves? Few studies have
actually documented the impact of landscape management upon endangered or
threatened species. Dr. Alan Templeton, of Washington University, proposes to
study the impact of fire management at the landscape level on the state-
threatened species, the eastern collared lizard (Crotaphytus collaris). The
eastern collared lizard is found on Ozark glades-barren rocky outcrops that
represent a desert or dry prairie-like microhabitat. The suppression of forest
fires in the Ozarks has allowed trees to invade and shade over the glades,
resulting in the local extinction of collared lizards and other species unique
to the glade habitats. Past work by Dr. Templeton and others has shown that
collared lizards could thrive when translocated into glades restored by clearing
and burning, but a restored glade was never colonized spontaneously by the
lizards even when nearby source populations were available. How did collared
lizards get to glades in the first place? The answer may lie in one recent and
drastic change in the Ozarks-active suppression of fire. Historically, fires not
only maintained the glade habitat, but also maintained an open woodland habitat.
With the recent suppression of fires, the forest now has a thick understory that
may inhibit dispersal of collared lizards. By burning the entire landscape
(forests and glades), it may be possible to restore both glade habitats and the
ability of glade species to disperse. The Peck Ranch, in the Ozarks, has been
the site of past glade restoration work. Starting in 1984, lizard populations
were translocated there with great success. Nevertheless, there was still no
dispersal among the translocated populations and no colonization of unoccupied
but restored glades (some as close as 64 meters). In collaboration with the
Missouri Department of Conservation, some preliminary landscape burns were
initiated in 1994 on the Peck Ranch. Following a burn in 1994 and a second burn
in 1996 highly significant increases have occurred in both dispersal among glade
populations and colonization of new glades. Dr. Templeton proposes to continue
following the fate of the lizard populations in the burn areas with both genetic
surveys as well as traditional mark/recapture studies. The genetic and
mark/recapture data will allow rigorous tests about the dynamics of dispersal,
gene flow and colonization at several different habitat and geographical scales.
These studies ultimately will allow a detailed examination and rigorous testing
of three interrelated issues fundamental to much of conservation biology: local
extinction and recolonization, habitat fragmentation, and range expansion into
restored areas.