* 9610227
* Cation Radicals in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Nathan Bauld, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

The Organic Synthesis Program supports Professor Nathan L. Bauld's
investigations of the chemistry of cation radicals in solution. Professor Bauld,
of the Department of Chemistry of the University of Texas at Austin, is
developing a convenient mechanistic criterion for distinguishing electrophilic
additions to alkene pi bonds from additions proceeding via initial electron
transfer reactions. Formation of homobenzylic cations through addition of
electrophiles to aryl vinyl ethers and sulfides, wherein the alkene is insulated
from the aromatic ring by virtue of the heteroatom, correlates with the Hammett
sigma value, while one-electron oxidation of such substrates correlates with the
Hammett-Brown sigma-plus value. In contrast, when the alkene is directly
attached to an aryl ring, both protonation and ionization correlate
preferentially with sigma-plus. Professor Bauld is developing a unique set of
substituent parameters which promise significantly better correlations for
cation radical formation, permitting the distinction between electrophilic and
electron transfer reactions of styrene derivatives. A new addition
polymerization strategy based upon sequential cation radical reactions offers an
attractive route to Diels-Alder and other cycloaddition polymers and will be
explored mechanistically and as a method for the synthesis of new materials.
Professor Nathan L. Bauld, of the Department of Chemistry of the University of
Texas at Austin, with support from the Organic Synthesis Program, carries out
studies of the formation and reaction chemistry of two classes of reactive
molecules, one (`cations`) bearing a net positive charge, the other (`cation
radicals`) having a positive charge and also containing an unpaired electron in
addition to those electrons involved in forming the chemical bonds in the
molecule. He is developing a set of parameters to describe the reactions which
can lead to the formation of either of these classes of molecules, determining
which types of molecules lead to simple cations and which to cation radicals.
The importance of these unusual species is highlighted by Professor Bauld's
investigations of a new method for the formation of polymeric materials based
upon the reactions of cation radicals. This chemistry promises to afford both
new materials and milder routes to known materials displaying a range of
important properties.