* 9610249
* Maximizing Utility of Medical Imagery via Image Registration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2002
* Eric Grimson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Junku Yuh
* 08/31/2002
* USD 520,000.00

This research seeks to achieve a deeper understanding of the critical computer
vision components and techniques needed to develop a new generation of image
guided surgery systems. Such systems are important to the successful use of the
emerging class of minimally invasive surgical procedures. Effective use of image
guidance will improve the accuracy of such procedures, broaden the range of
applicable procedures, and enable interactive patient-specific anatomical
modeling. The key computer vision issues to be addressed are segmentation, data
registration, instrument tracking and flexible modeling of structures. This
research will develop methods for utilizing anatomical atlases and other
anatomic knowledge, to provide structure-specific segmentation templates. Such
atlases will need to be registered to the patient's data set, requiring new
registration algorithms, that deal with flexible and deformable structures.
Motion tracking algorithms are needed to monitor the position of surgical
instruments within the operating field. By utilizing Mutual Information based
registration algorithms, this proposal will develop tracking methods that match
models of the surgical instruments to passive views of the operating field,
enabling 3D tracking of those instruments. Finally, the tracked position of the
surgical instruments, coupled with detected variations in images of the surgical
field itself, the 3D models of the patient's anatomy will be automatically
updated to reflect removal of tissue and changes in position of anatomical
structures.