* 9610248
* Effects of Spatial Inhomogeneity on Nonlinear Pattern       Forming Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Robert Behringer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Foss
* 08/31/2000
* USD 225,000.00

This is an investigation of the effects of spatial inhomogeneities in both
thermally driven convection and Taylor vortex flow (TVF). The investigation will
consider both porous media convection (PMC) and Rayleigh-Benard convection
(RBC). The experiments on PMC will be a continued exploration of the effects of
media spatial structure on both pattern selection and stability-and the
consequent, often large, effects on heat and impurity transport. This work will
relate pattern selection to pore structure, for both pure fluids and binary
mixtures. Regarding RBC, the experiments will involve horizontal variations in
both the layer thickness and in the temperature profile. Related experiments
will address similar effects in Taylor vortex flow (TVF) where the radial gap,
(delta)R, between the inner and outer cylinder varies. The advantage of this
flow is that the first pattern-forming instability (when only the inner cylinder
rotates) is to rolls aligned along the cylinder axis-therefore, the
complications of directional degeneracy are removed. It is envisioned that
experiments on different hydrodynamic systems with control over spatial
variations in different ways, will yield broad insight into the effects of
spatial variations on such flows. In the past, there has been some work focusing
on slow spatial variations of parameters or periodic variation of parameters,
but very little on the effects of broad-band random spatial variations, a
particularly important issue for PMC. There are a number of important
applications for this work including heat transfer devices, insulation, and the
flow of contaminants in ground water when there are temperature or concentration
gradients. In most practical applications involving heat and mass flows, the
systems are far from the usually studied idealizations, and the need for more
information on imperfect systems is considerable. Recently developed
experimental techniques will allow experimenters to non-invasively image
patterns in PMC, leading to im portant new insights into the effects of the
medium structure on pattern selection. Particle imaging velocimetry (PIV) will
be used to study TVF.