* 9610495
* Novel Reactivity, Structures, Properties and Materials      Based on Sulfonimides, Sulfones and Iodine Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1997,10/31/2001
* William Pennington, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 10/31/2001
* USD 270,000.00

Dr. Darryl D. DesMarteau, III, Department of Chemistry, Clemson University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for research into the reactivity, properties, and materials
based on sulfonimides. Perfluorinated ionomers (ion clustering polymers) and
perfluorinated ionenes (polyelectrolytes containing ionic groups in a polymer
main chain) incorporating the superacid bis((perfluoroalkyl)sulfonyl)imide and
isoelectronic sulfone functions will be prepared. Stable N-fluoro derivatives
will then be obtained by the reaction of the ionomers with elemental fluorine.
These polymers will contain ionic clusters embedded in a fluorcarbon matrix and
the cavities, where the clusters reside, will be used as microreactors to form
dispersed nanoscale particles of, for example, CdSe. Using analogies to
molecular sulfonimides, the polymers will be developed as acid catalysts. Also
based on analogy to the sulfonimides, fluoroalkyl iodonium salts will be
developed as aqueous phase alkylating reagents. Using these reagents fluoroalkyl
analogs of amino acids and other biochemically interesting compounds will be
prepared. The systems to be studied in this project are being investigated for
their potential as polymer electrolytes in fuel cells and battery applications,
as media in which nanoscale materials can be formed, and as polymer based
reagents. One objective is the design of new catalysts for a number of `acid
catalyzed` processes (petroleum refining, for example, often uses acidic
catalysts). Another is to design ways to introduce fluorine containing groups
into biological molecules.