* 9610098
* Pilot HGDP: Banking, Sequencing, and Haplotyping of ArchivalHuman DNA Samples
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2000
* Andrew Clark, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 03/31/2000
* USD 81,400.00

There is widespread interest in having available a representative understanding
of the amount and geographical distribution of human biological variation. One
way to obtain such information is to collect samples from human populations
around the world. In addition, many laboratories in nations around the world
already house collections that were made in the past. These 'archival'
collections could be an important resource for the future study of human
variation, and some of the data could not be collected again, because the
populations no longer exist, or the material was from burials, or because of
cost. However, archival material is often limited in amount or preservation
quality and many questions we would like to ask of genetic data today cannot be
asked without large amounts of DNA (genetic material). Fresh samples can be
manipulated in the laboratory so that the cells can be grown continually,
producing an open-ended supply of DNA, but this cannot be done from dead cells
or material in poor preservation. We are working on methods for obtaining large
amounts of DNA from such material by making copies of the DNA in an enzymatic
(non-living) manner. When this is done, archival materials could be as available
as other types of material. We will amplify, in this way, a substantial number
of DNA samples from Amazonian and Central American populations that are of
widespread interest and anthropological importance. These would be made
available to the HGDP DNA bank when that is formally established, so that the
samples would be widely available to scientists studying human variation and
population history. The methods could also be applied to fresh samples that were
very small in quantity (cells from cheek swabs, for example). Archival samples
may, however, be degraded in such a way that obtaining long DNA sequences from
haplotypes (single chromosomes) could be difficult to obtain. We will work on
methods for obtaining such longer sequences, using a gene related to lipid (fat)
metabolism, called Lipoprotein Lipase (LPL), as a case in point, because we have
extensive data on variation in this gene from other studies. Mutant forms of the
LPL gene may be related to human health (heart disease). This work will
demonstrate or develop methods for obtaining such long sequences, but will in
itself also provide a picture of the global variation in this gene, adding
Amerindian variation to that already being documented for other populations.