* 9612502
* Using Ensembles to Identify Observations Likely to Improve  Forecasts
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Craig Bishop, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 291,369.00

The Black Forest Consortium, a group of fifteen New Yorkarea academic
institutions,seeks funds to construct a modern research and training facility at
its Field Station, the 1500-hectare (3750-acre) Black Rock Forest. Black Rock
Forest is located in the Hudson Highlands,80 km (50 miles) north of New York
City, and possesses a wide variety of terrestrial and aquatic habitats for
study. It has been carefully protected and managed for nearly a century, and has
been utilized by the Black Rock Forest Consortium since 1989. The Forest has
become a focal point for scientific field studies and education for thousands of
faculty and students from Consortium institutions. Despite many natural features
that makes it a logical location for scientific field work, the Black Rock
Forest lacks suitable research and training facilities. An imminent increase in
scientific activity is expected due to the creation of a new BRF Consortium
member, the Center for Environmental Research and Conservation (CERC) at
Columbia University. The CERC initiative will be enhanced by the creation of
seven new faculty and three new postdoctoral positions in biology, ecology, and
other conservation-related fields. A major component of CERC will be increased
scientific focus on the Black Rock Forest and intensive field training. The
Consortium has designed a new, integrated headquarters structure to b e
constructed at the Forest in three phases. Phase I, the focus of this proposal,
will contain research labs, student lab/classrooms, administrative offices, and
a data control center at the hub of an extensive environmental monitoring
network. It is expected that this facility will become a intensively used for
scientific research and training.