* 9612738
* High Resolution Studies of Solar Flares, Active Regions,    Prominences and the Quiet Sun at Centimeter and Millimeter  Wavelengths
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Mukul Kundu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul A. Evenson
* 02/28/2001
* USD 507,291.00

This project continues studying many areas of solar physics able to be addressed
by radio observations. Using primarily three radio telescopes (i.e., the Very
Large Array of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, the Berkeley-Illinois-
Maryland Millimeter Array at Hat Creek, and the Nobeyama Radioheliograph), the
PI will continue analyzing flares observed over the past few years, and non-
flare studies appropriate to the current minimum phase of the solar cycle.
Specifically, the PI will: (1) compare photospheric magnetic fields with high-
quality VLA images, deducing the presence of strong currents from extrapolated
coronal fields in determining the magnetic field in the active region corona;
(2) study the large scale structure of the X-ray corona above strong sunspot
magnetic fields associated with microwave gyroresonance emission; (3) study limb
darkening, active region filament channels, bright prints and networks in
detail; (4) study evolution of active regions in microwaves in relation to their
flare productivity; (5) use simultaneously obtained imaging data to study the
X-ray counterparts of type II bursts; (6) study filament eruptions in X-rays,
microwaves and their relations to coronal mass ejections; and (7) observe both
microwave and meterwave radio emission associated with dynamic coronal X-ray
jets.