* 9612895
* INDOEX - Field Experiment in the Indian Ocean: Continuous   Measurements of Aerosol Chemical, Physical, and Optical     Properties in the Marine Boundary Layer at Male,Indian Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2001
* Joseph Prospero, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2001
* USD 421,053.00

9612895 Prospero The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) is an international field
experiment with participation from France, Germany, India, the Netherlands, and
the United States. The main effort under the U.S. component focuses on assessing
the role of sulfates and other continental aerosols in global radiative forcing
and is being supported jointly by the Department of Energy and the National
Science Foundation. In addition, complementary studies involving investigations
of a variety of related chemical and radiative processes will be undertaken by
scientists from other federal agencies and other international partners. The
composite observing system consists of a wide range of platforms, from ships to
aircraft, as well as surface-based and balloon measuring systems, and satellite
data. The main part of the three year effort will be a four-month intensive
field phase which begins January 1999. The ultimate goal of this program is to
obtain a better understanding of the decadal and longer time scale climate
forcing. The equatorial Indian Ocean during the northeast winter monsoon season
provides a unique natural laboratory for this experiment. The experimental area
is probably the only place in the world where an air mass which has been
modified by intense sources of continental aerosols, anthropogenic trace
species, and their reaction products (e.g., sulfates and ozone) from the
northern hemisphere comes into contact with the pristine air of the southern
hemisphere, which has been transported via cross equatorial monsoonal flow, at
the Intertropical Convergence Zone. The juxtaposition of these two very distinct
air masses will allow a thorough examination of both the direct and indirect
effects of the aerosols on the radiative properties of the atmosphere. Dr.
Prospero and colleagues will develop a climatological data set of the chemical,
physical, and radiative characteristics of aerosols in the INDOEX region through
a continuous sampling program over two and a half yea rs at an island site in
the Maldives. With the expected range in atmospheric conditions over this time,
the characteristics of and concentrations in species of aerosols will also vary
greatly. The PIs will attempt to associate these chemical and physical
variations with changes in atmospheric radiative properties.