* 9612747
* An Investigation of Turbulence Scales that Affect Particle  Motion
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1997,04/30/2001
* Chris Rogers, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 04/30/2001
* USD 292,883.00

Abstract CTS-9612747 C. Rogers Tufts University The main objective is to
measure statistical properties of turbulence as seen by a particle suspended in
air flow, and to determine the mechanisms responsible for particle dispersion. A
combined experimental-numerical approach is suggested to determine the fluid
turbulence in the reference frame of a moving particle. A two-component laser
Doppler velocimeter (LDV) measure the instantaneous fluid velocity, then one
calculates the acceleration of an imaginary particle, and the LDV measuring
volume follows that particle. The instantaneous vorticity and energy dissipation
rate in the fluid. The turbulence length scales and the dispersion
characteristics are estimated using digital particle image velocimetry (DPIV).
The investigation will include low and moderate Reynolds number flows, in forced
and unforced turbulence situations, with relevance for two- and three-
dimensional flows. This a collaborative project between Prof. C, Rogers of Tufts
University and Prof. J. Eaton and one of his students at Stanford University who
will collaborate particularly in the direct numerical simulation of particle-
laden flows. Several sets of experiments will be performed concerning
preferential particle concentration near-isotropic turbulence, particle
concentration and directed particle motion in a separated shear layer. Improved
fundamental understanding of fluid turbulence-particle interaction is expected.