* 9612282
* Modeling of Tropospheric Photochemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Paul Wennberg, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/29/2000
* USD 405,001.00

9612282 Jacob In this project, 3-dimensional chemical models will be used to
investigate issues in tropospheric chemistry. (1) The export of nitrogen oxides
from North America to the global atmosphere in different seasons, and the role
played by non-methane hydrocarbons in modifying this export, will be quantified.
Large amounts of nitrogen oxides are emitted by fossil fuel combustion in North
America, but only a fraction of this material is exported out of the continental
boundary layer where it affects tropospheric chemistry on a global scale. (2)
The contribution of fossil fuel combustion in North America to concentrations of
nitrogen oxide in the remote troposphere will be determined by expanding the
scale of the 3-dimensional model from continental-scale to the northern
hemisphere. The ultimate fate of the nitrogen oxides exported from North
America, and its influence on global tropospheric chemistry, will be
investigated. (3) The factors controlling the concentration of nitrogen and
hydrogen oxide radicals in the upper troposphere will be studied. These chemical
factors are currently poorly understood. A comprehensive theoretical study will
be conducted, supported by data from recent and upcoming aircraft campaigns, in
order to define the different regimes and to examine the sensitivity to chemical
and meteorological variables. (4) The sources of atmospheric acetone are
currently not known quantitatively. A 3-dimensional model study of acetone and
its non-methane hydrocarbon precursors will be conducted. Detailed comparisons
of simulated and observed atmospheric concentrations in different regions will
be carried out.