* 9612110
* Collaborative Research:  Volcanic Evolution in the          Galapagos:  A Geological, Petrological, and Geochemical     Investigation of Volcan Ecuador
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Dennis Geist, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2000
* USD 100,691.00

9612110 Geist This project is an integrated field, petrological, and geochemical
study of Volcan Ecuador, Isla Isabela, Galapagos. The immediate objectives of
this study are as follows: 1. Determine the eruptive and structural history of
the volcano through field studies and K-Ar dating. 2. Obtain a sufficiently
complete suite of chemical data so that the liquid line of descent can be
determined and the nature of the parental magmas constrained. 3. Identify any
temporal trends in composition, through analysis of suites of samples whose ages
are constrained by a combination of stratigraphy and K-Ar dating. For this
purpose, samples will be taken from stratigraphic sections exposed in fault
scarps and caldera walls. Determine what, if any, effect has the apparent
faulting on Ecuador had on magma composition? Laboratory based work will include
major element analyses, petrographic studies, electron microprobe analyses of
mineral phases, Sr, Nd, Pb, and Hf isotopic analyses, and trace element
analyses. The results obtained will be used, along with thermodynamic models of
magmas, to model magma generation and evolution. These will be compared with the
results of studies of other volcanoes in the Galapagos. This in turn will be
used to address the problem of how the Galapagos mantle plume interacts with
lithosphere and asthenosphere at shallow levels in the mantle beneath the
Galapagos. The proposed study is a joint Franco-American project involving a
collaboration between Francis Albarede of the Ecole Normale Superieure de Lyon,
Dennis Geist of the University of Idaho, and William White of Cornell
University.