* 9612509
* Response of Microbial Community Structure and Protistan     Grazing Pathways to Environmental Forcing in the Arabian Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* Lisa Campbell, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1998
* USD 28,592.00

9612509 Campbell The Arabian Sea is an intensely dynamic region of the world's
oceans driven by strong seasonal reversals in monsoon winds. The region is
interesting in the context of the Joint Global spatial scales "extremes" in
ocean production systems -coastal upwelling to open ocean oligotrophic -- under
relatively constant tropical illumination. It is thus a natural laboratory to
test conceptual linkages among physical forcing, food-wed structure,
biogeochemical cycling and fluxes, and carbon burial in the sediments. The
general goals of this project are to asses the roles of microzooplankton as
consumers of bacterial and phytoplankton production and to contribute to
nderstanding the relationships among plankton community structure, new
production, and biogeochemical fluxes and their responses to physical forcing
the Arabian Sea. The project is to be conducted during the spring (April)
intermonsoon and summer (August) SW monsoon seasons, when the most dramatic
differences should be evident. Abundance, biomass, and specific growth rates of
bacteria and phytoplankton will be determined by flow cytometric, microscopic,
and pigment analyses to determine their variations with season, depth and
location. The dominant microzooplankton grazers on pico- and nanoplankton will
be identified and quantified, and the impact of their grazing will be measured
with a suite of complementary methods including dilution, fluorescently-labelled
prey, size- fractionation, and specific metabolic inhibitors. Results of this
project will contribute to understanding how global climate changes, which may
affect prevailing forcing winds, will alter phytoplankton community structure
and in turn how these changes in structure of the food web affect carbon storage
and export from the upper water column. ***