* 9612499
* Modeling and Stability Analysis of Prototype Mixed Kinematic Bulk, Free Surface, and Interfacial Flows of Viscoelastic  Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Bamin Khomami, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* C. F. Chen
* 05/31/2001
* USD 245,000.00

This is a grant to address problems related to polymeric and polymer matrix
composite materials that have been identified as being key to the security of
the U.S. The basic part of most polymer and composite materials manufacturing
processes involves flow of polymers in cavities of arbitrary shape with or
without reinforcement. Process throughput and product quality are often limited
by the onset of flow instabilities. The existence of purely elastic
instabilities suggest that all polymer processing operations, however slow they
may be, are prone to instabilities. For this reason understanding the influence
of fluid elasticity on flow and stability of representative bulk, free surface
and interfacial flows is crucial. Fully parallelized, higher-order finite
element techniques will be used to study a number of prototype two and three-
dimensional free surface and interfacial flows of viscoelastic fluids.
Specifically, the work will focus on investigating flow modifications due to
fluid elasticity in mixed shearing/elongational flows as well as examining the
role of fluid elasticity and non-equilibrium energetic effects on stability of
this class of flows. Of particular interest is to identify the mechanism(s) that
are responsible for viscoelastic instabilities in mixed kinematic flows which
are routinely encountered in processing of polymers and composite materials.