* 9612077
* Mathematical Sciences:  Aspects of Discrete Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1997,12/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/2000
* USD 114,888.00

Herman 9612077 The investigator studies how to determine functions defined over
three-dimensional space from physically measured (and hence only approximate)
values of their line integrals, using ideas from discrete tomography. In
discrete tomography there is a domain --- which may itself be discrete (such as
a set of ordered pairs of integers) or continuous (such as Euclidean space) ---
and an unknown function whose range is known to be a given discrete set (usually
of real numbers). The problems of discrete tomography have to do with
determining the function (perhaps only partially or approximately) from weighted
sums over subsets of its domain in the discrete case and from weighted integrals
over subspaces of its domain in the continuous case. The essential aspect of
discrete tomography is that knowing the discrete range of the function may allow
determining its value at points where without this knowledge it could not be
determined. Discrete tomography is full of mathematically fascinating questions
(e.g., what shapes are uniquely determined by their x-rays?) and it has many
interesting applications (e.g., electron microscopy and nondestructive testing).
The investigator studies how to determine three-dimensional objects from
physically measured (and hence only approximate) values of what are essentially
averages along one-dimensional slices of the objects. Mathematically, this is
the problem of determining functions defined over ordinary three-dimensional
space from approximate values of their line integrals. Such physical
measurements may be taken of biological macromolecules using an electron
microscope or of industrial objects using high energy x-rays. What is shared by
these two (and many other) applications is that the object to be determined may
be known to have only finitely many possible values. The distinguishing feature
of discrete tomography is that by making use of such knowledge we may succeed in
determining the structure of th e object from data that is not in itself
sufficient for determining the structure without the prior information. While
the emphasis of the project is on the development of an appropriate mathematical
theory (including computational procedures for the solution of specific
instances of the general problems under investigation), these will be developed
so that they can be applied in the field of recovering the structure of
biological macromolecules from sets of electron microscopic images by making use
of the truly discrete nature of the objects to be reconstructed. What this boils
done to is the following: certain methods of data collection do not allow us to
determine the structure of a totally unknown object (e.g., the electron
microscopes destroys a macromolecule before sufficient data can be collected).
Discrete tomography allows us to overcome such a technical difficulty in those
cases when the object is known to have only finitely many values. The project
has applications to imaging problems in medicine, biology, and chemistry.