* 9612329
* An Investigation of Visually Guided Micromanipulation Using Active Optical Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1996,11/10/1998
* Peter Hesketh, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jing Xiao
* 11/10/1998
* USD 276,637.00

Robust micromanipulation strategies are needed in order to overcome a potential
technology barrier to the commercial development of complex
microelectromechanical (MEMS) devics. Development of robust strategies requires
an investigation into two critical issues not applicable to the traditional
macro manipulation domain. These issues include the much higher relative
positioning accuracy required, and the vastly different mechanics of
manipulation. Both of these differences highlight the need for micromanipulation
strategies that are guided by realtime sensor feedback. Initial experimental
results indicate that feedback from high resolution optical systems with
controllable intrinsic and extrinsic parameters in useful for manipulation over
a broad range of micromanipulation tasks. This research theoretically and
experimentally investigates sensor-based micromanipulation strategies that
account for the different mechanics that govern object interactions on a micron
scale. A critical aspect of the approach entails the use of realtime vision
feedback from active optical systems to correct for micromanipulation mechanics
that are often difficult to model precisely. In addition, various micro-
grippers will be designed and analyzed, and promising designs will be
micromachined and tested. This research will result in experimental and
theoretical analyses that will illuminate the similarities and differences
between sensor-based manipulation in macro and micro domains. The realization of
successful micromanipulation strategies will aid in the development of automatic
assembly machines for assembling and packaging future MEMS devices that require
increasingly complex assembly strategies.