* 9612536
* Antalith Seismic Reflection Program at Central West         Antarctica Camp (CWA)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1997
* Sridhar Anandakrishnan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 11/30/1997
* USD 32,189.00

Anandakrishnan OPP 9612536 Abstract This award supports analysis of seismic data
from the central part of West Antarctica. The use of broadband seismometers to
detect and record teleseismic earthquakes (so-called passive seismology) is a
relatively cost effective way of determining physical parameters of the
continental crustal and underlying upper mantle. These data can extend the
results from reflection and refraction seismic programs to regional scales and
place useful constraints on the interpretation of the reflection and refraction
data. The method of Receiver Function analysis will be applied to the passive-
seismic data and will be used to determine crustal thickness and velocities at
Central West Antarctica camp (CWA). Detailed reflection and refraction seismic
profiles collected at CWA will be compaped to the passive- seismic results.
Next, passive-seismic data from STC, a site 150 km from CWA, will be analyzed
and the results correlated to CWA. Regional trends will be identified and
interpreted for their tectonic significance. In addition to analysis of
teleseismic data, this analysis takes advantage of data from an array of
seismometers (deployed for a microearthquake study of glacier movement) that was
near the active seismic program study area.