* 9612054
* Analysis of Neuronal Growth Dynamics and Control
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1998,01/31/2001
* Helen Buettner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 01/31/2001
* USD 93,876.00

9612054 Buettner The growth of neuronal axons represents a fundamental step in
nerve development: axons grow out from individual neurons in or near the brain
and spinal cord to make synaptic connections with innervation targets throughout
the body. Multiple axons projecting to the same target become bundled together
to form a nerve supplying function to that site. The remote location of most
targets from the initiation sites of the axons innervating them, and the complex
pathways along which axonal growth occurs, poses a demanding navigational
challenge for the growing axons - one which they meet with remarkable success
under normal developmental conditions. However, the repair of postnatal injury
to a nerve requires repetition of the same axonal growth and navigation process
for the affected axons, and the lack of success of this axonal regeneration
typically leads to incomplete recovery of nerve function or paralysis. To better
understand the principles underlying axonal growth and navigation (often
referred to collectively as "pathfinding") and how they may be altered during
regeneration, this investigation addresses the quantitative dynamics of the
axonal growth cone, the sensory-motile leading tip of the axon which controls
where and how the axon grows. The primary focus of this study will be to develop
a computer simulation model of growth cone motion based on the molecular forces
generated within the growth cone during its migration. Particular emphasis will
be placed on the role of actin, a major structural component of the growth cone
cytoskeleton and long believed to play a central role in the motility not only
of growth cones but of many other cell types as well. Another important factor
to be considered is the interaction of the growth cone with the extracellular
environment. This work should have multidisciplinary impact, with both
biological and technological implications. In neuroscience, it will provide a
new mea ns of testing hypotheses about the forces responsible for growth cone
locomotion and the mechanisms underlying growth cone pathfinding. It will also
provide insight into strategies for manipulating growth cone migration, of
importance in nerve repair and the formation of biological neural networks. In
mathematical science and engineering, the simulation of growth cone processing
of instructional cues will be used to suggest new paradigms for controlling both
biological and nonbiological systems.