* 9612890
* Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2001
* Francisco Valero, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Sumant Nigam
* 07/31/2001
* USD 507,772.00

9612890 Valero The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) is an international field
experiment with participation from France, Germany, India, the Netherlands, and
the United States. The main effort under the U.S. component focuses on assessing
the role of sulfates and other continental aerosols in global radiative forcing
and is being supported jointly by the Department of Energy and the National
Science Foundation. In addition, complementary studies involving investigations
of a variety of related chemical and radiative processes will be undertaken by
scientists from other federal agencies and other international partners. The
composite observing system consists of a wide range of platforms, from ships to
aircraft, as well as surface-based and balloon measuring systems, and satellite
data. The main part of the three year effort will be a four-month intensive
field phase which begins January 1999. The ultimate goal of this program is to
obtain a better understanding of the decadal and longer time scale climate
forcing. The equatorial Indian Ocean during the northeast winter monsoon season
provides a unique natural laboratory for this experiment. The experimental area
is probably the only place in the world where an air mass which has been
modified by intense sources of continental aerosols, anthropogenic trace
species, and their reaction products (e.g., sulfates and ozone) from the
northern hemisphere comes into contact with the pristine air of the southern
hemisphere, which has been transported via cross equatorial monsoonal flow, at
the Intertropical Convergence Zone. The juxtaposition of these two very distinct
air masses will allow a thorough examination of both the direct and indirect
effects of the aerosols on the radiative properties of the atmosphere. Dr.
Valero's role in INDOEX is to quantify the radiative effects of aerosols by
providing airborne, direct observations of spectral radiative fluxes, spectral
optical depths and broadband irradiances. This information , together with other
observations that will be obtained during the experiment, will provide a means
of evaluating the potential impact of aerosols on the climate.