* 9612274
* Development of Novel Optical Techniques for Cleaning        Contaminated Surfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Susan Allen, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 09/30/1999
* USD 460,000.00

9612274 Walz Removal of particulate contamination from solid surfaces is a major
concern in the fabrication of integrated circuits (IC's), high density magnetic
storage, large area displays, high power laser and astronomical optics, and
other electronic and optical devices. With the trend toward smaller scale device
technology, the need for improved particle removal techniques has become
critical. In previous work, Allen developed an innovative technique called Laser
Assisted Particle Removal (LAPR) to remove particulates from solid surfaces
using a laser and a medium to transfer energy from the laser beam to kinetic
energy in the particles. In this project, a two-prolonged-effort will be used to
identify experimentally the important variables in controlling the LAPR process
and to integrate the resulting information into a physically meaningful model to
predict and optimize LAPR for different particle/substrate/ambient systems. This
combined empirical and mechanistic approach will allow efficient technology
transfer to, for example, semiconductor process equipment manufacturers. The
primary objective is to develop a model of the LAPR process that can be used to
optimize the design of a particle removal process module for cleaning critical
surfaces. Toward that end, collaborations with industrial partners will be
continued. An important step in reaching this objective is to develop a model
for predicting the strength of the adhesion force binding specific contaminants
to surfaces. This will be accomplished using the novel optical techniques
developed by Walz to measure colloidal interaction forces. Also proposed is the
development of a new technique for removing adhered particles based on the
principle of radiation pressure. Here, a tightly focused laser beam will be used
to "push" particles off transparent substrates. The technique would be
especially useful for cleaning high energy optical devices. A major advantage of
the technique is that it should be possible to perform the cleaning without the
use of any liquids. Since the applied radiation force can be measured
independently, the technique could also be used for measuring directly the
adhesion force, which would be an extremely useful research tool. ***