* 9612148
* Exploratory Synthesis of Inorganic Solids Containing        Nanosize Transition-Metal-Oxide Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Shiou-Jyh Hwu, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/2000
* USD 332,000.00

Abstract 9612148 Hwu The aim of this research is to explore a new class of
extended solids that contain nanosize, transition-metal-oxide frameworks and to
investigate the behavior of the delocalized electrons of oxide-bridged,
transition-metal (TM) magnetic centers in a confined lattice. The anticipated
structures consist of TM-oxide chains (wires), layers (sheets) and oligomers
(dots) that are structurally separated and electronically isolated by closed-
shell, non-magnetic oxyanions, i.e., silicates, phosphates and arsenates.
Efforts in exploratory synthesis will focus on (1) homologous series containing
sheets and wires of rutile and perovskite frameworks and (2) silicate compounds
containing nanosize frameworks of late TM oxides. Molten-salt methods, using
alkali and/or alkaline-earth metal halides, will be employed, since it is a
proven technique for the crystal growth of these refractory oxides. Compound
characterizations will be directed toward understanding the bond strength, spin-
spin and spin-lattice interactions, band structures, and the onset of metallic
properties associated with finite TM-oxide structures. This proposed research is
significant because the anticipated TM-oxide fragments with different lengths
and geometries will provide a library of structural models for studying the
behavior of the delocalized electrons in a confined space. Also, compounds
containing TM-oxide frameworks with finite structures may possess novel
electronic and/or magnetic properties, which are incompatible with the
properties of extended oxides and will be of both scientific and technological
interest. Finally, the research outlined in this proposal will provide
invaluable fundamental knowledge necessary to continue advancing technology for
materials that are of electronic and magnetic importance. %%% Recent advances in
technology and the need for new materials in device applications have driven the
rapid growth of solid-state science. Understanding fundamen tal parameters that
govern the performance of a material has played a crucial role in every area of
this multi-disciplinary science, which includes solid-state chemistry and
physics, as well as interdisciplinary areas such as electrical and materials
science engineering. Solid-state chemistry is concerned with the synthesis of
materials with extended structures and their related properties. The variety and
complexity of these solids' structures, and the evaluation of the factors that
influence and control structural and physical properties, are the elements that
have made solid-state chemistry a dynamic area of study. As a result, attempts
to modify known structures and explore new ones with novel properties are made
with the aim of revealing parameters that may be used to fine tune the physical
properties and to ultimately synthesize the desired materials. Currently, the
ability to predict the composition and structure for extended solids is not yet
possible and synthetic discoveries that have led to landmark advances in solid-
state science have nearly always been made through exploratory synthesis, rather
than by design. The research outlined in this proposal will provide invaluable
fundamental knowledge necessary to continue advancing technology for materials
that are of electronic and magnetic importance. The aim is to explore new class
of extended solids that contain nanosize, transition-metal-oxide frameworks.