* 9612114
* Mathematical Sciences: 1996-1997 Clifford Lectures;         November, 1996; New Orleans, LA
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Xuefeng Wang, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9612114 Wang The Mathematics Department of Tulane University requests a partial
support for the 1996-1997 Clifford Lectures, which will be held in November
1996. This will partially cover the expenses of speakers and participating
students and faculty who do not have grants. The principal lecturer will be
Professor Paul Fife of the University of Utah, who will speak on "Mathematical
issues in the dynamics of phase transitions". The lectures, with their
accompanying miniconference, will bring lively interactions among scientists in
applied analysis, modeling and computation in material science and mathematical
biology, statistical physics as well as geometry. The conference will bring
mathematics of the highest quality to faculty and students from not only at
Tulane but also from Louisiana universities. %%% This proposal calls for support
to organize a week long conference, historically known as the Clifford Lecture
series. The purpose of the lecture series is to bring together researchers from
many different fields who have a common intersection on phase transition which
is an active area in the theoretical material science, statistical physics as
well as geometry. The topics to be covered represent some current technological
issues in phase transition. The theme of the workshop includes a principal
lecturer, followed by a mini conference. Student participation is a strong
component of the lecture series. ***