* 9612960
* FASEB: Summer Research Conference: Signal Transduction in   Plants to be held at Copper Mountain, Colorado, June 16-21, 1996
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Ralph Quatrano, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 05/31/1997
* USD 5,600.00

96-12960 Quatrano This Summer Research Conference on "Signal Transduction in
Plants" is the second in a series of FASEB conferences. This conference occurs
every other year, alternating with the "Plant Genetics/Gene Expression" FASEB
conference. The conference is chaired by three of the leading experts in the
field: Terri Lomax, Ralph Quatrano, and Keith Roberts. The conference will
highlight recent progress in signal transduction mechanisms in plants. Specific
sessions include: signaling between the cytoskeleton, plasma membrane, and cell
wall; signaling molecules in plant growth and development (two sessions);
environmental signaling in plant pathogen and plant/microbe interactions (two
sessions); cell:cell communication, and perception and transduction of light
signals. This conference will bring together scientists (150) who are
approaching plant signaling from different and complementary conceptual and
technical approaches and will generate an interdisciplinary synthesis in this
fast moving research area. This conference format will provide a unique forum
for sustained, focused, in-depth discussions of emerging topics that are
critical to our understanding of the underlying mechanisms controlling plant
growth, development, and environmental responses. %%% This Summer Research
Conference on "Signal Transduction in Plants" is the second in a series of FASEB
conferences. This conference occurs every other year, alternating with the
"Plant Genetics/Gene Expression" FASEB conference. The conference is chaired by
three of the leading experts in the field: Terri Lomax, Ralph Quatrano, and
Keith Roberts. The conference will highlight recent progress in signal
transduction mechanisms in plants. Specific sessions include: signaling between
the cytoskeleton, plasma membrane, and cell wall; signaling molecules in plant
growth and development (two sessions); environmental signaling in plant pathogen
and plant/microbe interactions (two sessions); cell:cell communication, and
perception and trans duction of light signals. This conference will bring
together scientists (150) who are approaching plant signaling from different and
complementary conceptual and technical approaches and will generate an
interdisciplinary synthesis in this fast moving research area. This conference
format will provide a unique forum for sustained, focused, in-depth discussions
of emerging topics that are critical to our understanding of the underlying
mechanisms controlling plant growth, development, and environmental responses.
***