* 9612131
* Learning in Negotiation:  A Sequential Decision Making      Model and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Katia Sycara, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 02/29/2000
* USD 339,307.00

This is a three year standard award. The research aims to develop a domain-
independent computational model of negotiation capable of addressing several
complex issues, such as multi-issue negotiation and decision-making under
incomplete information. The research is based on a sequential decision-making
view of negotiation that provides a natural representation of the multi-stage
nature of negotiation. Issues such as learning associated with updating beliefs
about a partially-known world will be addressed. The original sequential-
decision-making-based negotiation model will be extended to explicitly model
strategic parts of negotiation. The resulting formalism can be made
computationally tractable by applying dynamic programming strategies. Under this
model, many key issues, such as asymmetric information among agents, dynamic
processes of negotiation, changing environments, etc. can be analyzed and
explored experimentally. In addition, the research will contribute to the
emerging field of multi-agent learning. Computationally efficient multi-agent
learning algorithms will be developed and the impact of introducing learning in
the model will be explored. To evaluate this research, a multi-agent simulation
testbed will be developed and utilized to conduct empirical studies. These
studies will be directed toward significant theoretical and practical questions,
such as the effectiveness of different negotiation strategies and learning
algorithms in realistic problem scenarios from domains such as supply
contracting.