* 9612109
* EcoSim:  A Proposal for Null Models Software (SGER)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Nicholas Gotelli, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 07/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal will fund the initial development, testing, and distribution of
ecological simulation software (EcoSim). In the study of ecology and evolution,
simulations are an important analytical tool. They allow an investigator to ask
"what if" questions, and to test patterns against stochastic models. "Null
models" are simulations that deliberately exclude a mechanism of interest, and
provide benchmark tests for patterns in nature. In spite of their popularity,
null models require a good deal of computer expertise to construct. Many
biologists without programming skills have been unable to use null models in
their work.. For biologists who are also computer programmers, it is still very
time-consuming to build, test, and de-bug null models. EcoSim is a set of stand-
alone software modules that will satisfy the needs of biologists for null
models. EcoSim will be developed specifically for personal computers, and will
initially be written for the Windows 95 operating system. Data will be easily
imported and exported, providing full compatibility with other graphics and
statistics software. Pull-down menus, checkboxes, and a powerful data editor
will allow the user to select a variety of simulation options, including power
tests. Output will be fully documented with on-screen graphics. The modules and
the interface will be programmed in Delphi, a powerful new programming language.
The primary audience for EcoSim will be community ecologists and biogeographers.
However, the modules will be widely used by many kinds of biologists. College
laboratory instructors, demographers, review authors, paleontologists,
conservation biologists, environmental consultants, fisheries biologists and
many others will find useful tests in EcoSim. The modules will provide
analytical tools applicable to both basic and applied ecology. EcoSim will be
thoroughly doc umented and tested before its release to the scientific
community. EcoSim will be distributed free-of-charge through Internet and a
World Wide Web site. EcoSim will be a standalone program that includes on-line
help, a user's manual, sample data sets and advice on using null models. Funding
from a SGER will allow us to build the user interface and two modules: (1)
species diversity and (2) niche overlap. These models are likely to used by the
greatest number of ecologists and educators. Future implementations of EcoSim
will include modules for (3) body size ratios, (4) co-occurrence, (5) incidence
functions, (6) species-area relationships, (7) range overlap, (8) shared
species, and (9) cluster formation. A tenth module will allow the user to
construct customized null model tests with a minimum of programming. This tenth
user-module will greatly expand the utility of EcoSim for problems in population
genetics, demography, and behavior. EcoSim has the potential to affect a large
number of ecologists by providing them with analytic tools. A similar problem in
the history of cladistic analysis points to the importance of software
availability on the development and infrastructure of science.