* 9612067
* A Responsive Process Planning System in Agile Manufacturing Using Case-Based Reasoning Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Wen Lu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1998
* USD 110,789.00

9612067 Lu This award provides funding for research to develop a model of the
responsive process planning system in agile manufacturing with a focus on
automated determination of the sequence of machining operations in agile
manufacturing environments for axisymmetric machined parts. An approach using
case-based reasoning to support learning capability will be employed. The
methodology to accomplish various issues in case-based operation sequencing will
be formalized. In particular, the following issues will be tackled. First, a
feature-based representation will be used for operation sequencing case
representation. Then, a method called model-based similarity measurement, based
on a domain-specific hierarchical model, will be applied for case indexing and
case retrieval. Furthermore, the adaptation of an operation sequencing case
including case modifier, plan simulator, and plan repairer will be developed.
The system model will be implemented to demonstrate the learning functions of
the system in response to rapidly changing markets and manufacturing
environments. The generated process plans will be evaluated. If successful, this
research will lead machine learning into the realm of practical application in
agile manufacturing and provide a way to guide a computer-aided process planning
system towards the level of human intelligence. It also offers to capture best
practices through industry interaction and thus prevent the loss of knowledge
through the attrition of experienced personnel. Furthermore, the proposed
process planning system, with enhanced intelligence through learning, should
respond rapidly to fast changing demands and enable the realization of the agile
manufacturing concept of shorter time-to-market and the increase of product
quality. It is expected that this model could be extended to other activities,
such as product design, metal forming planning, and assembly planning, in the
industry.