* 9612684
* Modeling Climate and Deep Water Sensitivity to Changes in   Deglacial Meltwater Flux and Location Using a Fully-Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere GCM
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Peter DeMenocal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 11/30/1999
* USD 217,660.00

Abstract ATM-9612684 deMenocal, Peter Columbia University Title: Modeling
Climate and Deep Water Sensitivity to Changes in Deglacial Meltwater Flux and
Location Using a Fully-Coupled Ocean- Atmosphere GCM This award supports a
project that will use a synchronously-coupled ocean-atmosphere general
circulation model (O-A GCM ) to examine the dynamical origins of rapid,
millennial-scale climate change events which punctuate the last glacial and
deglacial periods. Focus will be on deep circulation and surface climate
responses to prescribed changes in the supply and input location of deglacial
meltwater to the ocean. The NASA GISS O-A GCM used in this proposal is unique
because: 1) it does not require flux corrections to sustain realistic Atlantic
deep water circulation so the entire climatic system is free to adjust to
changed boundary conditions, 2) surface runoff is organized in 41 separate river
drainages allowing for point-source freshwater injection to the ocean, 3) the
ocean model is truly synchronously-coupled (every hour) to a full atmospheric
model, and 4) the model supports oxygen-isotopic fractionation and tracer code
to monitor resulting changes in Greenland ice composition. Three research foci
will be addressed: 1) characterize the ocean-atmosphere model climate signatures
associated with high and low deep-water production in the control model; 2)
quantify deep circulation sensitivity to changes in the flux and location of
deglacial meltwater input to the ocean; and 3) Younger Dryas simulation: effects
of variable deglacial runoff volumes and input locations between 12,000-9,000
years ago.