* 9612062
* A Virtual Reality Environment for Spherical Mechanism Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* John McCarthy, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1999
* USD 199,638.00

9612062 Vance This award provides funding to develop a new and innovative
approach to designing spatial mechanisms based on the use of virtual reality
technology. A virtual environment, which can be entered using a variety of
visual and interactive virtual reality devices, will be developed and used to
design unique, novel spherical mechanisms. New analytical techniques of
spherical mechanism design will be incorporated into the design software. In
addition, this software will be used to perform an evaluation of the suitability
of various virtual reality menu structures, interaction devices and display
devices to the task of engineering product design. This development will be a
testbed for the use of virtual reality in mechanical design. If successful, this
research will result in a computer tool that will provide a three-dimensional
design space where the designer can synthesize spherical mechanisms and obtain a
sense of the form and function of the devices without having to build expensive
physical prototypes after each design change. This would enable spatial
mechanisms to be incorporated into many products, including manufacturing
equipment and consumer products. The replacement of several planar mechanisms
with one spherical mechanism would result in a design with fewer links, fewer
driving motors, more reliability and lower cost. As a result of this research,
new advances in the application of virtual reality technology to mechanical
design and in the area of spherical mechanism design methodology are likely.