* 9612108
* GOALI:  Nuclear Magnetic Imaging of Highly Energized        Ganular Flows:  Vibrating Beds
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Anthony Rosato, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 05/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9612108 A Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) imaging technique will
be developed for the study of the dynamic microstructure and general behavior of
powders under the effect of external vibrations. The measuring techniques
consists in a three-dimensional spatial scan approach rather than scans in
conjugate spaces. In order to avoid the scanning speed limitations in highly
energetic flows, the synchronized vibration frequency and data from each
scanning line separately will be stored, followed by retrospective data
averaging and image reconstruction. The proposed project will explore the
feasibility of the proposed NMR measuring technique and will obtain the first
measurements in three-dimensional particulate vibrated flows with potential
progress in fundamental understanding of those flows. The measurements will
determine concentration and diffusive motion caused by particle collision during
a single NMR scan. The method will facilitate the measurements of particle
velocity and concentration fluctuations. The experimental work will be carried
out by the P. I, in the NMR Laboratory of the Lovelace Institutes, which has
uniquely specialized equipment and group of experts in the field of research.
Reference numerical simulations using the discrete element method will be
performed at NJIT. ***