* 9612145
* Proposal to Disseminate and Institutionalize the Successes  of the Southern California Coalition for Education in       Manufacturing Engineering.
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* J Williams, California State University-Long Beach
* Continuing Grant
* Sally Louise Wood
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,000,000.00

Williams 9612145 This proposal requests an award to continue the progress begun
by the NSF/TRP award which established SCCEME and to institutionalize the
Coalition as a close, symbiotic linkage between Southern California industries,
the SCCEME universities, and local community colleges. The emphasis will
continue to be on manufacturing in the modern integrated product and process
development environment. The Southern California Coalition for Education in
Manufacturing Engineering (SCCEME) proposes to disseminate and institutionalize
the products and successes of the Coalition through a new, permanent non-profit
(501c3) organization, the Foundation for the Advancement of Manufacturing
Education (FAME), to continue and enhance its regional Southern California
industry/university partnership for improving manufacturing education and
training. A primary mission of FAME is to continue to foster manufacturing
excellence in the region through providing advanced manufacturing training and
education at the factory floor through multimedia educational delivery. The
development of multimedia software and training programs for industry will
continue to occur through a partnership between the California universities and
community colleges in cooperation with industry. FAME is controlled by a Board
of Directors dominated by executives of industries that have participated with
the SCCEME universities to establish SCCEME. Under the direction of FAME, SCCEME
will enhance manufacturing engineering education and provide engineering and
technical training to the shop floor of manufacturing firms, primarily through
multimedia-based courses and course modules and secondarily through remote
classroom activities. Multimedia delivery of manufacturing education and
training to the factory floor will be both necessary and effective as a means of
gaining and maintaining high quality, low cost manufacturing that is competitive
in a global economy. FAME will provide both industry and the higher educational
i nstitutions in Southern California with the focus, capability and financing to
carry out this major transformation in how manufacturing education and training
is delivered. The financing of FAME activities will be through federal and State
support, industrial purchase of training activities, and other sources as
appropriate. The NSF is requested to provide support for SCCEME to facilitate
the transition of SCCEME from NSF support to other sources of support under the
direction of FAME.