* 9612388
* Evaluation of the Effects of Land Surface Processes on      Convective Precipitation Using a Nonhydrostatic Version of  the NCEP Eta Model
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Moti Segal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 237,011.00

9612388 Gallus The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency
activity designed to perform and implement the research necessary to improve the
delivery of weather services to the nation. Under this Program, the National
Science Foundation and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are
jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the USWRP.
Variations in earth surface properties, such as differential heating and soil
moisture, are known to have a significant impact on numerical weather forecasts.
The Principal Investigator will evaluate the impact of land use and soil
moisture on mesoscale precipitation systems simulated with a high-resolution
nonhydrostatic version of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration s
National Center for Environmental Prediction (NCEP)'s Eta model. In particular,
the role of surface heat and moisture fluxes in preconditioning the
thermodynamic environment and the dynamical effects of boundary-layer
circulations caused by surface inhomogeneities will be investigated, focusing on
orographic and frontal forcing of precipitation. The nonhydrostatic Eta model
will be run over a 24-48 hour time period both for historical cases and in an
operational-like mode. Historical cases will be chosen where orography, frontal
forcing or local mesoscale convection resulted in unique precipitation systems
whose scales were small enough that nonhydrostatic dynamics can be assumed to be
important. Initialization and verification of historical cases can be aided by
incorporating archived hourly precipitation data. The operational- like mode of
the project will rely upon the operational initialization and verification
procedures used at NCEP. Results of the research will contribute to (i)
improving our understanding of the effects of land use and soil moisture on
small-scale precipitation systems, and (ii) testing and refinement of the
nonhydrostatic Eta model, which is planned to be primary short-range forecasting
tool of the future at NCEP. ***