* 9612893
* INDOEX-Field Experiment in the Indian Ocean Contribution    from the University of Maryland
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/1997,10/31/2000
* Russell Dickerson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 10/31/2000
* USD 126,970.00

ATM-9612893 Dickerson , Russell University of Maryland "INDOEX-Field Experiment
in the Indian Ocean Contribution for the University of Maryland" The Indian
Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) is an international field experiment with
participation from France, Germany, India, the Netherlands, and the United
States. The main effort under the U.S. component focuses on assessing the role
of sulfates and other continental aerosols in global radiative forcing and is
being supported jointly by the Department of Energy and the National Science
Foundation. In addition, complementary studies involving investigations of a
variety of related chemical and radiative processes will be undertaken by
scientists from other federal agencies and other international partners. The
composite observing system consists of a wide range of platforms, from ships to
aircraft, as well as surface-based and balloon measuring systems, and satellite
data. The main part of the three year effort will be a four-month intensive
field phase which begins January 1999. The ultimate goal of this program is to
obtain a better understanding of the decadal and longer time scale climate
forcing. The equatorial Indian Ocean during the northeast winter monsoon season
provides a unique natural laboratory for this experiment. The experimental area
is probably the only place in the world where an air mass which has been
modified by intense sources of continental aerosols, anthropogenic trace
species, and their reaction products (e.g., sulfates and ozone) from the
northern hemisphere comes into contact with the pristine air of the southern
hemisphere, which has been transported via cross equatorial monsoonal flow, at
the Intertropical Convergence Zone. The juxtaposition of these two very distinct
air masses will allow a thorough examination of both the direct and indirect
effects of the aerosols on the radiative properties of the atmosphere. The role
of Dr. Dickerson and his colleagues in INDOEX is to supply carbon monoxide an d
ozone measurements for both the preliminary (1998) and primary (1999) ship
cruises, to measure sulfur dioxide and size-segregated aerosol particle
composition on the primary cruise, in collaboration with other INDOEX
scientists, to measure carbon monoxide and ozone from the island site in Male.
The resulting data will be analyzed to obtain insights into the transport
meteorology and photochemistry of the region.