* 9612817
* CEDAR Post-Doc:  The Electron Energy Balance over Millstone Hill Using Combined Optical and Incoherent Scatter          Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Philip Richards, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 12/31/1998
* USD 90,000.00

This post-doctoral grant examines the thermal balance of ionospheric electrons
through combining optical and incoherent scatter measurements. He will
accomplish measurements with ground-based observations that utilize CEDAR
developed instrumentation at Millstone Hill Observatory. Optical measurements
supplement the ongoing CEDAR NETE campaign, and are designed to provide
conjugate hemisphere photoelectron flux information. This flux of photoelectrons
is the heat source for thermal electrons in the nighttime ionosphere. Hence,
optical measurements of the conjugate hemisphere photoelectron flux will provide
an important constraint for the radar investigation of ionospheric behavior. In
addition, he will perform a modeling study of mechanisms responsible for
enhanced nighttime electron temperature and densities over Millstone Hill. The
Field Line Interhemispheric Plasma (FLIP) model calculates plasma density and
temperature above 80 km from one hemisphere to another. One aspect of the
modeling to be addressed is plasmaspheric heating through pitch angle trapping
of ionospheric electrons, which is estimated by assuming a fraction of the
photoelectrons trapped in the plasmasphere depositing a whole of their energy
there. Ongoing radar measurements coupled with the proposed ground-based optical
measurements of photoelectron flux will constrain this estimate of the fraction
of photoelectrons trapped in the plasmasphere.