* 9612422
* Presidential Awards For Excellence In Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring.
* EHR,ESR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Evangeline Sandoval, New Mexico MESA Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612422 Sandoval Established in 1982, the NM MESA currently serves approximately
2,500 students in 7 middle and high schools throughout the state, with 85% of
the participants being underrepresented minorities and 59% being female.
Mentoring is a critical component of the MESA success, which also includes: I.
Weekly contact with advisors/teachers, tutoring, academic counseling, curriculum
based enrichment activities, leadership workshops, field trips, summer
enrichment classes, career awareness speakers, scholarship opportunities, and
academic competitions; II. A continual support system that increases students
chances for success in higher education, because they have developed study,
research and cooperative learning skills; III. Over the last three years, 88% of
NM MESA graduating seniors enrolling in two or four-year institutions and 71% of
those having chosen mathematics, science, or engineering related majors; IV.
Significant MESA impact upon the course offerings and enrollment for
participating schools -- e.g. increase in the number of minorities enrolled in
college intended mathematics and science course sequences; and V. Steady growth
in the number of schools and school districts that have chosen to participate;
school districts must contribute their own resources in this model of shared
responsibility for financial and academic support; the NM State Legislature has
provided a steady growth in funding over the past years.