* 9612427
* Presidential Awards For Excellence In Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring.
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Joaquin Bustoz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9612427 Bustoz Bustoz is Professor of Mathematics at the Arizona State
University. One of 27 Mexican American Ph.D. holders in the Nation in
Mathematics, Bustoz has demonstrated outstanding breadth and depth in improving
mathematics and science education for underrepresented students. He has
established and/or provided: Mentoring programs for underrepresented minority
precollege students living in urban areas and on Arizona reservations to study
mathematics -- his outreach has grown from ten (10) students in 1985 to
currently over 200 minority students participating in the ASU
Mathematics/Science Honors Program (MSHP)each summer, with over 1,000 students
having completed MSHP since 1985; Significant individual and institutional
impact -- one-third of mathematics majors at Arizona State University are
minorities (primarily Native Americans and Hispanics), an unusually high rate,
especially since 86% of the students are non-minority; ASU now leads the nation
in the number of minority mathematics majors; approximately one-half of his
students have obtained degrees in mathematics, science, or engineering fields;
from the initial effort with MSHP, Bustoz has created additional outreach
programs that are now housed collectively in the Institute for Strengthening
Math and Science SUMS ) Enhancement programs for American Indian teachers and
teacher aides -- e.g. Pimas and Papagos Gila River Indian Reservation, and
Navajos from Window Rock where he directs a Young Scholars Project, now in its
seventh year; Activities to increase the ranks of minority teachers, such as
encouraged use of Arizona s Alternative Certification -- approximately 10
minority mathematics majors enter the teaching profession annually and return to
the high schools from which they graduated, including some of the lowest income
schools in Phoenix; Role models for Spanish-speaking students -- by bringing
Spanish- speaking mathematicia ns and graduate students from the U.S. and abroad
to study and teach at ASU; Technical advice to mathematicians to replicate and
adapt his work, e.g., replication of MSHP in South Dakota, where recruitment
from a nearby Sioux Reservation takes place; and Advice to launch the
Strengthening Underrepresented Minorities in Mathematics Program of the
Mathematics Association of America. 9612398 Gutierrez Gutierrez is Professor of
Chemistry and Director of both the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Minority
Access to Research Careers (MARC) and the Minority Biomedical Research Support
(MBRS) Programs at California State University at Los Angeles. His
accomplishments include: Significant impact on minority student college and
university education through his work on NIH funded projects -- over 180
students mentored by him through these programs or his role as a faculty
participant in other department projects such as the NSF Research Improvement in
Minority Institutions (RIMI) and Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Programs; Significant institutional impact -- the American Chemical Society
(ACS), in great part through his effort, established the Committee on Minority
Affairs in 1993 with Gutierrez serving as its first chair, which in turn
established the ACS Minority Scholars Program, a $5 million scholarship program
for undergraduates; and the establishment of the ACS Award for Encouraging
Disadvantaged Students to Pursue Careers in Chemical Sciences. -- as Vice Chair
of the National Academy of Science Committee on a National Scholars Program,
under contract to NASA, he has articulated persuasively the responsibility of
all faculty, but especially science faculty, to seek out talented minority
students and encourage their academic development very early in their
undergraduate career; and Beyond individual students, Gutierrez has effected an
entire cohort of future science professionals. 9612453 Bagayoko Bagayoko is
Professor of Physics and Chancellor s Fellow at Southern University. His
accomplishments include: Establishment of the Timbuktu Academy, which has a
summer program for 100 plus middle and high school students annually and an
academic year program for undergraduates, and is nationally recognized as an
exceptional program for mentoring minority students in SEM disciplines --
Bagayoko has intensively mentored over 200 students through the Physics
Department and the Academy since his arrival at Southern in 1984; Demonstrable
student outcomes -- among Academy students, two have received the University s
highest academic awards, University Grand Marshals; two have received Ph.D.s in
Physics and five others are completing their Ph.D.; 10 students have received
the M.S. degree in Physics; many of these students are themselves making
meaningful contributions to science and society; Significant institutional
impact and replicability -- started in Physics, the Academy program has expanded
to Chemistry and Engineering; while Southern is a predominantly Black
institution, students from a variety of backgrounds have been included and
succeeded in his program, e.g., Asian, Hispanic, and Caucasian; and Strong
testimonials from current graduate students about the influence of Bagayoko
personally and the Academy program on their academic and career pursuits.
9612399 Herman Herman is Associate Professor of Environmental Sciences at the
University of Virginia and has established herself firmly as a role model and
mentor for geoscientists and geoscience educators at her home institution and
more broadly. Nominated by the Association of Women in Science, her
accomplishments include: Advising approximately 55 students of which 40% are
women, four of whom were mentored to the Ph. D. level, 17 to the M.S. level, and
two at the B.S./B.A. level; An excellent publication record in environmental
geochemistry, strong service on a number of national committees and on several
editorial boards; emphasis of research experience in her mentoring of women and
minority students; Innovative science teaching approaches at all levels -- has
developed an effective videotape aimed at helping Earth Science teachers cover
the topic of Groundwater effectively; is a resource for geoscience education for
much of the primary school system in Charlottesville and surrounding counties;
Creation of the Program for Interdisciplinary Research in Contaminant
Hydrogeology (PIRCH), which has resulted in significant NSF Traineeship and
University of Virginia Academic Enhancement Program support, especially for
women and minority graduate students; and Strong letters of support from
students. 9612459 Robin Robin, a retired chemist from A.T.&amp; T. Laboratories,
has served as a volunteer at Science High School, a small, public magnet school
in a large urban city, Newark, N.J. since 1991. His accomplishments include:
Establishment of the Student Independent Research Program, which engages
interested students in the pursuit of long-term science research projects and
encourages them to enter state and national competitions such as the New Jersey
Science Fair, Rutgers University Junior Science Symposium, NAACP ACTSO, National
Black Chemist and Chemical Engineers Science Bowl; Secures grants to maintain
the program, which is not maintained by the school district -- project SEED, an
American Chemical Society grant, and A.T.&amp; T. Minority Grants program;
Directs his own funds into the program; Spends countless hours coaching,
mentoring,