* 9612530
* EUROPA Ocean Workshop; November 12-14, 1996, San Juan       Capistrano, California
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Douglas Nash, Planetary Science Institute
* Fixed Amount Award
* David E. Epp
* 10/31/1997
* USD 22,000.00

OCE-9612530 This NASA and NSF sponsored conference will explore ideas related to
Europa's possible ocean, submarine volcanism, and biological activity. Europa is
one of the four large Galilean satellites of Jupiter. Data and theory have
suggested (though not proven) that Europa has an ocean of liquid water beneath
its icy crust. Europa undergoes tidal heating similar to that driving the
spectacular volcanism on the Jovian moon Io, and this heating may have been
sufficient to melt the ice and maintain an ocean. Among the topics the
conference will address are geologic and geophysical evidence concerning an
ocean, and what its physical state might be. If an ocean exists on Europa, the
question of whether it could support life immediately arises. The first detailed
examination of Europa by the Voyager spacecraft (in 1979) coincided very closely
with the first detailed investigation by oceanographers of volcano- hydrothermal
sites on the Earth's seafloor. That work has shown that in the presence of
liquid water, volcanoes can sustain life without energy from the sun. Submarine
volcanism is also a possibility on Europa. A major purpose of the conference,
then, will be to examine critically the arguments for and against submarine
volcanism on Europa, and the likelihood that such activity could support
biological activity there as well. A related and controversial topic is the
issue of whether life can have originated at submarine volcanic systems, on
Earth and on planets in general. The conference will bring together the
planetary science, oceanography, and exobiology communities to explore these
topics. The conference, jointly supported by NASA's Solar System Exploration
Division (Exobiology Program Office) and NSF's Ocean Science Program, will also
deal with ongoing and future robotic exploration of Europa. The Galileo
spacecraft is now in orbit around Jupiter, and will make multiple flyby
examinations of Europa during its mission. Follow-on missio ns could be flown to
Europa that would address the existence of an ocean in detail, and that would
explore the ocean the ocean if it were found to be present. The conference will
address the measurement techniques that could be used on such missions, and
their implications for further solar system exploration.