* 9612399
* Presidential Awards For Excellence In Science, Mathematics  and Engineering Mentoring.
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Janet Herman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9612399 Herman Herman is Associate Professor of Environmental Sciences at the
University of Virginia and has established herself firmly as a role model and
mentor for geoscientists and geoscience educators at her home institution and
more broadly. Nominated by the Association of Women in Science, her
accomplishments include: I. Advising approximately 55 students of which 40% are
women, four of whom were mentored to the Ph.D. level, 17 to the M.S. level, and
two at the B.S./B.A. level; II. An excellent publication record in environmental
geochemistry, strong service on a number of national committees and on several
editorial boards; emphasis of research experience in her mentoring of women and
minority students; III. Innovative science teaching approaches at all levels --
has developed an effective videotape aimed at helping Earth Science teachers
cover the topic of Groundwater effectively; is a resource for geoscience
education for much of the primary school system in Charlottesville and
surrounding counties; IV. Creation of the Program for Interdisciplinary Research
in Contaminant Hydrogeology (PIRCH), which has resulted in significant NSF
Traineeship and University of Virginia Academic Enhancement Program support,
especially for women and minority graduate students; and V. Strong letters of
support from students.