* 9612343
* Grain-Scale Plastic Deformation in Metals:  Experimental    Observations Using Orientation Imaging Microscopy and       Numerical Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1996,11/30/2000
* Surya Kalidindi, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* K. Linga (KL) Murty
* 11/30/2000
* USD 305,015.00

9612343 Doherty The process of plastic deformation is explored at the level of
individual grains in a polycrystalline metal the related nature of the
interactions between adjacent grains. To this end the evolution of grain-scale
microstructure occurring with deformation in commercially pure aluminum is
studied using a Osplit sample testO in channel-die compression. Back-scattered
Kikuchi diffraction (BKD) and Orientation Imaging Microscopy (OIM) are employed
to determine grain orientations. A selected range of deformation paths, strain
levels, temperatures and strain rates, grain sizes, sub- grain particles, and
starting textures are explored to gain understanding of the deformation process.
A goal of the research is to determine the inherent length scale that is
associated with in-grain misorientations; this is the size of the regions which
rotate together within each grain. Local strain distribution is measured within
and between grains using photoresist techniques and OIM. Modeling is aimed at
correcting observed deficiencies in current models and are extended for the
prediction of the observed inherent length scales. %%% The plastic deformation
of polycrystalline metallic alloys is an important process in wrought alloy
manufacture. The research could lead to a predictive model for in-grain
misorientations and recrystallization. ***