* 9612194
* Spatial Parallelism and Ultra-fast Dynamics in Tunneling    Microscope-Surface and Adsorbate-Surface Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Joseph Lyding, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2002
* USD 983,377.00

9612194 Brady This multidisciplinary research project utilizes advanced optical
science methodology to address several fundamental research areas in the study
of fundamental optical interactions and surface science phenomena associated
with photo-assisted desorption, and in the exploration of coherent dynamics in
metal quantum dots on silicon and InAs semiconductor surfaces. Overall, the
project aims to gain new knowledge and greater understanding of basic issues
associated with the creation, addressing and/or modulation of spatially parallel
arrays of atoms, molecules, or nanostructures. Examples of issues to be
addressed are: coupling of optical signals to surface-bound atoms, propagation
of electrical signals across atomic arrays, registration of ultra-fast optical
signals in surface states to maintain information capacity and coherence, and
the potential utilization of photochemical interactions to create and operate
nanometer scale devices. %%% The project combines concepts and methodologies
from materials science, electrical engineering, chemistry and physics with
advanced optical methods and related characterization tools to address forefront
issues at the interfaces between these disciplines. The research will contribute
basic new knowledge at a fundamental level to several aspects of materials
science, engineering, and information processing. An important feature of the
program is the integration of research and education through the training of
students in fundamental interdisciplinary research areas. ***