* 9612717
* Dissertation Research:  Student Resistance to Learning:     Network Analyses of the High School Experience
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Charles Bidwell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/1998
* USD 7,500.00

9612717 Bidwell This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement study examines the
conditions under which students oppose efforts to educate them. Traditional
views often characterize resistance as something intrinsic to the adolescent
world. In contrast, this research takes the view that resistance is not
necessarily intrinsic to the adolescent world but is in great part determined by
the organization of learning in the classroom and the curriculum. This study
focuses on the multiple relational structures of three separate high schools at
the school and classroom levels. At the school level, the distinct but
interdependent relational structures (i.e., course curriculum, extra-curricular
activities, and student friendships) will be investigated while at the classroom
level micro-relations that persist within individual settings will be examined.
Month-long visits will be conducted in 10th, 11th and 12th grade classes in
three high schools (located in Kansas City, Kansas, Grand Rapids, Michigan and
Brookline, Massachusetts) to administer surveys to students on classroom
friendships, perceptions of teaching style, relationship with teacher and course
subject-matter. Survey data will be supplemented with observational data. These
data will be analyzed to identify the dimension and level at which the
organization of student relations is most likely to lead students to resist
educational efforts. *** ??