* 9612459
* Presidential Awards For Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring.
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Melvin Robin, Science High School
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9612459 Robin Robin, a retired chemist from A.T.& T. Laboratories, has served as
a volunteer at Science High School, a small, public magnet school in a large
urban city, Newark, N.J. since 1991. His accomplishments include: I.
Establishment of the Student Independent Research Program, which engages
interested students in the pursuit of long-term science research projects and
encourages them to enter state and national competitions such as the New Jersey
Science Fair, Rutgers University Junior Science Symposium, NAACP ACTSO, National
Black Chemist and Chemical Engineers Science Bowl; II. Secures grants to
maintain the program, which is not maintained by the school district -- project
SEED, an American Chemical Society grant, and A.T.& T. Minority Grants program;
III. Directs his own funds into the program; IV. Spends countless hours
coaching, mentoring, and acquiring materials and equipment for urban schools
that serve primarily Black and Hispanic students; and V. Of the 21 students
participating since 1992, 18 are underrepresented students (15 Black or Hispanic
and three white females). All have received awards for their achievement,
including one Westinghouse semi-finalist, and a four-year scholarship to Stevens
Institute of Technology for another. Students attend other schools such as
M.I.T., Dartmouth, Bates, and Rutgers University. As a retiree from industry,
Robin was recommended for this award on the basis of the quality and outcomes of
his work with underrepresented minorities in science and mathematics.