* 9612003
* Nonlinear Dynamical Systems Theory for Real-Time DistributedScheduling of Heterarchical Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Neil Duffie, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 08/31/2001
* USD 275,945.00

9612003 Duffie This research involves heterarchical manufacturing systems in
which control is highly distributed among loosely-coupled autonomous entities
that retain a minimal amount of global information. The goal of this research is
to establish a nonlinear dynamical systems theory for modeling and analysis of
real-time distributed control in part-driven heterarchical manufacturing systems
with batch sizes as low as unity and Just-In-Time production. Major issues to be
addressed are (1) innovative continuous feedback control topologies for general
multiple machine configurations, (2) dynamical models that characterize the
behavior of general multiple machine configurations, and (3) rigorous analysis
of system dynamics including state trajectories, stability, steady-state values,
convergence properties, and robustness. Challenging research issues include
modeling nonlinearities and analyzing system dynamics when there is more than
one machine for a given processing step and when parts have to visit more than
one such processing step. Real-time scheduling performance and robustness to
disturbances will be evaluated in the laboratory. This research is novel and
highly relevant to industry needs. There are many non-trivial issues to surmount
making this relatively high risk, but if successful, will represent major
advances.