* 9612317
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometry and Topology of Foliations  and Flows in 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/1996,11/30/2000
* Sergio Fenley, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 11/30/2000
* USD 60,000.00

9612317 Fenley Foliations are a fundamental tool in the study of the topology
of 3-manifolds. A Reebless two dimensional foliation F in a closed 3-manifold M
lifts to a foliation (F1) by topological planes in the universal cover. This
project proposes to study the topological structure of F1, the geometric
properties of F1, and how these relate to the topology and geometry of M. Of
special interest is the study of the large scale geometry and asymptotic
behavior (when M is hyperbolic) of leaves of F1. A second topic to be considered
consists of flows in 3-manifolds and the large scale geometry of flow lines when
lifted to the universal cover. The principal investigator has constructed many
examples of metrically efficient (called quasigeodesic) pseudo-Anosov flows in
hyperbolic 3-manifolds and now proposes to study the consequences of the
quasigeodesic property for the geometry of the stable and unstable foliations
associated to these flows and the finite depth foliations to which these
quasigeodesic flows are almost transverse. A foliation is a decomposition of an
object of dimension n (called a manifold) into a disjoint union of objects of
dimension less than n (called the leaves of the foliation), much the same as a
book (dimension 3) is the union of its pages (of dimension 2). In mathematics
these objects are quite common; for instance, a flow without fixed orbits is a
foliation of dimension 1 (the leaves are the flow lines and they have dimension
1). A general principle of manifold theory is the following: the smaller the
dimension, the easier to understand. Hence foliations are very useful;
understand the leaves and how they are put together to form the manifold and one
partially understands the manifold. This project attempts to understand how the
geometry of the leaves interacts with the geometry of the manifold; in the case
of a book, the leaves sit flat in the manifold, but in general their geometric
behavior is much more complex. The principal investigator hopes to describe this
geometric behavior for a special class of manifolds called hyperbolic manifolds.