* 9612732
* Kinetics and Mechanisms of Adsorbate - Adsorbate Reactions  of Halocarbons and Coadsorbates on Iron Surfaces Studied    In Situ
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1996,09/30/1999
* Donald Land, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 09/30/1999
* USD 258,000.00

The study of the mechanisms and kinetics of the dechlorination of small
organochlorine compounds forms the focus of this research project supported in
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program. Dechlorination of chlorocarbons
and polychlorinated biphenyls on model iron and iron oxide surfaces will be
examined using unique instrumentation for desorbing and identifying reaction
intermediates. The combination of Fourier-transform reflection absorption
infrared spectroscopy with laser desorption Fourier-transform mass spectrometry
will provide information about the mechanisms and kinetics of these important
surface reactions which can not be otherwise obtained. This information may have
a significant impact on the development of environmental remediation processes
for chlorine containing hydrocarbons. The elimination of halogen containing
hydrocarbons from soils and groundwaters is an important environmental task. The
research supported in this project by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
program uses a unique combination of techniques which can identify and quantify
reaction intermediates on surfaces and in the gas phase, to help in the
development of our understanding of dehalogenation chemistry on solid surfaces.
This understanding will enable the design of more effective environmental
remediation approaches for these widely dispersed contaminants.