* 9612562
* Strategies for Overwintering by Hatchlings of Northern      Turtles
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Gary Packard, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 12/31/2001
* USD 178,375.00

9612562 Packard This is a proposal to investigate the adaptive strategies for
overwintering by hatchlings of five species of turtles inhabiting shallow lakes
and marshes in the central and northern Plains. Hatchlings of two species
(snapping turtle, Blanding's turtle) emerge from their subterranean nests in
late summer, and then move overland to lakes or ponds where they establish
residence and spend the winter. Hatchlings of two other species (ornate box
turtle, yellow-bellied mud turtle) dig down through the bottom of their nests
and spend their first winter of life deep in the soil. And hatchlings of the
fifth species (painted turtle) remain inside their shallow, subterranean nests
throughout the winter, and do not emerge from their nests until the soil thaws
the following spring. Why do three different adaptive strategies for
overwintering exist in the assemblage of turtles when neonates of all the
species presumably would benefit from being able to remain for the entire winter
inside their nest cavity? Research that will be performed over a period of 3
years will examine the roles of morphology, physiology, and behavior in enabling
neonatal turtles to survive their first winter of life. Special attention will
be given the integument, because the skin seems to be a barrier to the
penetration of ice from frozen soil into body compartments of neonatal painted
turtles but not to the penetration of ice into body compartments of neonates of
the other species. Accordingly, hatchling painted turtles apparently survive
over winter by exploiting a capacity for supercooling and remaining continuously
unfrozen. Hatchlings of the other species, however, cannot exploit supercooling
because their integuments seem not to resist the penetration of ice into body
fluids from the environment. The absence of such a cutaneous barrier has caused
hatchlings of other species to tap behavioral means for avoiding situations that
could result in inoculation, freezing, and death. Thus, the common thre at of
cold may have resulted in the evolution of three different adaptive strategies
for overwintering by hatchlings in the same assemblage of turtles. The research
there fore will elucidate the principle that evolution commonly produces
multiple answers to the same general problem. ***