* 9613377
* NSF/EPA:  Environmentally-Benign Processing Low             Dielectric Constant Polymers for Microelectronics           Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1996,05/31/2001
* Gregory Raupp, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2001
* USD 307,998.00

Abstract - Raupp - 9613377 This research is motivated by the need for enhanced
thin film materials' performance in microelectronics devices and cost-effective
environmentally benign processes for producing these materials in
microelectronics manufacturing. The global objective is to investigate critical
fundamental processing and materials science barriers related to implementation
of vapor deposited polymers, a promising dielectric option which addresses these
performance, cost and environmental technology drivers. The research targets low
dielectric constant thin film parylenes and polyimides for intermetal dielectric
applications in multilevel interconnection. The PI's will simultaneously
investigate chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of polymer thin films and associated
CVD chamber cleaning and polymer etching. In collaboration with industrial
professionals at Motorola, Inc. and Olin chemicals, the practical process
integration issues and the environmental, safety and health impact of this
alternative technology will be assessed in each step of this study. This
integrated approach will provide a comprehensive technology transfer package to
facilitate implementation in industrial practice. The expected principal
environmental benefits of the technology are as follows: (1) vapor deposition
avoids solvent-based spin-on processes and their associated air emissions and
liquid waste; (ii) vapor deposition employing recovery and recycle of monomer
has a high potential for near zero emission operation; (iii) the need for CVD
chamber cleans should be reduced through appropriate reactor design and process
control; and (iv) chamber cleaning and post-deposition etching of polymer films
can be performed with oxygen-based plasmas, eliminating the need for
perfluorocompounds (PFCs) commonly employed to etch inorganic dielectric films.