* 9613729
* Sensitivity Analysis of Multidimensional Air Qualtiy        Models Development and Application of a Direct Technique to the Mexico-Southwestern United States Border Region
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Armistead Russell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 95,000.00

9613729 Russell The major focus of this proposal is to develop a computationally
effective sensitivity analysis technique for use in multidimensional air quality
models, and to apply that technique to the border region between the US and
Mexico. As part of that application, the research will quantify source impacts
and develop sensitivity coefficients for various model parameters (e.g.
deposition velocities and chemical rate constants). Because of its climate and
rapid growth and industrialization, the Mexico-southwestern United States border
area experiences elevated levels of ozone exceeding the national standards of
the two countries. Addressing this air quality problem in the region is of
particular interest for several reasons: first, the international nature of the
problem, and the expected trans boundary pollutant flow, along with recent trade
agreements (e.g. NAFTA and Maquiladoras); second, the high population growth in
the area; and, third, the level of controls which differ widely between the
various regions. If one can adequately demonstrate the source-air quality
relationships through the application of sensitivity analysis, it is possible to
develop much more cost effective integrated strategies for air pollution control
in the region. It is proposed to develop a computationally attractive
sensitivity analysis technique for use in multidimensional air quality models
based on the direct decoupled sensitivity method. The resulting method will be
designed and constructed in such a way as to be easily transportable between air
quality models that are in common application today, and are being developed for
future use. Furthermore, the system will make use of parallel computing
environments. The method will be applied to air quality modeling along the
Mexico-southwestem U.S. border to better understand pollutant dynamics in that
region, and to quantify the model responses to inputs and model parameters.
Finally, as an example of the power and uses of such techniques, the method will
be applied to address three specific issues of importance in air quality
engineering of interest in that region: explore the use of formal sensitivity
analysis for model evaluation and intercomparison, quantify how ozone
concentrations respond to emissions of various compounds and sources, and to
further explore the use of sensitivity analysis in studying volatile organic
compound (VOC) reactivity scales. The expected results from this project are:
development of a computationally efficient sensitivity method for air quality
modeling; application of the sensitivity analysis method along the Mexico-U.S.
border to better understand the dynamics of air pollutants in that region,
assessment of model sensitivities and uncertainties in the application along the
border region, and a growing relationship between Georgia Tech and Instituto
Technologico Estudios Superiores de Monterrey (ITESM) due both to the direct
collaboration between the two principal investigators, but also due to the
advanced education of a Mexican student (from ITESM) at Georgia Tech.