* 9613561
* NSF/EPA:  A Process Analysis Approach to Pollution          Prevention
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Urmila Diwekar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2000
* USD 250,005.00

ABSTRACT - Diwekar - 9613561 With the growing concern for the environment, it is
necessary to enhance process simulation capabilities and to develop design tools
that account for environmental factors in the design and synthesis of large-
scale chemical processes. A major obstacle in the design and development of
processes incorporating environmental control strategies involve uncertainties
in some of the technical and economic parameters, which commonly lead to
uncertainties in design, plant performance and cost estimates. Incorporating
environmental concerns in the design is a multi-objective problem satisfying a
number of measures and constraints such as controllability, safety, compliance
with regulations, cost and risk. A conceptual design of any chemical process
involves the identification of an optimal flowsheet structure, commonly called
optimal design configuration, obtained typically form a large number of
alternatives constituting the "superstructure". In fact, synthesis, design, and
optimization of large-scale processes involving uncertainties often requires
considerable computational effort. This work and validation of efficient
algorithms for stochastic modeling, stochastic optimization and programming,
multi-objective optimization, and synthesis under uncertainty. The overall
objective is to advance the state-of-the-art in the4 area of process design for
environmental considerations by (a) providing an integrated assessment framework
tool which can be used to insure that environmental issues are fully addressed
in all phases of process engineering activities from synthesis to design to
operations; and (b) developing improved algorithms for stochastic modeling,
stochastic optimization, multi-objective optimization which will enhance the
applicability of the framework for large scale complex problems. Real world
problems in conjunction with participating industries will be used as test beds
for these techniques. The methodology developed will be applied to analyze compl
ex process flowsheets and is expected to provide insights into process
feasibility based on environmental considerations and optimal design, plant
performance and uncertainty issues.