* 9613638
* Fitness Consequences of Avian Coloniality
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Charles Brown, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2001
* USD 216,333.00

9613638 BROWN This project seeks to understand why animals live in groups. Many
different organisms, including humans, show different degrees of group-living:
some animals live in tiny groups or solitarily, whereas others in the same
population may reside in enormous colonies. To understand why some individuals
prefer living in large groups and others in small groups requires knowing the
reproductive consequences of such choices. In what way do certain animals
benefit from groups of one size while others apparently benefit from groups of
another size? This question is addressed in this research, which focuses on a
colonially breeding bird, the cliff swallow (_Hirundo pyrrhonota_), that breeds
on the sides of steep cliffs and canyons and underneath the eaves of bridges and
buildings throughout much of western North America. The objectives are to
determine how different birds sort themselves among different sized nesting
colonies and on what basis; whether there is a single colony size that is best
for all birds (where reproductive success is greatest); whether a swallow's
preference for a particular sized nesting colony is genetically based and thus
inherited from its parents; and how the birds' nesting success is affected if
their nesting colony is changed in size. The research uses primarily mark-
recapture methods that involve bird banding: birds are banded at a particular
site and their subsequent activity and lifespan is determined by recatching them
at that site or others in later years. This study builds on 15 years of past
work on this cliff swallow population. This project will further our
understanding of why animal group sizes vary in nature. Group size affects many
aspects of animal behavior: for example, the spread of disease, extent of
competition for resources such as food, type of mating strategy, and extent of
cooperation and altruism among individuals are all influenced heavily by the
size of a social group. We can better understand these important conseque nces
of group life if we know what causes groups to vary in size in the first place
and if we know whether different groups are composed of different kinds of
individuals. The cliff swallow provides a well-studied animal model whose social
behavior parallels that of other social species, and it will yield insight into
fundamental processes that govern group formation in many kinds of organisms.