* 9613596
* U.S. GLOBEC: Reproductive, Growth and Mortality Rates of    Calanus and Pseudocalanus on Georges Bank
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Mark Ohman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9613596 Ohman The abundance and production rates of Calanus finmarchicus and
Pseudocalanus spp. have been observed to differ greatly between the shallow
well-mixed crest waters of Georges Bank and the deeper waters of the northeast
peak and the southern flank. This project will investigate the hypothesis that
differing physical processes which control the advection of water and
zooplankton from the Gulf of Maine onto different regions of the bank during the
winter, and differences in growth and mortality patterns of the target copepod
species within the different regions of the bank, regulate the population sizes
they attain during the spring and early summer. As part of the U.S. GLOBEC
Northwest Atlantic Field Studies, Phase 2 program this project will focus on egg
production, growth, and mortality of Calanus finmarchicus and Pseudocalanus
spp.. This project will determine: (1) the recruitment of Calanus and
Pseudocalanus on Georges Bank during the winter/spring period, as inferred from
the distribution of nauplii and early copepodites collected with pump samples
during the broad scale surveys; (2) the spatial, seasonal and interannual
variation in egg production and birth rates for the dominant copepod species;
(3) the spatial, seasonal and internal variations in egg viability, egg and
naupliar mortality rates, and naupliar development rates; and (4) whether egg
and naupliar mortality rates are correlated with abundances of potential
predators. ***