* 9613653
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Meromorphic Mappings and   Intrinsic Metrics in Complex Geometry
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Bernard Shiffman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 05/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

9613653 Shiffman This award supports a one year collaborative research project
between Professor Bernard Shiffman of the Japan-US Mathematics Institute (JAMI)
of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland and Professor Junjiro Noguchi
of the Tokyo Institute of Technology in Japan. The project will focus on several
complex variables, concentrating on the subjects of meromorphic mappings and
intrinsic metrics in geometry. The main focus will consist of a conference and
workshop that will provide lectures for students and talks on current research
by Japanese experts and resident experts. They will explore the relationship
between geometry of holomorphic mappings and the theory of complex manifolds, by
concentrating on the topics of Nevanlinna theory, complex dynamics in several
variables, hyperbolicity, moduli of holomorphic mappings, and invariant metrics.
This project would support part of the ongoing activities of JAMI which has
annually co-sponsored conferences with visitors from Japan. The three day
workshop and four day conference (held the same week) are expected to include
60- 70 participants. Many of the participants will include young investigators,
post-doctoral researchers and graduate students. Results of these meetings
should facilitate interaction and collaboration between mathematicians working
on these related topics in the United States and Japan. ***