* 9613626
* Factors Influencing Participation of Local Governmental     Officials in Environmental Policy Making and Implementation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Paul Stern, Social and Environmental Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 11/30/1999
* USD 119,100.00

This research will explore the factors influencing the nature of the
participation (whether or not they participated and how they participated) of
local governmental officials in environmental policy making initiatives
sponsored by the EPA. Participation by local governmental officials is not give
the same attention in the literature as that of citizens, publics, technical
experts, or stakeholders. And yet local governments are often a keystone to
successfully implementing and enforcing environmental policies. The project will
examine three applications from the National Estuary Program: New Hampshire
Estuaries, Casco Bay in Maine and Massachusetts Bays. Maine and Massachusetts
cases were selected because they achieved very different levels of participation
of local governmental officials and they used similar yet not identical
procedural structures. New Hampshire was selected because it is in a much
earlier phase of operation, yet it draws upon the lessons learned in the Maine
and Massachusetts cases. Factors influencing the decision of local governmental
officials to participate in national and regional policy making and
implementation efforts will be examined through a direct interview protocol and
responses to hypothetical policy scenarios. Once it is better understood how
local government officials interpret the messages they receive from decision
making bodies, it will be possible to generate prescriptive advice for how to
approach and involve this body of people in policy making and implementation
efforts.