* 9613035
* The Transition to 'Green' Technology: Implications of       Irreversibility and Nonconvexity
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Michael Toman, Resources For the Future Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ann H. Bostrom
* 09/30/1999
* USD 71,250.00

In the ongoing debate over how to mitigate against long-term pollution threats
(e.g., climate change, accumulative water pollutants) and promote long-term
sustainable economic development, all sides agree on the importance of
developing and disseminating new environmentally-friendly technologies. There is
a significant debate over how this is best done, with many economists advocating
the establishing the use of broad environmental performance standards and
economic incentives for environmental protection that will induce technical
change, while others advocate a more proactive government role in inducing the
use of green technologies. For the most part, the conceptual part of this debate
has been engaged using fairly simple analytical frameworks that do not encompass
a number of important stylized facts: (i) the process of environmental
degradation is dynamic, as is the switchover to new technology; (ii) there are
uncertainties and irreversibilities surrounding both the accumulation of
ecological damages and the costs of new technologies; and (iii) both
environmental degradation and technical change may exhibit nonconvexities
(threshold effects, multiple ecological equilibria, and lumpy technology
transition costs) that complicate the identification of a socially efficient
path and the realization of such a path in practice through appropriate policy.
In particular, a policy of simply `getting prices right` with respect to
environmental damages may not succeed in inducing a socially efficient
investment path with nonconvexities and irreversibilities. The objective of this
research is to expand understanding of these issues by extending existing
dynamic models of production, investment, and pollution accumulation. Of
particular interest is the extent to which efficient outcomes are realizable or
can be approximated in practice given a limited number of relatively `clumsy`
policy tools that are available in practice (e.g., it is impossible to implement
complex dynamically optimal pollution tax paths). The research will consider
both the properties of socially efficient outcomes under conditions of
irreversibility and nonconvexity, and the extent to which pollution
internalization policies (e.g., emissions permits systems) need to be dovetailed
with other policies (e.g., information campaigns, demonstration programs, and
subsidies for initial investments in new technology) to overcome sunk cost
barriers to the adoption of socially efficient new products and processes,
particularly if there are multiple potential socially efficient outcomes. In
addressing uncertainty and irreversibility, the research also will use recent
theoretical advances in valuing `technology options` to address how the value of
waiting versus investing is affected by nonconvexities. The research thus should
contribute to an increased capacity for assessing obstacles to the green
technology transition, and the performance of alternative policies in addressing
problems such as climate change, accumulative pollutants like methyl bromide and
other ozone depletors, and the protection of water bodies from accumulative
pollutants, among other cases.