* 9613166
* NSF/EPA:  Biocatalytic Polymer Synthesis in and from Carbon Dioxide for Pollution Prevention
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Alan Russell, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 02/29/2000
* USD 180,000.00

9613166 Russell The proposed research has two thrusts; one involves using carbon
dioxide (CO2) as either a reactant, solvent or both, and the other uses enzymes
as heterogeneous catalysts in CO2 to promote required reactions selectively at
low temperatures. CO2 will be used as the solvent during the enzymatic
polymerization of diols and diesters to form polyester polyols (hydroxy-capped
polyesters). Polyester polyols are important constituents of polyurethane
elastomers. Presently, they are generated via the high temperature reaction of
diols with diacids. Constant removal of water is used to drive the reaction to
completion. Pollution prevention will be accomplished through energy savings
related to low temperature operation, as well as elimination of cyclic
byproducts through use of the enzyme, lipase. The enzyme may enable the
generation of dihydroxy capped material without resorting to high stoichiometric
imbalances, thus reducing waste. In addition, the use of enzymes in concert with
a pressure- tunable solvent such as CO2 enables the production of polyesters
with narrow molecular weight distributions. Such materials are presently
unavailable using conventional condensation polyester synthetic techniques. The
proposed research also will investigate the details of the polymerization
process in an attempt to rationally design a continuous method for synthesis of
polyol polyester intermediates for the urethane industry. CO2 will be used as a
raw material, in concert with enzymatic catalysis, in the synthesis of diphenyl
carbamate, the monomer for bisphenol A polycarbonate (BAPC), a widely used
thermoplastic. Current processes for production of diphenyl carbonate require
phosgene as a raw material, generating large quantities of waste salt and
organic solvent. A two-step reaction, where CO2 is used in the first step to
generate a dialkyl carbonate, followed by an enzymatically catalyzed
transesterification, will be used to produce diphenyl c arbonate. If successful,
the research will use reactants and processes that save energy, minimize waste
and use an environmentally benign solvent.