* 9614005
* SGER: The Role of Metal Reduction in the Relationship Between Marine Phytoplankton and Their Associated Bacteria
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Lynda Shapiro, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1998
* USD 49,686.00

9614005 SHAPIRO In the relationship between phytoplankton and their associated
bacteria, it is assumed that the bacteria derive nutrition from phytoplankton
exudates, and that phytoplankton utilize the bacteria as a source of specific
vitamins, a source of N or P, or as an alternate carbon source. This SGER
project hypothesizes that a major role of this association relates to metal
reduction and acquisition. Thus, the phycosphere will be examined as a symbiotic
zone of active metal reduction by bacteria and uptake by phytoplankton. As a
first step in examining this hypothesis, the researchers will determine whether
there are replicable assemblages of bacteria living in close association with
phytoplankters, and whether these associations are capable of metal reduction.
During this SGER project phytoplankton clones from the Oregon coast will be
established and will subsequently be tested with 16s rRNA probe analysis for
common marine bacterial genera, including Shewanella putrefaciens, a common
metal-reducing species. Population analysis of bacteria associated with
phytoplankton natural samples, using DNA amplification, will permit the
researchers to characterize bacteria associated with phytoplankton whether or
not they are amenable to culturing techniques. Natural samples will be probed
with 16s rRNA probes generated from the amplified DNA. The significance of this
research lies in its potential to provide a mechanism, based on symbiosis, for
metal uptake by phytoplankton. This may prove critical in understanding those
regions of the world's oceans where metal limitation of primary production is
strongly suggested. ***