* 9614058
* International Workshop on Ultra-high Reynolds Number Flows, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Russell Donnelly, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 64,000.00

9614058 Donnelly This project will fund the "International Workshop on Ultra-
High Reynolds Number Flows at Brookhaven National Laboratory, June 18-20, 1996".
Fully developed turbulence at high Reynolds numbers is a challenging problem of
fundamental importance in nonlinear physics and is of great practical importance
in engineering. While there are several ways of attaining high Reynolds number
numbers, one of the more attractive ways is to use cryogenic gaseous and liquid
helium as the working fluid. This Workshop will bring together a group of
experts on various facets of the turbulence problem: theorists and
experimentalists on fluid turbulence, experts on low- temperature physics, with
emphasis on instrumentation, users of high Reynolds number flow research, etc.
The purpose is to discuss the future of high Peynolds number turbulence research
with some (though not exclusive) focus on helium as the working fluid. The
Workshop will emphasize fundamental physics issues, but the phenomena have long-
range technical importance in the context of practical testing of scale models
for design of aircraft of submarines. %%% This project will fund the
"International Workshop on Ultra- High Reynolds Number Flows at Brookhaven
National Laboratory, June 18-20, 1996". Fully developed turbulence at high
Reynolds numbers is a challenging problem of fundamental importance in nonlinear
physics and is of great practical importance in engineering. While there are
several ways of attaining high Reynolds number numbers, one of the more
attractive ways is to use cryogenic gaseous and liquid helium as the working
fluid. This Workshop will bring together a group of experts on various facets of
the turbulence problem: theorists and experimentalists on fluid turbulence,
experts on low- temperature physics, with emphasis on instrumentation, users of
high Reynolds number flow research, etc. The purpose is to discuss the future of
high Reynolds number turbulence research with some (though not exclusive) focus
on helium as the working fluid. The Workshop will emphasize fundamental physics
issues, but the phenomena have long-range technical importance in the context of
practical testing of scale models for design of aircraft of submarines. ***