* 9614134
* Thermal and Photo-Assisted Reactions on Metal Oxide         Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/1996,10/31/2000
* Vicki Grassian, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 10/31/2000
* USD 275,000.00

This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program, extends Professor Grassian's earlier research work on surface
photochemistry into the field of oxide surfaces. During the tenure of this
three-year continuing grant, thermal and photo-driven chemistry on oxide
surfaces will be examined using techniques ranging from infrared and optical
spectroscopy on high surface area powders to electron spectroscopic studies of
single crystal samples. The interaction of nitrous oxide with zirconia surfaces
forms one focus of the project. The interaction of small molecules of
atmospheric importance with model mineral aerosol surfaces will also be
explored. Results of these basic studies will be of interest in developing an
understanding of catalytic and environmental processes occurring on oxide
surfaces. Light-driven surface reactions are of interest in a variety of
technical applications. For example, the reaction of nitrous oxide on zirconia
surfaces may be of importance in the environmentally benign synthesis of
synthetic fiber precursors. The basic research supported in this project
addresses the detailed mechanisms of surface photochemical reactions such as
this one. In addition, small molecule reactions on model mineral aerosol
surfaces will be examined, with possible application in our developing
understanding of tropospheric mechanisms of air pollution generation.