* 9614689
* Pressure, Stress, and Stratigraphy: Hydrodynamic Analysis   of a Young Compacting Sedimentary Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Peter Flemings, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2000
* USD 89,012.00

9614689 Flemings The research proposed will use observation and theory to pursue
a hydrodynamic analysis of the Eugene Island 330 mini-basin of offshore
Louisiana, Gulf of Mexico. I will characterize the geology (e.g.
lithostratigraphy and age of deposition), pressure, porosity, and stress field
of this system. I will then study the individual behavior of these components.
Examples of this include porosity/stress behavior, stress/pressure behavior, and
rock property/pressure behavior. Finally, I will study the linkages between
these components and develop a quantitative two-dimensional numerical (finite-
element) hydrodynamic model to predict the state and evolution of fluid flow in
this region. This research is new and innovative for three reasons. First, it is
interdisciplinary (it integrates theory and observation in geology, hydrology,
and rock mechanics). Second, it proposes to study a system at a higher
resolution than previous basin-scale fluid-flow studies (for example the work of
Bethke or Garven). Third, theory will be tightly constrained by observation of
this system. A critical component of the project is that I have chosen a mature
oil and gas field with an extraordinary database that will allow me to
characterize this system at the kilometer scale. This includes multiple 3-D
seismic surveys, hundreds of well logs, and direct measurements of pressure and
permeability. This study will directly address a number of continuing
controversies in basinal fluid flow. These include: 1) what causes the
generation of abnormal pressures? 2) what component of fluid-flow is controlled
by fracture permeability? 3) how is the horizontal stress controlled by the
evolution of the pressure field? 4) how and when do faults behave as
permeability conduits? The very nature of these questions shows the
interdependence of rock mechanics, geology and hydrology. The inter-disciplinary
or 'systems' approach that is proposed has the potential to gain insight not
found with studie s of individual components of this system.