* 9614983
* Rheology, Structure, and Dynamics of Langmuir films
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Gerald Fuller, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Foss
* 08/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

This is a grant to support the development and application an interfacial
rheometer based on a new design that offers increased sensitivity and a faster
dynamic response. Furthermore, its open architecture allows for the simultaneous
acquisition of structural measurements using optical methods such as Brewster
angle microscopy and absorptive dichroism. It is demonstrated that most
interfaces comprised of complex materials (fatty acids, polymers, and lipids)
respond in a highly nonlinear manner when subjected to flow. The evidence of
this behavior includes recent measurements performed in the laboratory of the
P.I. showing flow induced changes in interfacial microstructure on a variety of
length scales. Macroscopically, these molecular and mesoscale deformations and
orientations are manifested as shear thinning viscosities and first normal
stresses in two dimensions. However, at the present time, very little is known
about the connection of non-Newtonian interfacial rheology and molecular and
microstructural mechanisms. Mechanical rheological data will be acquired, along
with molecular level responses, to establish structure-property constitutive
relationships. The proposed design of an interfacial rheometer is of the class
of controlled stress instruments. The applied stress is generated using magnetic
field gradients that subject a rod residing at the surface of a Langmuir films
to flow. Both creep compliance and dynamic oscillatory testing will be possible
with the instrument so that the linear and nonlinear viscoelastic properties of
the films can be obtained. The use of a Langmuir trough as the platform for the
measurements will make it possible to establish the desired thermodynamic
condition of the film during the measurements. It is planned to study a variety
of complex fluid interfaces including: (1) fatty acid monolayers in a number of
phases including liquid condensed and solid phases, (2) polymer solution
monolayers where the polymers are rigid, hairy rod materials that resemble two-
dimensional liquid crystals, and (3) lipid monolayers in the liquid expanded,
condensed and two phase states.