* 9614469
* Radiation and Scattering from Antennas or Objects Within    Advanced Artificial Materials.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1998,08/31/2000
* H.Y. David Yang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/2000
* USD 130,000.00

9614469&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;Applications of advanced artificial composite
materials, in which photonic bands and band-gaps can be controlled though an
external current, voltage bias or light source, require that implant sizes and
lattice constants be comparable to at least a wavelength. For these cases,
conventional effective medium approaches are inadequate. In this research, a
double vector-integral equation (DOVIE) method for modeling of radiators and
scatterers within advanced dielectric materials is proposed for first time
development and implementation. The first integral equation formulation is to
find the electromagnetic fields within the implants due to an array of sources.
The second integral equation formulation is to find the currents or fields at
the antennas or scatterers. The DOVIE methodology applies to general periodic
structures with abnormalities, and will allow investigation of many interesting
new phenomena of printed circuits and antennas involving advanced artificial
materials. Expected applications include printed antennas with high directivity,
high gain, multifunctionality and beam steering through controllable artificial
material overlay; electromagnetic shielding provided by photonic band-gap
material coatings on millimeter wave integrated circuits in which the conductor
is too lossy for a desired frequency range (potentially very useful in
integrated circuits); and DOVIE + CAD design of specialty integrated circuit
components such as filters, directional couplers and interconnects.&lt;br/&gt;