* 9614000
* Collaborative Research to Extend the Expanded Version of the U.S. Supreme Court Judicial Data Base:  The Burger Court   Years
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Harold Spaeth, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2000
* USD 42,114.00

Spaeth 9614000 Since 1989, the investigator has produced two major data bases
on the U.S. Supreme Court. The first, which is updated annually, relies
exclusively on the published Reports of the Court's decisions. The second
includes unpublished conference votes and opinion assignments of the justices
who served during the Vinson (1946-1952) and Warren (1953-1968) Courts. This
project will update and extend the previous work to encompass the Burger Court
(1969-1986). Inclusion of the Burger Court conference vote data will provide
investigators with the complete voting record of each justice in every case in
which a conference vote was cast during a 40-term period,. 1945-1986. Analysts
will have access to a standardized, highly reliable data file with which they
may compare individual and Court voting across vote types, as well as voting
changes of individual justices from one type of vote to another. Because a raft
of background, chronological, substantive, outcome, and opinion variables are
associated with these votes, the richness of the resulting data will enhance the
formulation of theory and the testing of hypotheses. %%% Since 1989, the
investigator has produced two major data bases on the U.S. Supreme Court. The
first, which is updated annually, relies exclusively on the published Reports of
the Court's decisions. The second includes unpublished conference votes and
opinion assignments of the justices who served during the Vinson (1946-1952) and
Warren (1953-1968) Courts. This project will update and extend the previous work
to encompass the Burger Court (1969-1986). Inclusion of the Burger Court
conference vote data will provide investigators with the complete voting record
of each justice in every case in which a conference vote was cast during a
40-term period,. 1945-1986. Analysts will have access to a standardized, highly
reliable data file with which they may compare individual and Court voting
across vote types, as well as voting changes of individual justices fro m one
type of vote to another. Because a raft of background, chronological,
substantive, outcome, and opinion variables are associated with these votes, the
richness of the resulting data will enhance the formulation of theory and the
testing of hypotheses. ***