* 9614160
* SGER: Modification and Testing of the Time Series -         Submersible Incubation Device (TS-SID) on the Bermuda Test  Bed Mooring
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Craig Taylor, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 02/28/1998
* USD 47,749.00

9614160 Taylor This Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) award will
validate newly developed instrumentation for autonomous biological activity
measurements. The Time Series - Submersible Incubation Device (TS-SID) is a
mooring-compatible, automated instrument for performing multiple, in situ
microbial incubation experiments. Each incubation involves a cleaning cycle,
procurement of a 400 ml sample at depth with simultaneous introduction of
tracer, and the preservation of up to four pairs of subsamples during
incubations of user-determined length. Testing under real-world conditions is
necessary to validate performance and permit publication of results. Specific
goals are to: A) Modify the subsample distribution valve to prevent leaking and
construct a mooring-strength stainless steel cage to meet the technical
requirements of the Bermuda Test Bed Mooring program. B) Perform incubation
tests in shallow water to confirm proper instrument functioning and establish
the incubation protocol to be used in the Test Bed Mooring studies. C) Place the
instrument on the Bermuda Test Bed Mooring to perform autonomous primary
production measurements. This new instrumentation addresses the need to reduce
the temporal disparity between key biological measurements, and correlative high
resolution physical and biophysical measurements, as well as to provide a means
for investigating underlying physiological response of microorganisms to changes
in the environment. Because most of the labor intensive manipulations have been
automated, it is possible to increase the frequency of measurements in
biological time series studies (up to several measurements per day) for directly
quantifying the effects of seasonal or episodic physical phenomena upon
biological activities, such as phytoplankton primary production.