* 9614339
* READING RAINBOW:  Literature-based Math
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Lee Rockwell, Nebraskans for Public Television Inc (NPTV)
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 12/31/1998
* USD 850,000.00

9614339 Liggett Nebraskans for Public Television is developing the math strand
in Reading Rainbow. Under this grant, the project will "re-purpose" 30 existing
Reading Rainbow program for use in mathematics learning, produce two new math-
focused programs, and institute a comprehensive outreach campaign. Books
currently being considered for the new programs are Mama Bear, which looks at
money and its uses and examines some simple economics; and Echoes for the Eye
which explores patterns in nature. The outreach will solicit and involve
families served by the National Urban League; recruit school and community-based
children's librarians in the math-based literature effort; and expand the local
public broadcasting outreach efforts related to the math focus of the series
from the eight model stations in the previous year to all interested public
television stations. The target will be to involve at least 75 stations in
substantive outreach to families and schools. The project also will develop and
disseminate a new print piece modeled after the very successful Math is
Everywhere Reading Rainbow Teachers Guide which has been used by over 3,000
teachers. Twila Liggett will continue as Executive Producer and Project Manager
and LeVar Burton will remain as host and Co-Executive Producer. Cecily and Larry
Truett will be Supervising Producer and Producer/Director respectively. Advisors
include Herbert Ginsburg from Teachers College, Columbia University; Lucille
Mahon, Math Coordinator, NYC Community School District 2; Solomon Garfunkel,
Executive Director, COMAP, Inc.; and Judith Jacobs, Director of the Center for
Education and Equity in Mathematics, Science, and Technology at California State
Polytechnic University.