* 9614540
* CONFERENCE: Second International Conference on Digital Power System Simulators; May 28-30, l997; Montreal, Canada
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Mladen Kezunovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/1997
* USD 5,000.00

9614540 Kezunovic The Second International Conference on Digital Power System
Simulators (ICDS '97) is being organized with an objective of providing a forum
for exchange of information among universities, research organizations,
manufacturers, consultants and utility industry regarding research,
development,implementation and application in the area of digital power system
simulators. The First Conference (ICDS '95) was the inaugural gathering on this
subject and has demonstrated a strong interest in this subject with over 70
papers presented from over 20 countries and close to 150 participants present.
The exhibit of the state-of-the-art simulator equipment at the First Conference
and a similar plan for the Second Conference provide participants with a unique
opportunity to see demonstrations of the existing, and new, designs. With recent
restructuring of the power industry, it becomes important that efficiency and
skills of the personnel to be enhanced. Digital simulators provide for an
opportunity of comprehensive study of various power system phenomena using their
interfaces that facilitate complex evaluations of new power system designs and
related control equipment. The time consuming and expensive approaches of the
past where either field tests or analog simulators are used can be substituted
with highly automated, low cost simulators. The ICDS '97 is a unique forum for
discussion of the most recent issues in this area. The U.S.A. academic
institutions have had very little access to advanced analog simulators in the
past due to the excessive cost. Today, low cost digital simulators can be
developed at the universities using readily available tools. A need to educate
students in this important area is pressing since this can lead to their
interest in developing and/or using such equipment in the future. This proposal
is aimed at supporting travel of the interested students to the conference to
present and/or to participate in va rious discussions and presentations. ***