* 9614847
* Jurassic Floras of the Carapace Nunatak Area: Evolution and Paleoclimatic Significance
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Thomas Taylor, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/2002
* USD 339,228.00

OPP 9614847 Taylor and Taylor Abstract This award supports a project to
systematically collect and analyze the Jurassic fossil floras from three levels
at Carapace Nunatak, in southern Victoria Land, and to complete reconnaissance
for similar aged deposits at Shapeless Mountain near the head of Wright Valley.
These floras represent the most extensive deposits of Jurassic fossil plants
that are known from the continental portion of Antarctica. They are poorly
known, both from a biostratigraphic and floristic standpoint, and as such are
important not only to our understanding of floral changes in Antarctica, but
also to correlations with other Gondwana continents. In addition to impressions
and compressions, the site also contains permineralized specimens. In this rare
preservation type, cells and tissue systems are intact so that details about the
anatomy and morphology of these Jurassic plants can be evaluated. The
preservation of the permineralized floral elements at Carapace is identical to
those of Permian and Triassic age that have been studied in over the past ten
years. As a result a continuum of structurally preserved plant fossils extending
from the Permian into the Upper Jurassic of Antarctica are available for
examination. In this context it will be possible to examine details of seed
plant growth, development and evolution at high paleolatitudes during the latter
stages of the Paleozoic and extending into the Jurassic. The few specimens
collected during an earlier reconnaissance at Carapace Nunatak suggest a flora
rich in conifers and seed ferns. The conifer components will be important in
evaluating basal character states within the major conifer families, while the
seed ferns will be useful in evaluating the characters and relationships of
these Mesozoic gymnosperms to the geologically younger flowering plants. The
site also contains some woody specimens (small twigs, fragments of wood), in
which the tree rings will be analyzed and com pared with those from other high
latitude sites, both older (Permian and Triassic) and younger (Cretaceous,
Tertiary). Because of the patchy nature of the silicification and the
discontinuous sedimentary beds, field work is anticipated to involve primarily
day trips via helicopter to the sites immediately followed by sectioning of
material in the Crary Laboratory at McMurdo Station in order to reduce the
collecting of unproductive material.