* 9614347
* He-Ne-Ar Isotope Studies in Iceland, Heard Island and       La Palma (Canaries):  Identifying Mantle Plume              Signatures and Crustal Contamination
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* David Hilton, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2000
* USD 135,520.00

9614347 Hilton The presence of distinct reservoirs in the mantle as indicated by
the geochemical and isotopic characteristics of ocean island basalts provide key
constraints on the geodynamic history of the earth. This proposal seeks to
characterize the He-Ne-Ar isotopic compositions and concentrations of samples
from three ocean islands previously studied for their geochemical and Sr-Nd-Pb
isotope systematics that show different mantle affinities: Heard Island
(EM1/EM2), Iceland (DMM-FOZO), and La Palma, Canaries (HIMU). The proposed work
will search for rare gas differences between the different mantle source
reservoirs and will consider the degree of coupling between rare gases and
radiogenic isotopes. A specific aim will be to test the presence of a mantle
component (FOZO or 'C') common to all three ocean islands. If present, an
attempt will be made to characterize its rare gas and radiogenic isotope
systematics. An important aspect of this work will be to compare the results
obtained by measuring different sampling media (i.e. geothermal fluids, glass
rims of basalts, and mafic phenocrysts) to evaluate their capabilities for
preservation of features that are characteristic of the mantle source region or
susceptibility to modification by upper-crustal (magma chamber) processes.
Another goal of this study will be to consider the integrity of the 'low-3He'
hotspot signal found in some ocean islands to evaluate if this is a mantle
feature or a crustal overprint introduced immediately prior to eruption in
crustal magma chambers.