* 9614200
* Formation Mechanisms of Self-Assembled Monolayers
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Daniel Schwartz, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 02/29/2000
* USD 222,254.00

This new three-year continuing grant in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program will support studies of the fundamental growth mechanisms of self
assembled monolayer (SAM) systems. Using scanning force microscopy and Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy, Professor Daniel Schwartz and his students at
Tulane University will study model self- assembling systems, with the goal of
identifying and understanding the various processes involved in the nucleation
and growth of self-assembled monolayers. Alkylphosphonic acid monolayers on mica
will serve as the model system, and results will be correlated with further
studies of SAM systems involving alkanethiols on gold surfaces. Growth modes,
surface patterning and kinetic growth parameters will be investigated. Self-
assembled monolayer systems for the formation of organic thin films show promise
in possible molecular electronics applications, as possible corrosion
inhibitors, and in various other new materials applications. Very little is
known about the process of nucleation and film growth in the self assembling
systems. This research project will probe these questions using state of the art
scanning probe microscopy and infrared spectroscopic methods. A basic
understanding of film growth processes should result from this work, which will
have wide applicability in the synthesis and use of new materials.