* 9614236
* Adaptive Signal Processing for Communications by Maximum    Partial Likelihood Estimation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Tulay Adali, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/1998
* USD 60,000.00

This research aims at developing a unified statistical framework for nonlinear
signal processing for communications by using a recent extension of maximum
likelihood estimation, the maximum partial likelihood (MPL) estimation theory,
which allows for dependent and missing observations, and sequential processing
of data using only the information that is available at the time of processing.
Previous research has established the theoretical foundation for the statistical
analysis of MPL estimation with a general nonlinear probability model and
provided a very useful information theoretic connection. The inclusion of the
dependent data in the framework allows addressing of problems in coding and
modulation in the presence of sources and channels with memory. This research
includes development of a new class of realtime adaptive signal processing
algorithms based on MPL estimation by using gradient optimization and
information theoretic alternating projections, and the study of their
statistical and dynamic properties and implementations in specific
communications applications such as equalization in long distance optical fiber
communications and voiced/unvoiced/transition classification in variable rate
speech coding. Another important part of the effort is the investigation of the
choices for the conditional probability model within the MPL framework, for
which, along with other nonlinear models, such as polynomials, finite normal
mixtures, and neural networks, piecewise linear models are used to provide a
highly desirable compromise between the approximation ability of nonlinear
structures and the efficiency and theoretical accessibility of the linear domain
to develop new adaptive algorithms. The techniques which result from this work
are very likely to lead to breakthroughs in realtime signal processing for
communications via new algorithms with superior performances and in the general
theory of nonlinear techniques in communications via rigorous treatment of t he
underlying dependent time series problems.