* 9614875
* The Effect of Quaternary Climate Change on the Balance of   Silicate Mineral Weathering and Eolian Input in Desert Soils
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Rosemary Capo, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2000
* USD 126,139.00

9614875 Capo The interaction of atmospheric processes and terrestrial weathering
is crucial to understanding global geochemical cycling and its relationship to
climate change. The quantification of cation fluxes in the soil-atmosphere
system is an essential part of this problem. Knowledge of the effect of climate
change, time, parent material and other soil-forming factors on the development
of desert soil and the storage and mobility of elements is also critical. The
objective of this research is to quantify the effect of atmospheric input and
silicate mineral weathering on Quaternary desert soil pedogenesis as a function
of climatic regime. We will use a combination of field, mass balance and isotope
tracer studies to examine the factors involved in soil formation in desert soils
over the last 2 million years. Soil profiles from the Desert Soil-Geomorphology
Project of the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service, near Las Cruces, NM, and from
Kohala Peninsula, Hawaii, will be studied to place constraints on the role of
atmospheric addition of cations and in situ silicate weathering in arid to
semiarid environments in an eolian-dominated and a silicate weathering-dominated
system over Quaternary time. Strontium isotope measurements will be combined
with micromorphologic studies, major and trace element analyses, and cation mass
balance calculations in order to (1) determine the sources and quantify the
relative contributions of cations into desert soil systems; (2) examine the
locations, rates and mechanisms of silicate mineral weathering within the soil
profile; and (3) identify shifts in the relative contributions of silicate
mineral weathering and eolian input to the soil cation budget as a function of
climate change. Well documented and preserved soil chronosequences at both
locales permit detailed sampling of modern, relict, and buried soil profiles of
known age and climatic history. The strontium isotopic and major and trace
element composition of soil parent material, local atmo spheric inputs from dust
and rain, and soil carbonate will be determined. Calcium provencance in the soil
will be determined by Sr isotopic analysis. Mass balance analysis will quantify
the gain, loss, and redistribution of cations in the soil system. These data
will b correlated with existing radiocarbon, stratigraphic, stable isotope,
pollen and paleohydrology records. The data will aid in reconstructing the
history of desert soil formation over the Quaternary as a function of
environmental change.