* 9614709
* Collaborative Investigation of Earliest Crayfish:           Paleobiologic, Paleoecologic and Paleoclimatic Implications
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Molly Miller, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/2000
* USD 52,948.00

Miller: OPP 9614709 Isbell: OPP 9615045 Babcock: OPP 9614989 Abstract During
the 1995-96 Austral summer field season the oldest known fossil crayfish and one
of the oldest known occurrences of fossil crayfish burrows were found in the
Shackleton Glacier area of Antarctica. This award supports a collaborative,
interdisciplinary study to expand on these discoveries. The crayfish claw was
found in the Upper Carboniferous to Lower Permian Pagoda Formation deposited in
glacial environments 280 to 300 million years ago; the discovery pushes back the
first occurrence of crayfish 65 to 75 million years. The crayfish burrows were
found in the Lower Triassic Fremouw Formation deposited approximately 240
million years ago. Their abundance and complexity indicate that crayfish
developed burrowing behavior early in their long history. The objectives of the
study are to collect additional crayfish body and trace fossils from Antarctica,
to use these fossils to develop further insight into the depositional conditions
in parts of that continent during intervals of the Late Carboniferous- Early
Permian and the Early Triassic, and to study the early evolutionary and
burrowing history of freshwater astacoid decapods (crayfish). Specifically, the
work plan is: 1) to search for more fossil crayfish and crayfish burrows in the
Pagoda Formation; 2) to interpret the way of life of the crayfish in the Pagoda
Formation and relate it to the crayfish morphology; 3) to reconstruct the
depositional environment and paleoclimate recorded by the crayfish-bearing
rocks; 4) to search for crayfish within burrows in the Fremouw Formation; 5) to
quantitatively describe the burrows in the Fremouw Formation; and 6) to compare
the morphology and behavior of Late Carboniferous to Early Permian crayfish and
burrows to those of the Early Triassic and later. This study will elucidate the
evolutionary and behavioral history of crayfish. Modern crayfish exert an
important control on paramet ers such as energy flow, biotic species
composition, and biotic abundance in many different aquatic ecosystems. This
proposed study will yield information about how and when this environmental and
behavioral diversification took place, as well as increase understanding of the
late Paleozoic and early Mesozoic paleoclimates.