* 9614930
* Dissertation Research:  Pliocene Hominid Foraging Behavior  at Sterkfontein Member 5 (South Africa):  Insights From     Actualistic Studies of Modern Chimpanzees and Their Environ
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1998
* Henry Bunn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1998
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Henry Bunn Mr. Travis Pickering will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to examine faunal remains
associated with early hominid skeletons to determine whether such materials
accumulated through non-human processes or as the result of human activity. If
the latter is the case, then analysis of these materials will permit scientists
to gain insight into early hominid diet and behavior. If the opposite proves
true, then faunal remains can provide information on the specific local
environment in which a hominid lived, but little more than that. A number of
natural processes can act to aggregate bones - human and otherwise - into one
place: leopards, porcupines and hyenas for example all accumulate such remains
in desecrate concentrations. To determine whether humans are the responsible
agent scientists have used as controls archaeological sites where it is known,
on the basis of other evidence, that hunting has taken place and also conducted
butchering experiments using stone tools to search for `signatures` of human
butchering behavior. Likewise they have collected bones from hyena and other
carnivore dens and from lion kills to determine the characteristics of non-human
carnivore modification. As Pickering notes however it is quite unlikely that the
earliest hominids who lived millions of years ago behaved in ways similar to
their more recent counterparts and one has very little idea what such an
assemblage should look like. Because they were similar in size to chimpanzees
and probably relied primarily on their hands and teeth, Pickering believes that
modern chimpanzees may provide a relevant model. Although it is not an important
element in their diet, chimpanzees do eat meat and hunt and kill animals in the
wild. In the first stage of this research Mr. Pickering will provide captive
chimps with goat carcasses, and allow the chimps to feed on them. The residues
will be collected, cleaned and taken to the University of Wisconsin for
zooarchaeological analysis which focuses on the location and nature of gnaw
marks and on breakage patterns. In a later stage of the research, also supported
through this grant, he will travel to South Africa to analyze faunal remains
from the australopithecine site of Sterkfontein. Similarities and differences in
skeletal part representation and bone modifications between the Sterkfontien
material modern control material will then be noted. This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide insight into early hominid behavior. It
will help to develop analytic techniques which can be employed in many sites and
it will assist in training a promising young scientist.