* 9614752
* West Siberian Sequence Stratigraphy and Mesozoic Eustasy:   Testing a Quantified Sea-Level Curve Toward Application     to Sedimentary Basins
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1997,09/30/2000
* Dork Sahagian, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2000
* USD 180,013.00

9614752 Sahagian We propose to develop a self-consistent depositional model of
the West Siberian Basin by sequence stratigraphic analysis of the Jurassic-
Neocomian section. Existing stratigraphic models have led to inconsistencies in
basin stratigraphy. We also propose to test the validity of the Quantified
Eustatic Curve (QEC) developed in our previous study by comparing against the
stratigraphy of tectonically independent regions. We will then apply the QEC to
quantify the subsidence history of various parts of the West Siberian Basin.
Motivation to conduct this proposed study stems from the following: -- No basin-
scale sequence stratigraphic analysis of West Siberia has ever been performed,
although copious stratigraphic information has already been accumulated. -- The
depositional history of West Siberia is not well understood because most
previous investigations have been focused on local petroleum exploration. --
Basin subsidence has not been well constrained because it has been impossible to
separate the eustatic signal from basin stratigraphy. -- The recently developed
Quantified Eustatic Curve (QEC) based on Russian Platform stratigraphy must be
tested on tectonically independent basins before it can be used as a globally
applicable tool. West Siberia provides an ideal test case because of its well-
established biostratigraphic correlation with the Russian Platform. -- It will
be possible to use the newly constructed Quantified Eustatic Curve to filter the
eustatic signal from tectonic and sedimentary factors for any basin, once it has
been tested. -- No quantified eustatic input has been available for synthetic
stratigraphic models. Inclusion of the Quantified Eustatic Curve will enhance
their applicability to basin analysis. Our plan of attack includes: -- Data
Compilation -- Sequence stratigraphic analysis -- Backstripping and construction
of relative sea-level curves -- Further testing of the Quantified Eustatic Curve
-- Application of eustatic cu rve to basin stratigraphy and determination of
subsidence history -- Utilization of synthetic stratigraphic simulations to
fine-tune parameters and test system sensitivity to parameter uncertainties. We
will first compile a database including geophysical, lithostratigraphic, and
paleontologic information from published literature and unpublished data housed
in Siberian Institutes. We will then apply sequence stratigraphic techniques to
selected regions in West Siberia in order to develop a consistent model of basin
stratigraphy and depositional history. The next part of the proposed project
involves construction of local relative sea-level curves by backstripping
individual points in the stratigraphic database. Our previously constructed
Quantified Eustatic Curve will be tested and then applied to the local relative
sea-level curves, making it possible to quantify the subsidence and
sedimentation histories of the different parts of the basin. Finally, we will
construct synthetic stratigraphy of West Siberia using standard modelling
packages. The results of the project will be significant on local and global
scales in that the project will: -- include the first basin-scale sequence
stratigraphic analysis of West Siberia (basin-scale), thus providing a better
understanding of its depositional history. -- reconcile the differences between
presently existing, parochial depositional models. -- produce a quantified
history of basin subsidence more reliably than previously possible. -- provide a
test of the applicability of the recently constructed Quantified Eustatic Curve
for filtering the eustatic signal from basin stratigraphy. -- be the first use
of the Quantified Eustatic Curve in synthetic stratigraphic computer models.