* 9614512
* Collaborative Research: Refinement of the Late Permian and  Early Triassic Time Scale through Integrated Ar/Ar and U/Pb Radioisotopic Dating and Magnetostratigraphy
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Maureen Steiner, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/1999
* USD 42,989.00

9614512 Steiner Environmental extrema at the end of the Paleozoic are manifest
in evidence for profound marine regression, severe faunal and floral
extinctions, and geochemical and isotopic anomalies (e.g. Holser and Magaritz,
1987; Erwin, 1993; Veevers et al., 1994). The search for a cause or causes, as
well as establishing genetic links between the observed phenomena, is hindered
by a paucity of reliable geochronologic data. Though the Permian-Triassic (P-T)
boundary is now reasonably well dated, much work remains to test whether the
boundary events were globally isochronous and to establish the time scale of
events before and after the boundary. Whether the extinctions were protracted or
rapid, or occurred in pulses, relies on better calibration of the time scale.
The research proposed herein would provide high-precision Ar/Ar and U/Pb dates
for tephras combined with magnetostratigraphic data, which would vastly improve
the resolution of the time scale. Establishing a well-calibrated magnetic
polarity time scale will facilitate global correlations and help obviate
problems arising from faunal provincialism and possible diachronism of
biostratigraphic boundaries. The proposed research would concentrate on sections
in the western interior U.S. for which many data and samples already been
obtained. The project will also include geochronologic work and paleomagnetic
feasibility studies are proposed which would help determine whether sections in
Argentina, Australia, China, Greenland, New Zealand, and South Africa merit
future research towards the goals of this project.