* 9614596
* Synthesis and Characterization of Magnetic Alloys Based on  Expanded Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1997,01/31/2001
* George Waddill, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 01/31/2001
* USD 395,712.00

9614596 Yelon This research explores the stability of substitutional-
interstitial magnet compounds. New compounds which are doubly substituted (using
an OatlasO to guide the atom selection) will be prepared and characterized. In
addition the research advances from 2-17 phases to 1-12 and 6-23 phases. In
prior work neutron diffraction and Mossbauer techniques were used to investigate
a large number of magnetic alloy systems, and from this effort an "atlas" for
the location of substitutional atoms in the R2Fe17 lattice was developed. The
details of the changes in Fe-Fe bounding were followed in this system and in
interstitially modified compounds. It became clear that not all of the effects
on Curie temperature could be attributed to magnetovolume effects, and
associated theoretical modeling contributed to better understanding of these
compounds. It was observed that introducing interstitial carbon by induction or
arc-melting during the materials synthesis leads to a modification of the
substitutional occupancy patterns, and this could result in enhanced stability
of interstitial compounds. This research is extended to novel interstitial
compounds in which the interstitial atoms are incorporated from the gas phase
(e.g., SiH4, B2H6) or from the melt in which the interstitial atom is tightly
bonded to the substitutional atom (e.g., TiB, VC). The research now makes use of
photoemission measurements of the electronic density of states to compliment the
other experiments and test the theoretical calculations being carried out by
collaborators. %%% The substitutional-interstitial magnetic compounds under
investigation here show potential for magnet applications. The research is
building improved understanding for optimum design of the atomic structural of
magnetic materials. ***