* 9614807
* A National Conference on Rapid Prototyping; October 1-2,    1996; College Park, MD
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Guangming Zhang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 02/28/1997
* USD 25,000.00

9614807 Zhang The award supports the National Conference on Rapid Prototyping to
be held at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, October 1-2,
1996. The objectives of the conference are: (1) to bring together of scientists,
engineers, developers, and users from academia, industry, government, and trade
associations to discuss key issues in rapid prototyping engineering research;
and (2) to encourage students to exchange research experiences in the rapid
prototyping education. The organizers plan to invite ten research leaders in the
rapid prototyping field to discuss fundamental research issues. Invited
companies will be demonstrating their recent developments with exhibits. The
organizers also plans to invite ten graduate students from different
universities to exchange their research experiences in this field. The
participating students will be nationally selected. In addition, four high
schools in the State of Maryland will be invited to participate in the hands-on
workshop and exhibits to learn about rapid prototyping technologies at the
conference. A conference proceeding will be assembled by the awardee. The
principal investigator and his colleagues have organized similar conferences in
the past. The University of Maryland has made strong commitment to support the
activities. In addition, the Student Chapter of the Society of Manufacturing
Engineers (SME) at the University of Maryland is co-organizing the conference..