* 9614672
* Assessing Cretaceous Vegetational Change: Palynological,    Mesofossil and Macrofossil Evidence from the Atlantic       Coastal Plain
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Peter Crane, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/1999
* USD 127,070.00

9614672 Crane The mid-Cretaceous diversification of angiosperms marks the
transition from Mesozoic terrestrial ecosystems dominated by ferns, conifers,
cycads and Bennettitales, to more modern ecosystems dominated by angiosperms. In
the paleobotanical record this transition is much more profound than that
occurring at the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary. Angiosperm macrofossils are
sparse in pre-Aptian fossil floras, but by the Cenomanian angiosperm leaves are
diverse, abundant and frequently dominant in paleobotanical assemblages.
Compilations of data on macrofloras and microfloras (palynofloras), especially
from western North America, show that angiosperms had attained within-flora
diversity levels of about 40%-80% by the end of the Cretaceous, but there is
both palynological and macrofossil evidence that angiosperm abundance remained
subordinate to gymnosperms and ferns in some habitats, and perhaps over large
geographic areas. In this proposal we request support for a critical study of
the pattern of angiospem diversification to provide a more detailed insight into
the group's rise to ecological dominance, and to clarify temporal changes in the
composition of Cretaceous terrestrial ecosystems. Our approach will include
consideration of both palynological and macrofossil evidence but will also
incorporate detailed studies of newly discovered and highly informative
mesofossil assemblages (composed of small flowers, fruits, seeds, shoots, and
leaf and wood fragments), which have not been used previously to establish
stratigraphic ranges and assess Cretaceous vegetational change. Because there is
a clear geographical pattern to the angiosperm diversification (initial
radiation at low paleolatitudes and subsequent movement into high
paleolatitudes), we focus on a sequence of exceptionally-preserved fossil floras
in a single area - the Atlantic Coastal Plain of eastern North America - where
it is possible to integrate data on the abundance and diversity of macrofossils,
mesofossils and po llen-spore assemblages. Specifically we will: I) document the
leaf, mesofossil and pollen-spore assemblages from eight localities ranging in
age from Early Aptian to Early Campanian and establish the systematic affinities
of selected dispersed pollen and spores based on the affinities of the
mesofossils containing comparable in situ palynomorphs; ii) compare temporal
changes in the diversity and abundance of major groups of vascular plants, using
data from mesofossils as an independent test of patterns documented at the same
sites by macrofossils and palynofloras; iii) identify discrepancies in the
patterns revealed by different organ systems, both through direct comparison,
and through comparison of dispersed palynofloras with pollen and spores
preserved within flowers, cones and sporangia. These results will be used to
interpret the ecological significance of geographic and stratigraphic patterns
in pollen and spores based on an already completed database of more than 2,500
Cretaceous palnofloras from North America