* 9614165
* Isotopic Studies of Hydrothermal Flow Systems Above and     Below the Duluth Complex, Midcontinent Rift System,         Minnesota
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Edward Ripley, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2000
* USD 103,461.00

9614165 Ripley In order to better understand the processes involved in the
development of hydrothermal flow systems associated with continental rift-
related magmas, a detailed oxygen and hydrogen isotopic study is planned, to be
augmented by radiogenic isotopic analyses where competing processes may have
produced similar stable isotopic signatures. Results of a one-year pilot study
indicate that above the Duluth Complex hydrothermal fluid flow was channeled in
the North Shore Volcanic Group within permeable flow tops and bottoms, and
possibly along the contact of sills within the Proterozoic sedimentary rocks
below the Complex. Additional O and H isotopic measurements of sills located
both above and below the Complex are planned to better define the nature of the
hydrothermal circulation system association with emplacement of the Duluth
Complex and hypabyssal intrusives. Modeling of isotopic exchange and reactions
will be pursued based on temperature constrains, flow parameters, and water/rock
ratios, and both equilibrium and kinetic fractionation. Some Sr, Nd and Pb
isotopic analyses are planned. Potential variations in radiogenic isotope values
as a function of alteration and intensity of water-rock interaction will also be
determined. Results will be of particular significance to the interpretation of
possible origins of platinum-group element mineralization in the Duluth Complex
and will lead to a better understanding of crust-magma interaction in rift
environments worldwide.