* 9615970
* Chronological Control for Chiefdom Development in the Upper Tennessee Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Lynne Sullivan, The University of the State of New York
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 31,090.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Lynne Sullivan and a graduate
assistant will develop a ceramic chronology for the time period from ca. 1,200 -
1,600 AD for the Eastern Tennessee region. This area has yielded archaeological
materials with the potential to address significant anthropological questions,
but presently sites can not be placed in an accurate relative or absolute
sequence because chronological control is lacking. Because pottery designs
change in systematic ways over time, archaeologists have developed detailed
analytic methods to isolate and describe time sensitive attributes which permit
the establishment of a master sequence. Materials from individual sites can then
be compared to the master chronology and placed in relative time. With the
addition of radiocarbon dating such systems can then be anchored to absolute
years. Dr. Sullivan and graduate assistant will seriate whole or reconstructible
ceramic vessels excavated from grave situations in Eastern Tennessee. These are
curated at the McClung Museum of the University of Tennessee. The seriation will
be cross-referenced with sherds from stratigraphic sequences and tied to dates
from radiocarbon assays. In the thousand years before the arrival of Columbus
Native American societies across much of North America were transformed from
highly mobile egalitarian groups into settled agricultural communities. This
process was accompanied by the growth of social and political complexity and the
rise of hierarchically organized chiefdoms. Widespread across the Midwest was a
system marked by large sites with raised earthen mounds which functioned as
centers for political and religious authority. What makes Eastern Tennessee of
particular archaeological interest is the appearance of agricultural sites but
the lack of central mound organization. Archaeologists wish to understand both
how such chiefdoms were organized and why the process is apparently different in
this one region. Although many sites are known, to achieve maximum usefulness
they must be placed in a secure chronological context and Dr. Sullivan's
research is directed towards this goal. The work is important because it will
provide a chronological tool which will increase the scientific value of a large
number of already excavated archaeological sites. It will permit scientists to
address significant questions of culture change and development.