* 9615819
* Categorization and Expertise in Human Visual Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Michael Tarr, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 04/30/2001
* USD 233,607.00

9615819 TARR This research will investigate visual recognition mechanisms
employed by human observers across different levels of categorization and
expertise, with particular reference to the difference between faces and non-
face objects. Earlier studies making claims for face-specific recognition
mechanisms include a number of experimental confounds. Addressing these concerns
will first require the use of computer graphics to create carefully controlled
three-dimensional objects for presentation in psychophysical,
neuropsychological, and functional neuroimaging experiments. These objects will
include a set of non-face control objects that will combine several properties
of faces (such as a fixed configuration of parts and homogeneity across the
class) but none of their superficial characteristics. A first set of
psychophysical experiments will use these novel stimuli, as well as familiar
classes of objects, to assess which of the several "face-specific" behavioral
effects described in the literature can be obtained for a) individual as opposed
to more categorical judgments for the same objects and, b) with experts as
opposed to novice participants. New expertise training procedures will provide
methods for manipulating participants' experience with the novel object class as
well as a better understanding of the reorganization of recognition mechanisms
that may occur during expertise acquisition. A second set of experiments will
test brain-lesioned patients traditionally classified as having a face-specific
disorder in neuropsychological experiments with the same object class to test
whether face-recognition deficits may be better described as an impairment of
exemplar-level processing mechanisms. Testing of these patients will be
performed in a manner closer to what is standard in the testing of normal
participants, by improving the control of object presentation and of response
measurements, in particular using reaction times and signal detection measure s.
Other experiments will use methods developed for studying the creation of
expertise in normals to explore the plasticity of the visual system of patients
with recognition deficits. A third set of experiments will study the neural
substrate of exemplar vs. categorical level visual judgments using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). While the importance of comparing face
processing to exemplar-level processing of non-face objects has been
acknowledged, few studies have compared recognition judgments at different
levels of abstraction for the same objects, in particular, under conditions
where participants begin as novices and then gain experience with an object
class. Longitudinal fMRI studies will assess the neural changes underlying
expertise acquisition at multiple levels of categorization. Overall, these
experiments should shed some light on the issue of face-specificity in the
visual system, provide data about the role of categorization level and expertise
for object recognition, explore rehabilitation possibilities for patients with
visual form recognition deficits, and extend our understanding of the plasticity
of the human visual system. ***