* 9615731
* Implementation Issues of Structural Control for Near Field  Earthquakes: Hardware Malfunction and Saturation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Jann Yang, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* John Scalzi
* 07/31/2000
* USD 240,000.00

9615731 Jabbari This project will address critical implementation issues
associated with active control for urban seismic hazard mitigation, particularly
excitations due to near-field earthquakes. These issues include hardware
malfunction and actuator saturation, which arise in the performance-based design
of control systems. The recent near-field earthquakes of Northridge and Kobe
have raised great concerns regarding the applications of both passive base
isolation systems (such as rubber-bearing isolators) and active/hybrid
protective systems. The characteristics of near field earthquakes, including
unexpected large peak ground acceleration and shock-type time histories, may
render both passive isolation systems and active/hybrid protective systems
ineffective or even detrimental. In the implementation of active control systems
possible malfunction of hardware, such as actuators or sensors, may occur due to
the infrequent use or due to shock-type excitations, such as that of near-field
earthquakes. Due to the limited capacity of any actuator, as well as the random
nature of earthquake excitations, the actuator may become saturated,
particularly under the near-field earthquakes. Further the robust controller
design for the reduction of peak structural response needs to be carefully
addressed. This project will attempt to establish control design methods that
guarantee high performance in the presence of potential hardware malfunction and
actuator saturation. The performance obtained depends explicitly on the
reliability (or malfunction) characteristics of hardware, actuator capabilities
and the design earthquake. Consequently, the evaluation of costs and benefits
for implementing an active control system becomes possible. Finally, a
comprehensive experimental test program will be conducted suing the state-of-
the-art shaking table at the University of California-Irvine to verify and
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed techniques. A di stinguished
feature of our technical approach is that all the issues to be addressed,
including the malfunction of hardware systems, actuator saturation, peak
response reduction and system robustness, can be formulated in a unified and
comprehensive framework. The main thrust of the project can thus be summarized
as developing a comprehensive control design methodology that will provide
reliability with respect to actuator/sensor malfunction, high performance with
actuator saturation, robustness and peak response reduction, and experimental
verification and evaluation. ***