* 9615875
* High-Resolution Climatic Variability in the Southwestern    U.S. During the Last Millennium
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1996,11/30/1999
* Hung Li, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 11/30/1999
* USD 257,033.00

Abstract ATM-9615875 Ku, Teh-Lung University of Southern California Title: High-
Resolution Climatic Variability in the Southwestern U.S. During the Last
Millennium This award supports a research project aimed at developing an
effective proxy tool which will enable the PIs to reconstruct the precipitation
variability on sub-decadal (3-10 years) time scales for the past millennium in
the southwestern U.S. This is a region (at least the southern part) of
atmospheric teleconnection associated with the El Nino/Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) events. The key approach is to employ the high-resolution oxygen isotopic
measurement on dated carbonate sediments retrieved from closed- basin lakes
located along a N-S transect in Oregon, California and Nevada. The basis for the
approach lies in the fact that water entering a closed-basin lake via rain and
runoff mostly leaves by evaporation, and the lake's isotopic composition
reflects the hydrologic balance that serves to monitor the regional climate
change, especially the precipitation variability, at a given time. Past
variations of lake water isotopic composition are recorded by authigenic
carbonate minerals of the lacustrine sediment. The feasibility of the proposed
research has been tested in a recent study conducted in Mono Lake. The method
will allow the PIs to assess the moisture sources (from three climatic regimes:
Pacific, continental, and Gulf of Mexico) and their relative strengths and
detect any shifts in storm track in the time domain. It is anticipated that the
study will allow the PIs to evaluate such climatic anomalies as the Little Ice
Age, Medieval Warm Period, and ENSO, and contribute to the understanding of the
causes and dynamics of sub-decadal climatic variability.