* 9615673
* Penguin-Krill-Ice Interactions: The Impact of Environmental Variability on Penguin Demography
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1997,08/31/1998
* Wayne Trivelpiece, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/1998
* USD 139,882.00

*** Trivelpiece 9615673 Long-term seabird research conducted at Admiralty Bay,
which is located on King George Island in the Antarctic Peninsula region, has
documented annual variability in the life history parameters of the breeding
biology and ecology of the Adelie, gentoo and chinstrap penguins. Twenty-year
records acquired on these species, including survival and recruitment,
population size and breeding success, and diets and foraging ecology have
enabled scientists to test key hypotheses regarding the linkage between these
predator parameters and variability in the Antarctic marine ecosystem. This
project will focus on understanding the linkages between the physical
environment and the population biology of penguins, in particular, sea ice
coverage and its impact on krill availability as a food source for penguins.
Krill is a key food web species in the Antarctic oceans and accounts for nearly
one hundred percent of the prey eaten by dominant predators such as baleen
whales, seals and penguins. Analysis of long term data sets has suggested that
years of heavy winter sea ice favor krill recruitment, as larval krill find
refuge and food in the sea ice habitat. It has also been observed that years of
heavy sea ice favor Adelie penguin recruitment and not that of chinstrap
penguins. Aspects of the work include analysis of diet samples, shipboard krill
sampling, survival and recruitment studies of penguins, satellite tracking of
penguins during the breeding season, and analysis of satellite sea ice images.
Penguins are the key species used to monitor the impact of commercial fisheries
activities in the region, so this study will provide useful information to the
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, which is
the part of the Antarctic Treaty System which focuses on fisheries management.
***