* 9615620
* Collaborative Research: Ecological Engineering by Fishes:   The Importance of Biodiversity to Resource Heterogeneity and the Structure of Neotropical Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Michael Vanni, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 06/30/2000
* USD 69,609.00

9615620 Vanni The major premise of this research is that sediment-feeding and
algivorous fishes and amphibians are important ecological engineers in tropical
streams, and can generate significant resource heterogeneity over a variety of
spatial and temporal scales. Specifically, this research will examine whether
the diverse guild of epibenthic-feeding fishes is ecologically redundant, and
whether species identities are important to stream community and ecosystem
dynamics including the generation of resource heterogeneity. The main objective
of this research focuses on the importance of biodiversity, species identities,
and density to resource heterogeneity, community and ecosystem dynamics. A
series of experimental and observational tests will be used to address this main
objective. This study will provide insight into the importance of biodiversity
to the structure and function of stream communities. The proposed research will
further our knowledge of community and ecosystem roles of sediment feeding and
algivorous fishes, and demonstrate whether these organisms vary significantly in
their capacities as ecological engineers. Sediment and algal-feeding fish are
among the most important components of the freshwater fisheries throughout South
America, yet their ecology is very poorly known. Overall, this project will
broaden our limited knowledge of patterns and processes in tropical stream
communities.