* 9615979
* Design of Constrained Model-Predictive Control Systems      with Increased Autonomy
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Michael Nikolaou, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/29/2000
* USD 179,205.00

Abstract - Nikolaou - 9615979 Constrained model predictive control (MPC) is a
technique that uses a process model in an on-line optimization scheme to meet
various control objectives for a process whose inputs and outputs are
constrained. There are always discrepancies between the model that MPC uses and
the real world. Such discrepancies may arise from inaccuracies in the initial
model used by an MPC system, or from variation of a process with time. Increased
MPC autonomy, the main thrust of this project, refers to the capability of an
MPC system to handle, with minimal human intervention, a wide range of
situations where a process model could be inaccurate. Situations that will be
addressed in this research are: o Time-invariant processes for which an
inaccurate linear of nonlinear model and bounds on the inaccuracy are available
or need to be developed. o Time-varying processes under constrained MPC
feedback. More specifically, the following problems will be investigated: o How
MPC systems can be structured and tuned (off- or on-line) to ensure robust
performance for a certain level of process/process-model mismatch. Conversely,
how much modeling accuracy is required for robust MPC performance. o How a
constrained MPC systems that monitors its performance, can modify itself if
necessary, e.g., by performing simultaneous control and closed-loop process
identification.