* 9615037
* Molecular Studies of PgiC Evolution in Allotetraploid       Species of Clarkia (Onagraceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Leslie Gottlieb, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/2001
* USD 149,992.00

9615037 Gottlieb The genus Clarkia of the evening-primrose family (Onagraceae)
is a group of 42 species, all but one native to western North America, that has
been examined for more than 50 years as a model for understanding speciation and
genetic divergence and to assess the value of different sources of evidence for
inferring phylogeny. The genealogical relationships among the species have been
resolved by analyses of many classes of characters, including nucleotide
sequences of the gene PgiC which encodes the cytosolic isozyme of phosphoglucose
isomerase, an essential enzyme of sugar metabolism in plants. PgiC was
duplicated in the basal stock that gave rise to Clarkia, and about half the
extant diploid species express both duplicated genes (have two PgiC isozymes).
In the other diploid species, one PgiC gene has been "silenced" (there is only
one isozyme present for enzyme function, but there are two detectable DNA loci).
Clarkia also includes a number of allotetraploid species, that combine through
hybridization the genomes (chromosome sets) of two diploid species and are thus
expected to possess four PgiC genes. However, in all tetraploid Clarkias tested
only two PgiC genes have been found. The major goal of Prof. Gottlieb's research
is to determine through DNA nucleotide sequencing which PgiC genes are expressed
and whether the genes that are not expressed have been mutated or lost. In this
study, the naturally occurring tetraploid species will be compared to
experimentally synthesized hybrids between their diploid progenitors. In
addition, hybrids between the diploids and tetraploids will be studied. The
synthesized hybrids are expected to express all the PgiC genes of their parents.
The extent and rate of nucleotide divergence between the duplicate genes will be
compared between the diploid and tetraploid genomes. The proposed studies are an
attempt to describe at the molecular level the fate of particular genes encoding
enzymes of known function during the formation and establishm ent of
allotetraploid plant species. Such basic information should also help guide
future analysis of the molecular causes of gene silencing and loss. The study
will also provide information about the use of nuclear genes from polyploids in
analyzing phylogeny, a highly relevant issue in plant systematics because more
than half of the flowering plants are polyploid.