* 9615561
* Collaborative Research: Seismic and Geodetic Constraints on Evolution and Eruptive Processes at Arenal and Irazu        Volcanoes, Costa Rica
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Timothy Dixon, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2000
* USD 66,000.00

9615561 Dixon This proposal is to investigate the seismic and geodetic behavior
of several andesitic stratovolcanoes in Costa Rica that are in different stages
of their volcanic cycles in order to better understand the properties and
dynamics of active magmatic systems and to improve volcanic hazard mitigation.
In 1995, two permanent Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers and five
stations equipped with broadband seismic sensors and electronic tiltmeters were
established on Arenal Volcano, Costa Rica. These observations are among the
first few broadband seismic recordings and continuous, high precision, geodetic
measurements made on an active volcano. Preliminary interpretation of the GPS
data suggest ongoing depletion of a relatively shallow magma reservoir and
magmatic injection at shallower levels in the form of dikes or sills.
Quantitative constraints on the geometry and behavior of this magmatic system
will be obtained by expanding spatial resolution of the GPS measurements and
analyzing the seismic recordings of the harmonic tremor and summit explosions at
Arenal. Modest GPS networks and seismic observations on Irazu, Turrialba and
Rincon de la Vieja (including 2 permanent GPS stations on Irazu) will allow the
characterization of surface deformation associated with these volcanoes in
between eruptive cycles. Baseline deformation data at presently inactive
volcanoes is quite rare, but potentially very valuable for evaluating volcanic
hazards and for understanding magmatic processes on the longer time scale of
major eruptive cycles. ***