* 9615974
* Workshop on Synchronized Phasor Measurements Systems: Theory and Application; November 5-6, 1996 (Crystal City, VA)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Jaime De La Ree, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 02/28/1997
* USD 13,500.00

9615974 De La Ree Advances in computerized systems, fast and reliable
communications, analysis and storing of large amounts of data have given power
engineers the ability to develop new protection and control schemes to improve
their existing power system. GPS synchronized measurements open new avenues of
applications such as adaptive relaying, advanced feed-back control techniques,
better estimation or determination of system losses and improved state
estimation determination of system losses and improved state estimation of the
power system. Also, controlled separation of power systems during emergency
conditions using phasor measurements has been studied and implemented. Precise
measurement and oscillographic recordings are of great use in analyzing system
events, providing benchmarks for validating simulation programs, and provide a
diagnostic tool for power equipment. It is our hope that we can bring together
the researchers, utility engineers, manufacturers and other interested
individuals to promote an exchange of ideas, applications of these new
technologies, and identify new research areas. The meeting format will include
one half day of tutorial presentations followed by one half day of presentations
by authors of papers. Papers from field engineers are sought, and will be mailed
to all participants in a bound conference proceedings within a month after the
conference. It is recognized that commercial manufacturers of modern measuring
and recording instruments, with or without precise synchronization, have helped
make this technology a practical engineering option. Several manufacturers will
exhibit their latest measuring and recording equipment during the conference
lunch breaks and after the technical sessions. ***