* 9615313
* LTREB: Effects of Recent Environmental Change on the Pinyon-Herbivore-Mycorrhizal Community of Sunset Crater
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2003
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 02/28/2003
* USD 264,775.00

9615313 Whitham Studies of natural perturbations help understand how plants
ecologically and/or evolutionarily respond to climate change. Since the eruption
of the Sunset Crater in about 1300AD, colonizing plants have had only a few
hundred years to adapt to this hotter, dryer, and nutrient poor cinder
environment. This LTREB project represents a continuation of a 15 year study on
how these environmental stresses have affected pinyon pine and its dependent
community members. Compared to trees growing in low stress sandy-loam soils,
trees growing in cinders produce less defensive resin, suffer chronic insect
outbreaks, and suffer corresponding declines in mycorrhizal mutualists, growth
and cone production. This in turn affects birds and mammals dependent upon
pinyon seeds for their survival. Associated changes in tree genetics suggest
that the selection pressures imposed by this new environment have resulted in
genetic adjustments in the plant population. The distributions of dependent
mycorrhiza, arthropods, and vertebrates map onto the underlying genetic
structure of the plant population. Because the southwest has experienced general
warming since the beginning of record keeping and is currently suffering a
100-year record drought, by contrasting Sunset Crater with adjacent less
stressed control sites, the PI's can address the question, "Is Sunset Crater an
analogue to global climate change and if so, how can it be used to predict the
ecological and evolutionary impacts of continuing warming trends?" The
continuation of long-term monitoring of individual tress and the associated
long-term experiments will provide a clear answer to this important question.