* 9615912
* Mathematical Sciences: Workshop on Advances in Smoothing:   Bumps, Jumps, Clustering and Discrimination; May 11-15,     1997; Houston, Texas
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,05/01/1998
* David Scott, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/01/1998
* USD 9,241.00

DMS 9615912 Scott This research will bring together a small number of
participants in a workshop entitled "Advances in Smoothing: Bumps, Jumps,
Clustering, and Discrimination." The workshop will include leading authorities
in several areas, together with other researchers and students,to share recent
findings that potentially impact other fields. Recent advances in nonparametric
smoothing could aid workers in clustering improve the statistical foundations of
their algorithms. Technology for identifying change points or jumps may help
determine the weight of evidence in favor of numbers of clusters. Finally,
recent advances in nonparametric regression technology have dramatically changed
the face of algorithms for statistical discrimination, which is closely related
to clustering. The workshop will have 3 or 4 leaders, with numerous breakouts
for investigating possible interfaces and technology or theoretical transfers.
In addition, young researchers, including faculty and graduate students, will be
invited to participate. The workshop will accommodate as many as 25-50
participants. This research will support participation in a workshop entitled
"Advances in Smoothing: Bumps, Jumps, Clustering, and Discrimination."
Participants will include leading authorities in these areas, together with
other researchers and students. The workshop will provide a forum for the
sharing of recent findings that potentially impact these other fields. These
statistical techniques are widely used in science: for example, the discovery of
the top quark, signal processing for speech recognition, detection of production
quality in manufacturing, to name just a few. The workshop will have 3 or 4
leaders. In addition, young researchers, including faculty and graduate
students, will be invited to participate. The workshop will accommodate 25-50
participants.