* 9615298
* Evolution of Annuals Under Resource Modification:  Genetic  Diversity and Trait Evolution Under Interacting Components  of Global Change (CO2, Temperature, and Nitrogen)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Fakhri Bazzaz, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/2000
* USD 250,000.00

Bazzaz 9615298 Global environmental changes pose complex challenges for plants.
Although some changes will occur within the lifetime of extant plants, the
response to these changes will depend strongly on how populations behave. How
will plant populations evolve in a change world? How will global changes alter
current evolutionary process? The first focus will be on the direct selective
effects global change may exert. The PIs will measure changes in selective
pressures in elevated CO2 and temperature conditions in a weed, Abutilon
theophrastii. The PIs will then subject 8 generations to these new selective
pressures to elucidate evolutionary response to global change. Secondly, these
conditions may alter response to selective pressures currently found in the
plant environment. Novel conditions are likely to alter the developmental
integration among traits, uncovering genetic potential for response to
selection. These potential changes in the nature of correlations among traits
may alter the response of plant populations to selective pressures, both by
weakening tradeoffs among traits and by potentially exposing new correlation
among traits. The effects of elevated CO2 levels on the response to selection
will be investigated by imposing selection for particular traits in 8
generations. These experiments will suggest how plant populations will change
under global change.