* 9615227
* The Effect of Induced Resistance on Herbivore Population    Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 02/28/1999
* USD 146,000.00

RAUSHER DEB-9615227 The chemical content of plants affects insect survival and
reproduction and thus may influence the size of insect populations. In a
phenomenon known as induced resistance, some plants respond to herbivore attack
by producing new compounds which negatively affect insect growth and
reproduction. Understanding the effects of inducible resistance on insect
herbivores is important for understanding herbivore population regulation
because the strength of the response may increase as insect populations and
insect damage increases. Consequently, inducible resistance may be a negative
feed-back mechanism that helps regulate insect populations. The investigator
will perform experiments with soybeans and Mexican bean beetles to determine
whether induced resistance can regulate insect populations. Soybean cultivars
that vary genetically in inducible response will be used to compare the
population dynamics of the bean beetle on soybean cultivars with high and low
levels of inducible response. The PI will use computer modeling to investigate
what conditions make regulation by induced resistance possible. It is important
to understand how herbivore populations are regulated because insects strongly
affect the yield of commercially important plants. If inducible resistance can
control insect populations, agricultural breeders may want to include induced
resistance in their breeding programs. Inducible resistance may be preferable to
the use of constant levels of plant defense because induced resistance may slow
the insect's development of resistance to plant defenses.