* 9615175
* Ecosystem Consequences of Trophic Exchange From A River to  Its Watershed
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Mary Power, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/2001
* USD 314,999.00

9645175 Power These investigators will study the effects of river subsidized
insect production on a range of watershed consumers that differ in their
abilities to track and translocate this resource. In order of increasing
mobility, these consumers are filmy dome spiders, tetragnathid spiders,
cursorial wolf spiders, western fence and sagebrush lizards, and three common
species of bats. This research will test the prediction that ecosystem-level
effects of aquatic insect subsidies on these consumers will depend on the scale
of their activities. For example, bats may be the most important guild in
translocating nutrients from the river to upland portions of the watershed,
while lizards may have locally intensified impacts on their terrestrial prey,
due to the river subsidies. Emergence traps, sticky traps, and quantitative
exuviae collections will be used to monitor spatial and temporal variation in
insect emergence and subsequent dispersal. Coordinated monitoring of consumer
densities and activities will be used to assess their resource tracking in space
and time. Insect emergence and subsidies will also be manipulated experimentally
on spatial scales relevant to spiders and lizards, respectively. In these
experiments, we will test the ability of particular consumers to track variation
in their resources, and test an anticipated tradeoff between tracking ability
and the impact of local resource variation on per capita performance of
consumers. During the three years of this study, the investigators anticipate
that year-to-year variation in hydrologic regimes will strongly affect the
timing and magnitude of insect production, as it has over the ten previous years
that we have studied this river food web. Studying this variation and its
effects on watershed insectivores will help to forecast how river hydrologic
regimes, including those altered by land use or climate change, will influence
adjacent terrestrial communities.