* 9615134
* Cost and Benefits of Plant Defense Against Herbivores       in Maintaining a Resistance Polymorphism
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* J. Daniel Hare, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 01/31/2000
* USD 260,000.00

HARE 9615314 Host plant resistance is an effective means to protect crops
against pests and pathogens. The value of host plant resistance in applied
systems presents a paradox for natural systems: if host plant resistance is so
valuable, then why aren't all individuals of wild plant species resistant? The
paradox suggests that there is some cost to resistance that favors non-resistant
plants when pests are absent. The costs and benefits of plant resistance will be
examined in jimson weed, Datura wrightii, where the presence or absence of
glandular hairs is determined by a single gene. Glandular plants are less
suitable as hosts for the tobacco hornworm, a common insect pest of tobacco and
tomato. Specific objectives are: 1) to quantify the costs and benefits of
producing glandular hairs when plants are grown under drought and non-drought
conditions and attacked by different pest species; 2) to quantify the damage
caused by different pest species attacking several plant populations along an
environmental moisture gradient; 3) to predict the frequencies of glandular and
non-glandular plants in different populations based on herbivore densities and
cost-benefit data; and 4) to determine the mechanisms responsible for variation
in susceptibility of glandular and non-glandular plants to different pest
species. Results will increase our understanding of how the interplay between
the costs and benefits of plant resistance maintains genetic variation in plant
defense against diverse pests.