* 9615679
* Long-Term Variations of the North Atlantic Oscillation
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1996,11/30/2000
* Charles Stockton, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 11/30/2000
* USD 262,328.00

Abstract ATM-9615678 Stockton, Charles W. University of Arizona Title: Long-Term
Variations of the North Atlantic Oscillation This award supports a research
project designed to use tree-ring data from Morocco, appropriate tree-ring data
from western Europe and eastern North America, sea ice extent records, and
indices from the GISP2 Greenland ice cores to provide a 1000 year reconstructed
record of variability of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). Previous
investigations have shown that the cool season large scale alternations of
atmospheric mass between the North Atlantic regions of subtropical high pressure
and subpolar low pressure are highly correlated with precipitation in Morocco.
Because Morocco is physically located at the southern extremity of the NAO
system, slight perturbations in the system are recorded in the Moroccan
precipitation records. The tree rings record variations in the state of the NAO
through the changing direction of associated atmospheric moisture transport.
Three-ring data from western Europe and eastern North America, as well as
Greenland ice core data and regional sea ice extent also show a high degree of
response to the state of the NAO, and thus, can be used to assess the more
northern extremity of the oscillation. The tree-ring construction of the NAO
index will place recent NAO trends in a long-term perspective. Of particular
interest is comparison of the recent NAO trend with NAO variations during the
Little Ice Age and other periods of climate extreme. A final product of the
project will be a long-term synoptic climatology showing various states of the
NAO along with their associated North Atlantic synoptic weather conditions and
North Atlantic SST anomaly fields.