* 9615252
* The Paleoenvironment of the Meyer Desert Formation,         Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2003
* Allan Ashworth, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 02/28/2003
* USD 103,471.00

OPP 9615252 Ashworth Abstract The Meyer Desert Formation crops out in the
Oliver Bluffs region of the Dominion Range in the central Transantarctic
Mountains, latitude 85 degrees South, about 500 km from the South Pole. The site
is on the Beardmore Glacier near the margin of the Polar Plateau. The polar
desert climate is too cold and too dry to support higher forms of life. This
award support studies of fossils that will be extracted from siltstones
containing wood, and from peat and marl deposits discovered in 1995. Fossils
discovered in earlier studies include: pollen, wood, and leaves of Nothofagus
(southern beech), seeds of 4 species of vascular plants, stems and leaves of
mosses, leg parts of a flightless beetle, valves of ostracodes, shells of
gastropods and bivalves, and a fish tooth. A cushion of a woody vascular plant
in its original growth position demonstrates that the fossil assemblage is in
situ and not transported to the site. The diverse organisms represented by the
fossils lived at latitude 85 degrees South during a time when the Antarctic ice
sheets were smaller. Stratigraphic evidence suggests an environment that
included a lake with vegetation-covered moraines, near a glacier margin. There
is a question of how warm temperatures were at the site. Studies of the
Nothofagus fossils suggest a harsh climate at the limits of plant growth. That
interpretation, however, does not agree with the diversity of organisms
represented by fossils. Also, the occurrence of fish in the lake indicates that
it did not freeze to the bottom. The Magellanic Moorland of southern South
America, with a mean annual temperature of at least 23 degrees Celsius higher
than the Oliver Bluffs location today, is a possible analog for the
paleoenvironment. Biogeographically, the organisms also seem to have closer
evolutionary links with southern South America. Based on 250 kg of sediments
collected at the site in 1995, a series of paleontological and geochemical s
tudies will be undertaken to determine how warm the climate was. The question of
when these organisms inhabited the Beardmore Valley is very important to answer
because of the question of stability of the ice sheets. The best estimate for
the age of the sediments is Pliocene based on transported marine diatoms. This
implies that the existing configuration of the Antarctic ice sheets is a
relatively recent feature, developing during the Quaternary. Other evidence from
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean suggests that the polar ice sheets are much
older and that the landscapes of the Dry Valleys region have not changed much
since the Miocene. The Pliocene is known for its globally high sea levels and
warmer climates in the Arctic. Did this warming cause a major disintegration of
the Antarctic ice sheets during the Pliocene or did they remain stable? This
question is especially important to answer in regard to our present concerns
about global warming. The Pliocene age that has been assigned to the Meyer
Desert Formation, with its in situ fossils of terrestrial organisms indicating
much warmer conditions, is critical to this question. The age needs to be
confirmed and a series of exploratory projects will be undertaken to attempt to
date the deposits using the biostratigraphy of the fossils of terrestrial
organisms, amino acid analysis of the gastropod and bivalve shells, and
argon/argon analysis of crystals growing inside the seeds. The fossils are very
important to test hypotheses about Southern Hemisphere biogeography. These
hypotheses have attempted to explain the distribution of related organisms
between South America, Australasia, the Subantarctic Islands, and Antarctica but
until now they have been untestable because of an absence of Neogene terrestrial
fossil data.