* 9615910
* Molecular Relaxation by ESR Spectroscopy and Related        Phenomena
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Jack Freed, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 02/28/2001
* USD 559,022.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Freed will continue studies of dynamical molecular processes
and free radicals in fluids, on surfaces, and in related systems. New electron
spin resonance (ESR) relaxation and structural techniques will be employed, and
the necessary theoretical frameworks will be developed and extended. Two-
dimensional Fourier Transform (2D-FT) ESR, electron-electron double resonance
(2D-ELDOR), and Far Infrared (FIR) ESR studies of fast and slow motional regimes
will be developed and applied to rotational molecular dynamics in liquids,
presenting a multi-frequency approach covering 9-250 GHz. Pulsed ESR methods
will be developed at 106 GHz base on a new source appropriate for liquid studies
and new quasi-optical methods for FIR-ESR. Other systems investigated will be
glass-forming liquids, inhomogeneous fluids such as microemulsions, restricted
reorientational dynamics on surfaces, translational diffusion in simple and
complex liquids, biradicals in liquids, and radical clusters in solids. NMR
spectroscopy has been successfully used in a wide range of applications, from
chemical structure determination to medical diagnostic scanning. The related
technique of ESR spectroscopy has been much slower to be developed in part
because of obstacles caused by the frequencies of radiation which must be used
and the shorter relaxation times, that is, the time during which one can measure
the molecular effect being observed. This research program will involve the
development and improvement of ESR techniques which may help to bring ESR-based
methods into more common usage as analytical tools in chemistry, biology, and
materials science.