* 9615938
* SGER:  Novel Antimicrobial and Antiviral Properties of the  Hok Killer Protein
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,09/17/1998
* Michael Selsted, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 09/17/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9615938 Wood The goal of this proposed research is to investigate the use of the
Hok killer peptide as a completely new antibiotic and antiviral system. The
potential efficacy of the Hok peptide as a broad, non-specific, antiparasitic
drug will be determined by testing its activity against relevant bacteria,
fungi, and phage. This research highly novel and exploratory since the
extracellular antibiotic application of Hok peptide is largely untested.
However, the antibiotic idea is sound since almost all bacteria tested to date
are susceptible to killing by Hok when it is expressed intracellularly, and the
PI has recently shown that phage T4 (a virus that destroys bacteria) can be
excluded when the Hok protein is expressed in E. coli cells. In order to
investigate the broad range effectiveness against human pathogens, the Hok
peptide will be overexpressed using recombinant bacteria, purified using gel
filtration and reverse-phase, high- performance-liquid chromatography, and
identified through fast-atom-bombardment mass spectroscopy. Using the purified
peptide, antimicrobial assays will be performed to determine if the peptide is
capable of slowing or preventing bacterial and fungal growth. To thwart the
propagation of virus in animal cells in a manner analogous to how the Hok
protein excludes T4 phage by killing the host before the virus can propagate, a
general suicide system for animal cells will be developed to combat virus-based
diseases. This will require controllable expression of a killer protein nd
activity in a wide variety of animal cells. Initially, the ability of Hok to
kill insect cells (as representative animal cells) will be evaluated by using
the baculovirus transfer vector pVL1392 for Hok expression in insect cells under
the polyhedrin promoter. ***