* 9615226
* What Causes Large Local-Scale Variation in Tree Diversity in a Neotropical Forest? An Experimental Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Stephen Hubbell, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 02/29/2000
* USD 190,000.00

9615226 Hubbell Unexpectedly large differences in tree diversity that correlate
with topography and dry season soil moisture have been found on small spatial
scales in tropical forests. This research is an experimental test of the simple
hypothesis that tropical tree diversity is controlled largely by drought stress
in the seedling and small sapling stages. In drier sites, a smaller fraction of
tree species may have sufficiently deep root systems as seedlings to survive
prolonged periods of drought than is the case in wetter sites. The hypothesis
will be tested by a watering experiment on seedlings transplanted to sites with
greater or lesser dry season soil moisture and drought stress within a single
tropical forest. The experiment will demonstrate whether dry season watering
increases seedling survival and growth compared with seedlings in non-watered
control plots. The experiment will also show whether the effect is sufficiently
large to explain the large observed differences in species richness between
sites. World-wide patterns of tree species richness in tropical forests show a
strong, unexplained pattern of increasing richness with mean annual rainfall.
This research will help us to understand the potential causes of large
geographical variation in tropical forest diversity and whether it is controlled
by events in the seedling stages. The study will improve predictions on the
impact of global climate change on loss of tropical forest diversity. Major
changes are forecast in the next century by Global Climate Models in the
worldwide distribution of annual and seasonal rainfall, and much of the tropics
is expected to become drier.