* 9615236
* Maestrichtian Land Mammals of Vega Island, Antarctic        Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Michael Woodburne, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 01/31/2001
* USD 162,325.00

OPP 9615236 Woodburne OPP 9615933 Case Abstract The Maestrichtian is considered
to have been a key interval in the development of the land mammal fauna of
southern Gondwana from Australia to Antarctica and South America. Up to now, no
Maestrichtian fossil land mammals have been found in any of these continents.
The Lopez de Bertodano Formation of Vega Island, Antarctic Peninsula, shows the
best potential of yielding remains of land mammals of Maestrichtian age in any
southern Gondwana location. This project is designed to grasp that opportunity
as a collaborative venture between St. Mary's University, University of
California, Riverside, and Argentine scientists. Current theory predicts that
the presently unknown Maestrichtian- age land mammal fauna in Antarctica should
consist (1) of a suite of non-therian taxa remnant from an Albian-Campanian
fauna that occupied southern Gondwana from Australia to Antarctica to South
America and (2) a complex of marsupials composed of relict peradectids and more
derived early members of australidelphians. The australidelphians should include
early members of the (currently) South American Microbiotheriidae as well as
early lineages of the (currently) Australian Peramelina, Dasyuromorphia and
Diprotodontia. This awards supports work to test this hypothesis in terms of the
composition of the Maestrichtian land mammal fauna by conducting field research
in Vega Island of the James Ross Island basin, Antarctic Peninsula. The location
has been chosen on the basis of its known productivity in yielding
Maestrichtian-age vertebrates (presbyornithid birds and hypsilophodont
dinosaurs) in near-shore fine-grained shallow-water marine sandstones of the
Lopez de Bertodano Formation that are amenable to dry or wet sieving collecting
methods, methods that have proven successful in obtaining fossil mammals from
similar facies in the medial Eocene La Meseta Formation of Seymour Island. This
is a cooperative project with the Antarct ic Institute, Argentina, (IAA) and the
Museo de La Plata, Argentina (MLP). MLP personnel are collaborating on research
into the evolutionary history of Late Cretaceous to early Tertiary therian
mammals in South America and Antarctica and the potential relationship of these
to the early population of Australia. The collaboration with IAA personnel is
focused on litho- and biostratigraphy of the marine successions. The first grant
year (1997) will focus on examining existing material. Years 2 and 3 will focus
on field work on Vega Island and follow up examination of any fossil
discoveries. The IAA will supply all Antarctic logistic support for US as well
as Argentine personnel, including travel from Argentina to Seymour Island, and
logistical support in the field. Collaborative visits to participating
institutions will occur as required over the life of the project.