* 9615184
* Can Insect Herbivory Control Grassland Composition,         Productivity and Dynamics: An Alternative View
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2003
* Patrice Morrow, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 03/31/2003
* USD 305,002.00

9615184 CARSON For more than 35 years evidence has accumulated that herbivorous
insects will not harm native prairies and grasslands (with the exception of
grasshoppers). New evidence suggests, however, that insect attack dramatically
reduces the diversity and abundance of broad-leaved herbaceous plants, or forbs,
that occur in North American prairies. Damage by certain insects may lead to
less diverse prairies that are more susceptible to environmental perturbations.
The goal of this research is to determine if damage by beetles, native
specialist insect herbivores, control the distribution and abundance of three
species of native, clonal goldenrods which form large, productive patches in the
prairies of Minnesota. The investigators' hypothesis, based on work by Grover is
that specialist insects, such as beetles, play a "keystone" role especially in
infertile grasslands by reducing the abundance of dominant plant species.
"Patch-centered" insect exclusion, transplant, and competition experiments will
be conducted in native prairies in Minnesota to determine whether beetles reduce
the abundance of goldenrods in natural grasslands. This work will help us
understand how some plant species become rare or threatened by natural processes
that are not strongly related to human activities. Furthermore, many of the most
important agricultural crops are grasses (e.g., corn and wheat) and are plagued
by weeds including a large number of forbs. Understanding and identifying those
insects that damage forbs and not grasses could lead to a greater use of
biological control agents (e.g., insects) to control weeds. This would
ultimately reduce the use of expensive and potentially harmful herbicides.