* 9615365
* Dissertation Research:  Obsidian Economy in the Formative   Tres Zapotes Hinterland
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Olivier De Montmollin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1999
* USD 11,444.00

Under the direction of Dr. Olivier de Montmollin, Mr. Charles Knight will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological
research at the Olmec site of Palo de Rabo, located in the Gulf Coast region of
Mexico to determine how obsidian was distributed and controlled. Obsidian
(volcanic glass), because it holds a razor sharp edge, was a highly prized
commodity among peoples such as the Olmec who lacked metal tools since it was
used for both cutting and scraping functions. As an important economic
commodity, obsidian can be traced through a prehistoric social system and by
understanding how it was distributed and controlled, one can gain insight into
many aspects of social organization. Obsidian in Middle America is particularly
interesting from this perspective because it occurs in only a very limited
number of places and through trace element analysis it is possible to trace
obsidian from a site back to its source. Thus one can reconstruct not only
intrasite but also external trade networks. Palo de Rabo contains widespread
surface scatters of obsidian and other cultural material. It also has mounds and
plazas associated with elite parts of the site. Mr. Knight will first conduct a
general ground reconnaissance to determine the limits of the site and to produce
a schematic map. A full coverage survey will then be undertaken with shovel
probes where vegetation obscures the surface. On this basis, areas for
excavation, including both `elite` and `commoner` residences, will be conducted
to collect obsidian and other cultural materials. The obsidian will then be
analyzed to determine how and where it was manufactured, distributed and used.
The Olmecs developed the first complex society in Middle America and therefore
are of great archaeological interest. They are important subjects for study both
for the light they shed on the prehistory of the region and for the insight they
can provide into the processes which led to the development of social
complexity. Researchers wish to understand how social stratification, which
accompanies social complexity takes place and have developed several hypotheses.
Two of the most promising concern control over the acquisition and distribution
of scares resources and Mr. Knight wishes to uses the Palo de Rabo data to test
them. Since obsidian in not locally available in the region, it is a scarce and
valuable resource which is ideal for an investigation of this type. The data Mr.
Knight collects will be of interest to many archaeologists. The research will
shed light on an important and poorly understood period of Middle American
prehistory and will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.