* 9615147
* Antarctic Network of Unattended Broadband Integrated        Seismometers (ANUBIS)
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1997,05/21/1999
* Sridhar Anandakrishnan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/21/1999
* USD 379,484.00

OPP 9615147 Anandakrishnan Abstract The Antarctic crust and mantle composition
and geometry are poorly known. The primary methods for studying the crust, upper
mantle, and the deeper asthenosphere is interpretation of seismic data; either
OactiveO through use of explosives or OpassiveO using natural sources and
interpreting various earthquake phase arrival times and amplitudes. Integrating
passive and active seismology can result in efficient use of resources to
produce detailed images of the lithosphere. This award supports development of a
passive seismic network for the Antarctic interior. The Antarctic is a gaping
hole in the rapidly improving field of global seismic imaging and tomography. On
this huge continent (surface area of 14 million square km) there are only eight
broadband seismic observatories. Further, with the exception of South Pole, all
of those stations are along the margins of the continent and none are in the
West Antarctic. By contrast, there are 200 permanent stations worldwide in the
FDSN (Federation of Digital Seismograph Networks) and on the order of a thousand
in national networks not yet integrated into the FDSN. There have been
innumerable temporary deployments (1 to 5 years) through PASSCAL (Program for
Array Seismic Studies of the Continental Lithosphere), but which have rarely
been attempted in the Antarctic. The obvious reason for this lack of data from
the interior is the need to supply power continuously and store data on-site
during the dark winter months. This project will develop and deploy eleven long
term broadband seismic stations on the continent itself. Because 98% of the
continent is ice covered, these stations will be installed at the surface of the
ice sheet. The body-wave data thus recorded from regional and teleseismic
earthquakes can be analyzed at each station for local crustal thickness,
lamination, Poisson's ratio (a measure of crustal composition), crust and mantle
anisotropy (a measure of current and former stress regimes), and identification
of rift zones and crustal block boundaries. In addition, the data from all the
stations (including the existing peripheral ones) can be used for seismic
tomographic analysis to detail lateral variations in these properties. Six of
the stations will be installed at existing Automated Geophysical Observatory
sites (in East Antarctica) which will provide heat and power for the data
loggers. The remaining five stations will be in the West Antarctic and will be
powered and heated by wind turbines during the austral winter. The wind- powered
stations are an experimental undertaking that will extend our capabilities for
installing seismic stations anywhere in the Antarctic. The stations on the
periphery of the continent (and other stations in the high southern latitudes---
most notably the stations of the French GEOSCOPE network) have been used to
measure surface wave dispersion functions for different paths that cross the
Antarctic. These data have been successful in measuring mantle properties, but
the resolution (both horizontal and vertical) achievable by this technique is
limited compared to body-wave analysis. Nonetheless, this is a valuable existing
tool that would be greatly enhanced by the presence of data from within the
continent that will be available after successful implementation of the
unattended seismometers under this project.