* 9615358
* LTREB: Short-term Climate Change and Variable Response to   Disturbance in an Arid Land Watershed-stream Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2003
* Nancy Grimm, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/2003
* USD 259,958.00

9615358 Grimm The primary objective of this LTREB project is to understand the
link between climate variability and the structure and functioning of running
water ecosystems in arid lands. Year to year variability in precipitation is
great in arid regions and precipitation regime determines the relative influence
of drying and flash floods on desert streams and rivers. In addition to water,
nutrients derived from desert uplands control rates of biological productivity
in streams and adjacent riparian zones. Flux of nutrients from upland to streams
is higher after several years of drought than after long wet periods. The
specific objective of this research is to determine the influence of alternating
wet and dry years on water and nitrogen transport in the landscape and its
eventual utilization in streams and riparian wetlands. Methods include long-term
monitoring of quantity and nutrient content of precipitation, overland flow at
several upland points, and streamwater in channels with permanent flow. Stream
ecosystem response will be measured in terms of several algal and
macroinvertebrate community parameters, rate of reestablishment of communities
after flood and drought, and patterns of nutrient cycling in the aquatic sector.
Research will be performed in the Sycamore Creek catchment ecosystem of central
Arizona. Arid lands are extensive nationally and globally and water is the
critical resource therein, yet little is known about how upland deserts and rare
surface water ecosystems are linked. The nature of this linkage is central to an
understanding of factors determining water quality in arid lands. Changing
climate, anthropogenic or otherwise, is likely to alter not only precipitation
regime, but also land use and natural vegetation patterns. This long-term
research project will enhance our knowledge of how entire catchment ecosystems
respond to changing climate and the consequences of this response for both
natural habitat and water quality.