* 9615071
* A Real-Time Human-Coupled Maultiagent System with Reactive  Social Organization, Based on Biological Principles
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Pietro Perona, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Les Gasser
* 07/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

*** 9615071 Perona The project is an investigation of social reactivity,
intention, and relationship in close-coupled interaction of people and computer-
based, biologically-motivated agents. It will result in the creation of a
virtual social environment of social agents, with visualization and with real-
time human-computer interaction. An agent model, whose parallel and modular
structure is based on the architecture of the primate brain, will be implemented
to function interactively and in real-time. An interface to human participants
will be implemented consisting of real-time visualization and real time input
devices including an advanced, six-degree-of freedom tracker ball. Social agents
will react to each other socially, with their intentions observed and their
affiliative relations assessed by the other social agents. Observed behaviors
and subjective experiences of human participants will be reported. Although the
fundamentally social nature of people is well known, the effects and results of
this social nature in cooperating with computers and multiple automated agents
are little understood. Affiliation, group-belonging, a sense of social
solidarity, and the attribution of intention are key in facilitating cooperation
and learning in multi-agent activity with human participants. This project makes
important first steps toward understanding, modeling, and providing experimental
infrastructure for the study of these phenomena. ***