* 9615228
* Atomic Level Study of Grain Boundary Diffusion in           Intermetallic Compounds using Polysynthetically Twinned     TiAl as a Model System
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,12/31/2002
* Vaclav Vitek, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* K. Linga (KL) Murty
* 12/31/2002
* USD 500,371.00

9615228 Luzzi An opportunity exists to carry out a basic investigation of the
relationship between interfacial structure and diffusion along interfaces in
intermetallic alloys. The crystallographically sharp twin-like and fault
interfaces found in the lamellar structure of the technologically important
intermetallic compound TiAl provide a model system which is ideal for such a
study. The structure of the interfaces in this alloy system allow high-
resolution electron microscopy (HREM) analysis to be used to study the location
of atoms. Together with high resolution compositional analysis, electron energy
loss spectroscopy, and theoretical atomistic modeling, the location of solute
atoms on well-characterized interfaces in TiAl are determined. Large crystals of
the lamellar TiAl are grown by optical float zone processing. High temperature
Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy experiments measure the time for
penetration of the solute atoms along the interfaces at various temperatures
through a thin film. Incorporation of the results of the HREM analysis allows
the interface diffusion coefficients and activation energies to be calculated
via a Hwang-Balluffi analysis as a function of interface structure and diffusion
direction. Theoretical studies are tied to the experimental program through the
determination of minimum energy interfacial structures by molecular statics
calculations employing potentials that include the directional character of
bonding in TiAl. An important aspect of the theoretical studies is the
development of these potentials. The diffusion properties at the interface are
investigated through a detailed analysis of vacancy configurations within and
near the interfaces and vacancy migration energies. The results of this
theoretical analysis are correlated with the experimental measurements to
develop a clearer understanding of the atomic level diffusion processes on
interfaces. This research program which combines synergistic expe rimental and
theoretical studies provides an excellent vehicle for graduate education in
which the students will be immersed in in-depth experimental or theoretical
investigations and will be continuously exposed to the complementary approach.
%%% Intermetallic alloys are candidate materials for high temperature
applications where stability of structure is important. This research should
provide increased understanding of the influence of structure on diffusion of
alloying elements. ***