* 9615425
* The Education Connection
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1998
* Anna Maria de Freitas, Soundprint Media Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 10/31/1998
* USD 191,023.00

9615425 Rankin The SOUNDPRINT Media Center, Inc. (SMCI) proposes the production
and distribution of The Education Connection (w.t.), a news service that will
focus media attention on model efforts that use networked technologies to reform
the teaching of science, mathematics, engineering and technology in K-12
education. The Education Connection project is designed to increase both the
volume and the quality of reporting on science and math educational reforms.
Through this reporting, The Education Connection will bring valuable information
to those who can act upon it: teachers, administrators, and parents of school
age children. SMCI will work with an expert advisory board that includes
practicing teachers, educational researchers and experts to identify successful
uses of technology in the science and math classroom. The Education Connection
will provide news directors, radio talk show hosts, public and commercial radio
and television broadcasters, and science and technology reporters in all media
with monthly tip sheets that present in-depth profiles of how and why
technology-based reforms were implemented, and their results to a broad national
audience. Twelve major technology-based reform projects will be featured in
major articles, while others will be profiled in shorter pieces and sidebars.
The Education Connection will have a radio broadcast component that features
model science and technology educational reform programs in a series of 24 short
format modules created to fit within existing broadcast vehicles, and as a
stand-alone series. A full length half-hour audio documentary will be
distributed for broadcast during April 1997, for National Science and Technology
Week. And an online multimedia resource will provide listener-users with
background information, information, including plans, photos and graphics
illustrating the reform project, and other materials that demonstrate to the
user how change was effected. The Education Connection will target an audience
that in cludes parents of K-12 students, educators and administrators, as well
as the general public through distribution on public and commercial radio
stations nationwide, on television and in print publications. Online
distribution will reach a national and international audience with model
projects, maximizing the impact of The Education Connection. ***