* 9615299
* Ecological Effects of a Host Range Expansion by a Weevil Imported for Biological Control
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2002
* Svata Louda, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/2002
* USD 270,000.00

9615299 LOUDA The investigators propose to measure the impact of the flowerhead
weevil (Rhinocyllus conicus), released for biological control of exotic
thistles, on native plants and the insects associated with them. Experiments
will measure the effects of the timing of flowering by native thistles on the
impact of weevils, the effect of the weevil on seed production of native
thistles, and whether superior competitive ability of the introduced weevil is
responsible for the population decline of native insects. The expected outcomes
include: documentation of the extent and impact of the feeding by the exotic
weevil on two native plants in the upper Great Plains, assessment of the role of
plant growth patterns on weevil use and impact, and determination of the direct
ecological consequences of shifting host use by a deliberately introduced
insect. The study will be the first to experimentally assess the ecological
consequences of unintended feeding on native host plants by an insect
deliberately introduced into the USA to control exotic weeds. Biological control
of weeds is increasingly advocated as an environmental alternative to
herbicides. Yet, few data are available with which to evaluate environmental
risks of introducing exotic insects in biological control programs. The study
will provide important data on such consequences when transference occurs and,
thus, on potential ecological risks associated with classical biological control
of weeds. Such information should prove useful in future attempts to control
invasive exotic weeds.