* 9615599
* SGER:  Cooperative Control: New Alternatives for the Second Wave of the Power System Revolution
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Sarosh Talukdar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 48,000.00

9615599 Talukdar This is a proposal to do preliminary work on an untested and
novel idea: to use autonomous, cooperating agents to control future electric
power systems. In today's power systems, controllers are arranged in hierarchy.
Controllers in higher levels adjust the set points of controllers in lower
levels. But the controllers are not allowed to cooperate (interact). That is,
controllers cannot help one another to do a better job. Specifically, no two
controllers can adjust the value of any system variable in the same time frame.
This precaution is taken to minimize the risk of instability. Any control
problem can be formulated as an optimization problem. The authors of this
proposal have shown that convergence to good solutions of optimization problems
is an emergent behavior of certain mixes of autonomous agents, and much better
solutions are obtained when the agents are allowed to cooperate in certain ways.
The implication is that much more effective control of power systems could be
achieved by autonomous controllers, provided these controllers cooperate in the
right way. The proposed work is to provide a proof-of-concept for this idea and
identify the forms of cooperation that would provide control advantages. If
successful, this work will open a new research area--cooperative control--and
take the first step in dramatically changing the way power systems are
controlled. Emerging hardware technologies, such as flexible AC transmission
systems, electric storage, and fuel cells, make cooperative control feasible.
Many of these technologies are already in the demonstration stage. Once they
reach the deployment stage, it will probably be too late to introduce a new
control technique. Therefore, it is imperative that the preliminary
investigation of the idea of cooperative control be undertaken immediately. ***