* 9615386
* Workshop on Subglacial Rock Drilling, June 19-20, 1997,     Pasadena, California
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1997,10/31/1998
* Barclay Kamb, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 10/31/1998
* USD 30,201.00

This award is for one year of support to convene a workshop on subglacial rock
drilling in the Antarctic. Only 2% of the Antarctic territory is ice-free and
accessible to direct geological sampling and research. Many areas of research
have a need to know what kinds of rocks and sediments occur beneath the ice
sheet. Most of the processes that lead to fast ice streaming flow are located at
the base of the ice sheet and involve basal conditions and basal materials. In
fact, active volcanism may be a crucial element of the dynamics of the West
Antarctic ice sheet. In addition, much of the paleontological record is stored
beneath the ice sheet and is inaccessible to direct sampling. Hence the need
seems to be great for drilling access boreholes through the ice to get samples
for studying the basal geology and basal conditions. A workshop on subglacial
drilling will bring out the interest and need from the scientific community and
will allow for an assessment of the presently available technologies. Additional
requirements from all parties need to be gathered so that the technology that is
developed will be of use for a wide range of interests. The outcome of this
workshop will be an implementation plan that will spell out in more detail how
to reach the specific scientific goals of the different groups interested in
subglacial rock drilling.