* 9615924
* Industrial Research Masters Program for Materials Science   and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1997,12/31/1998
* James Economy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 12/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9615924 Economy This planning grant is directed towards development of an
innovative Industrial Research Master's Program in Materials Science and
Engineering. The program is intended specifically for students planning on
careers in industrial research and development. A critical element of this
program is the design of a curriculum which effectively prepares the students
for careers in industry. The new Master's program will be designed to bridge the
gap between the long term basic research of the traditional university Ph.D.
program and the shorter term focus of research and development in industry. The
planning grant aims at developing a consensus among industrial leaders and
educators on strategies to best prepare students for the changing industrial
environment. A workshop on materials industries needs in future hires and
surveys of materials science and engineering programs and BS students in
industry will help define approaches needed. These strategies will be
articulated in a detailed proposal for consideration by the Division of
Materials Research. This education grant is funded through the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division of Materials Research.. %%% This
grant promotes novel opportunities for students to prepare for academic,
industrial, government and non-traditional roles (such as communication,
business, leadership, ethics, mentoring) and assists in integration of research
and training with curricula.

***