* 9615260
* The Quantitative Genetics of Metapopulations
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Charles Goodnight, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 02/28/2001
* USD 115,000.00

9615260 Goodnight A standard assumption of genetical models is that the effect
of a gene on the phenotype is constant. Models show, however, that in the
presence of gene interaction these effects will not be constant, rather, the
effects of genes may change when the frequencies of genes at other loci change.
Thus, a gene that is deleterious in one population may be favorable in another
population with a different suite of genes at other loci. For example, a gene
causing a "genetic disease" in one population or family may be neutral or even
beneficial in other populations or families. These models also suggest that a
period of small population size may shift the selective values of genes, sending
the population down a new evolutionary trajectory. In extreme cases speciation
can result. This may have implications for endangered species that have been
reduced to very small population sizes. This research will explore the role of
gene interaction in population differentiation and species differences. One
portion of this research will involve models and statistical analysis designed
to detect and interpret gene interaction in molecular quantitative trait loci
(QTL) studies. Of interest will be how to detect interacting QTL, and how to
relate these QTL to classical quantitative genetic measures. This will provide
important tools for researchers seeking to identify the genetic basis of traits
affected by gene interaction. A second portion of this research will examine the
role of gene interaction in species differences. This will provide fundamental
insights into the role of gene interaction in species formation.