* 9615649
* Adosrption and Surface Tension of Surfactant/Lipid/Protein  Mixtures:  Direct Probing of Surface Layers &amp; Theoretical   Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Elias Franses, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/2001
* USD 270,000.00

CTS-9615649 Elias Frances Purdue University The surface tension of several
aqueous systems of surfactant and surfactant/protein mixtures is examined, to
find out how components of different size, surface activity, or molecular
character compete for the air/water surface. New models for both equilibrium and
dynamic adsorption of mixtures are developed. To test the models, several
optical and spectroscopic tools are used to obtain compositional and
microstructural information: external-reflection infrared spectroscopy (IR) from
air/water surface monolayers; ATR-IR (total reflection) spectroscopy from
monolayers (LB films) transferred on solid substrates; ellipsometry at several
wavelengths; and radiotracer methods. The objectives are to develop quantitative
guidelines on how the mixture composition and the molecular structures of the
components can be tailored to control the dynamic surface tension behavior.
Dispersions of sparingly soluble particulate surfactants and their equilibrium
and dynamic adsorption are used to rationalize how foam stability and surfactant
concentrations in the foamate are related to bulk composition, and to foam-based
separations. The project also has a biomedical engineering focus: several
specific surfactants and lipids with applications or potential applications as
lung surfactant replacement drugs are examined to delineate the best conditions
for achieving the very low 10 mNm nonequilibrium surface tensions (under
pulsating are conditions) required for proper alveoli function.