* 9615754
* Fundamental Studies of Preparation/Structure Relationship   and Transport and Reaction of Mixtures in CMS Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Theodore Tsotsis, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 05/31/2001
* USD 338,392.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 9615754&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Type:
GOALI&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator Theodore T.
Tsotsis&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation: University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is awarded through the
Interfacial, Transport and Separations Processes Program of the Chemical and
Transport Systems Division, and the NSF Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison
with Industry (GOALI) Program. The Principal Investigator is Dr. Theodore
Tsotsis of the University of Southern California. An academic and industrial
collaborative research program is to be implemented aimed at developing a better
fundamental understanding of the phenomena involved during the preparation of
carbon molecular sieve (CMS) membranes. These membranes show excellent promise
for many reactor and separation applications and are made via the carbonization
in inert and/or reactive atmospheres of polymeric thin films which are either
self-supported or coated on various porous substrates. The emphasis in this
project is the understanding of the factors in the preparation procedure which
are critical to the ability of these materials to effect separation of mixtures
based on differences in molecular mobility within the
membrane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon molecular sieve membranes have tremendous
potential in the separation of hydrocarbon and reformate mixtures. The ability
to tailor the structure of a particular membrane to fit a particular separation
and /or reactor application will greatly enhance the technological significance
of these systems and expand their use into many new applications. A key
requirement here is the development of predictive models of the pore structure
and of transport and sorption characteristics of reactant mixtures. This is a
main area of emphasis in the project, which will significantly advance the
technological base in this area.&lt;br/&gt;