* 9615935
* Support for a Coring Cruise to the East Greenland           Continental Margin and Denmark Strait, and Preliminary      Data Analysis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Anne Jennings, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

This project is to participate in a cruise of RV Jan Mayen (University of
Troms() which was planned as a joint USA/Norwegian research cruise between
investigators at the University of Colorado and the University of Troms(,
Norway. The Co-Chief Scientists on the cruise will be Hald (Troms() and Jennings
(Colorado). The research plan was developed jointly during a sabbatical of Hald
in Colorado and built upon the reconnaissance marine cruises that had been
undertaken with INSTAAR leadership in 1991 and 1993. The cruise will take place
between Sept. 21 and Oct. 10th, 1996 (Troms( to Troms() and will undertake a
transect from NW Iceland, across Denmark Strait to the East Greenland margin at
ca. 68o N (Fig. 1). The major goal of the cruise is to extract sediment cores
which will provide information on the extent of the Greenland Ice Sheet in the
Denmark Strait, and the late Quaternary paleoceanography and on ice sheet/ocean
interactions across this critical "gateway" between the arctic and mid-latitude
North Atlantic. Based on existing core data (mainly 1-2 m long gravity cores),
and on a detailed analysis of 1655 km of seismic tracklines on the E. Greenland
shelf, key coring sites have been selected to 1) test potential late Quaternary
ice-sheet grounding positions on the shelf: and 2) extend our paleoceanographic
time-frame on the shelf well beyond the 8 to 14 ka basal age limit that we
encountered previously. The ability to obtain 10-m cores will potentially allow
the team to obtain records into Marine Isotope Stage 2/3, depending on the
glacial history. The Jan Mayen will be equipped with a piston corer that will
allow the scientists to obtain 10 m long cores, which will revolutionize their
ability to extract the information needed to obtain on glacial ice extent and
icesheet ocean interactions. Preliminary analyses of the East Greenland cores
will also be undertaken including visual and x-radiograph core descriptions,
laser color logging, bulk density measurements, volume and m ass magnetic
susceptibility, AMS 14C dating of foraminifera and potentially molluscs, and
coarse resolution foraminiferal biostratigraphy.