* 9615038
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:  Genetic and Environmental    Causes of Willow Hybrid Plant Resistance to Herbivores and a Pathogen
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Robert Fritz, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/2000
* USD 240,000.00

Fritz, R. S. DEB-9615038 This project will study the consequences of plant
hybridization on resistance to plant-feeding insects and a rust pathogen. The
PIs will use a model system of two willow species (Salix sericea and S.
eriocephala) that naturally hybridize in large parts of their range. Molecular
markers will be used to establish the purity of parents used in crosses and for
identifying naturally introgressed plants. The study will use comparisons of
resistance among genetic classes of willows growing in the two parental
environments, and will measure the effects of genetic class and environment on
fitness of seedlings in the presence and absence of a rust pathogen. The study
will also determine experimentally if introgression affects resistance of
introgressed plants compared to pure parents. Hybrid plants are widely used for
agricultural and forest tree breeding. These plants often have growth and yield
characteristics that make them more productive for commercial use. In several
cases, however, hybrid plants have been found to be highly susceptible to
disease. Understanding the consequences of hybridization on resistance may be
important to controlling insect damage and diseases in hybrid populations and
could reveal environmental and genetic factors that will improve commercial
success of hybrid plants in agriculture and forestry.