* 9615046
* Late Quaternary History of the Western and East-Central     Ross Sea, Antarctica:  A Contribution to the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Initiative
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* Amy Leventer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1998
* USD 26,100.00

OPP 9614287 Andrews OPP 9615046 Leventer Abstract The late Quaternary extent and
pattern of retreat of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet is an important control on
interpretation of ice core records from the region and it has important
ramification regarding the global water budget (in sea level terms), the timing
of meltwater contributions to the ocean, and the synchrony (or lack thereof)
between events in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. This award supports
continued research on the chronology of ice retreat from the western Ross Sea
and an extension of areal coverage for this research to include the eastcentral
Ross Sea. The study will use a series of piston, Kasten, and grab samples from
research cruises in 1994 and 1995 on the RVIB N.B. Palmer by researchers from
Rice University, University of Colorado, Boulder, and Hamilton College. Various
physical and biological parameters of the cores will be used to map changes in
the environments over time with a concentration on sediment properties,
foraminifera, and diatoms. At this time, ninety-two carbon-14 dates (plus 18
pending dates, all based on acceleratormass-spectrometry) have been obtained
from cores collected prior to 1994 and from the 1994 and 1995 cruises by the
research groups at Hamilton College and the University of Colorado, Boulder.
Emphasis will be placed on obtaining additional radiocarbon dates supplemented
by several other chronological methods including: sources and ages of volcanic
ashes, uranium-series dating of solitary corals, and amino acid racemization.
The three major research questions are: 1) What was the position of the
grounding line during the Last Glacial Maximum from the western to east-central
Ross Sea and what was the timing of retreat from this limit, was it synchronous
across the region, and what was the rate of retreat ? 2) Is there evidence from
the history of carbonate accumulation on the outer shelf banks, and from cores
on the slope of the Ross Sea that the ice was grounded on the shelf break at
some time prior to marine isotope stage (MIS) 2, possibly at MIS 4 (Goodwin,
person. commun. 1996)? 3) What are the paleoenvironments in the areas of the
Ross Sea at the millenial/century time-scales during the latest Pleistocene and
the Holocene? In particular, what is the history of changes in surface water
productivity and sea ice extent?