* 9615254
* Thermal and Fluid State of the Lithosphere Beneath South    Pole Region, East Antarctica, from Magnetotelluric          Measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Philip Wannamaker, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/2000
* USD 252,578.00

OPP 9615254 Wannamaker Abstract The award supports a project to extend knowledge
of the thermal and physico-chemical state (fluids, melts) of the deep crust and
upper mantle of Antarctica with magnetotelluric (MT) profiling of the South Pole
area. In the MT method, temporal variations in the Earth's natural
electromagnetic (EM) field are used as source fields to probe the electrical
resistivity structure in the depth range of 1 to 100 kilometers (km), or more.
Geophysical methods such as MT are appropriate in Antarctica because of the
predominance of thick ice cover (95% of the surface) and the difficult operating
environment. The effort will consist of about 16 sites over a length of 90 km,
offset from South Pole station about 5 km and oriented grid NE-SW, normal to the
Transantarctic Mountains (TAM). The main purposes are three- fold. First, the
method will test the cratonic character of the lithosphere of this part of East
Antarctica to depths of 100-150 km and will allow comparison of its resistivity
structure with that imaged in extensional central West Antarctica (CWA) by the
same research group. Second, this experiment will be conducted over the very
thick and cold ice sheet extant at South Pole, conditions that are very
different those at CWA, so that this project should make MT surveying more
feasible over the entire continent. Third, the results will provide the crustal
response baseline for possible long-term MT monitoring to lower mantle depths at
South Pole. This experiment should lead to important advances in understanding
of the crustal and mantle structure of the central part of the Antarctic
continent.