* 9615668
* Holocene Paleoenvironmental Change Along the Antarctic      Peninsula: A Test of the Bi-Polar/Solar Signal
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/1997,05/31/1999
* Robert Dunbar, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1999
* USD 41,951.00

Domack: OPP 9615053 Manley: OPP 9615670 Banerjee: OPP 9615695 Dunbar: OPP
9615668 Ishman: OPP 9615669 Leventer: OPP 9714371 Abstract This award supports a
multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional effort to elucidate the detailed climate
history of the Antarctic Peninsula during the Holocene epoch (the last 10,000
years). The Holocene is an important, but often overlooked, portion of the
Antarctic paleoclimatic record because natural variability in Holocene climate
on time scales of decades to millennia can be evaluated as a model for our
present "interglacial" world. This project builds on over ten years of prior
investigation into the depositional processes, productivity patterns and climate
regime of the Antarctic Peninsula. This previous work identified key locations
that contain ultra-high resolution records of past climatic variation. These
data indicate that solar cycles operating on multi-century and millennial time
scales are important regulators of meltwater production and paleoproductivity.
These marine records can be correlated with ice core records in Greenland and
Antarctica. This project will focus on sediment dispersal patterns across the
Palmer Deep region. The objective is to understand the present links between the
modern climatic and oceanographic systems and sediment distribution. In
particular, additional information is needed regarding the influence of sea ice
on the distribution of both biogenic and terrigenous sediment distribution.
Sediment samples will be collected with a variety of grab sampling and coring
devices. Analytical work will include carbon-14 dating of surface sediments
using accellerator mass spectrometry and standard sedimentologic,
micropaleontologic and magnetic granulometric analyses. This multiparameter
approach is the most effective way to extract the paleoclimatic signals
contained in the marine sediment cores. Two additional objectives are the
deployment of sediment traps in front of the Muller Ice Shelf in Lallemand Fjord
and seismic reflection work in conjunction with site augmentation funded through
the Joint Oceanographic Institute. The goal of sediment trap work is to address
whether sand transport and deposition adjacent to the ice shelf calving line
results from meltwater or aeolian processes. In addition, the relationship
between sea ice conditions and primary productivity will be investigated. The
collection of a short series of seismic lines across the Palmer Deep basins will
fully resolve the question of depth to acoustic basement. The combination of
investigators on this project, all with many years of experience working in high
latitude settings, provides an effective team to complete the project in a
timely fashion. A combination of undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate
students will be involved in all stages of the project so that educational
objectives will be met in-tandem with research goals of the project.