* 9615927
* Testbed Routers for Advanced Internet Lab (TRAIL)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Herbert Schorr, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 09/30/2000
* USD 1,499,999.00

USC/ISI will create and maintain TRAIL, Testbed Routers for Advanced Internet
Labs. The TRAIL software will be a freely available, well maintained, community
research router source, featuring IPv6 in particular. The work will extend and
leverage developments and facilities of the Collaborative Advanced Interagency
Research Network (CAIRN), organized by ISI under current DARPA funding. CAIRN is
a T1, DS-3 and OC-3 wide area router testbed. The software is for two classes of
hardware: 1) high performance but low-cost personal computers, supporting small
numbers of router interfaces and 2) specialized router hardware, supporting the
large numbers of interfaces that are characteristic of internet interconnect
points, and providing a realistic experimental model of commercial IP routing
technology. For the second class of hardware, one vendor who supports such
numbers of high-speed interfaces proved interested in donating full source code
to be used as the base of TRAIL. Therefore, the second class of hardware for
TRAIL is the Ascend/Netstar, Gigarouter. It supports 32 OC-3 ATM ports, or
combinations of ATM ports with 16 to 128 fast ethernet ports. The proposal
focuses strongly on support of experimental users. ISI's care will be devoted to
supporting their software, and maintaining and distributing versions for PC
alone, and for PC along with Gigarouter. ISI will also maintain facilities for
IPv6 networking research collaboration, and coordinate the North American
portion of the experimental IPv6 backbone, the "6bone".