* 9616199
* Multidisciplinary Collaborative Research:  Amines and       Agonistic Behavior in Crustaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Barbara Beltz, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* Sonya K. Sobrian
* 07/31/1999
* USD 135,000.00

Some biochemicals in the brain apparently affect behavior; for example, a high
level of the amine compound serotonin has been linked to aggression in a wide
range of both vertebrate and invertebrate species. It is very difficult in the
complex brain of vertebrate animals to study the way in which particular
chemicals affect the function of particular single nerve cells, or neurons. In
contrast, some invertebrate animals have limited numbers of large identifiable
neurons, allowing analysis of complex behavioral processes at the level of the
precise cells thought to be involved. This collaborative work in three different
laboratories exploits the well-studied behavior of crayfish and the very
accessible nervous system of these animals, as a model system. A variety of
behavioral, pharmacological, molecular and physiological approaches are used to
determine how amine compounds modulate the aggressive activity of dominant and
non-dominant animals in their social hierarchies, and how particular amine-
containing nerve cells are important in these behaviors. Results from this work
will be fundamental to understanding how compounds that are used by certain
cells as neural transmitters also can have effects on modulating behavior. By
clarifying the roles of amines in complex behavioral processes, such as
aggression in the nervous systems of animals far more complex than this model
system, the results will have an impact beyond cellular neuroscience and
neuroethology to other areas of behavior neuroscience and psychology.