* 9616567
* Robust Feedback Control of Improper Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2001
* J. Daniel Cobb, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2001
* USD 302,410.00

ECDS-9616567 Cobb Roughly speaking, an improper system is one whose gain
increases over a large bandwidth. In this project, we demonstrate the importance
of the problem of feedback compensation for improper dynamic systems from both a
theoretical and practical perspective. In doing so, we highlight specific
applications which are described most naturally by improper models and develop
some preliminary theoretical results for the case of a single-input, single-
output plant. Our results show clearly the striking differences between the
improper plant case and the heavily studied strictly proper case. We then
proceed to frame our preliminary findings in terms of the few existing results
in the literature where improper systems are discussed explicitly. The
importance of improper models becomes clear when one distinguishes between
actual system behavior and the model which is chosen to describe that behavior.
In practice, every physical device exhibits decreasing gain at sufficiently high
frequency. Nevertheless, an improper model is sometimes still the most
appropriate choice for analyzing a given plant, since the exact characteristics
of the high-frequency roll-off may be difficult or impossible to establish and
may occur well outside the frequency range of primary interest. Also, a strictly
proper perturbation of an improper model has higher order than the improper
model itself and exhibits large separation of time scales, leading to difficult
analytic and numerical problems. Our main theoretical result states that, for an
improper plant, stabilizing compensators are characterized not only by their
effect on closed-loop poles but also by the high-frequency interaction of plant
and compensator gains in the control loop. The admissibility of this high-
frequency loop interaction is determined entirely by the sign of the high-
frequency loop gain. This result is based on consideration of a large class of
plant perturbations; it has no counterpart in the theory of strictly proper
systems . In the light of our results, some changes are required in those
aspects of the literature which, at least superficially, pertain to the improper
case. For example, the celebrated Q-parametrization of stabilizing compensators
does (at least nominally) apply to the improper plant case. Our results
demonstrate that a small modification of the theory is necessary, leading to a
tightening of the constraint on the parameter Q. A significant portion of our
proposed research is experimental. Several specific application areas are
discussed in this proposal. For example, certain problems in motion control of
passenger vehicles lend themselves naturally to improper models. We intend to
pursue these problems in a laboratory setting with the intention of
demonstrating the advantages of improper control design for certain important
applications. In the ECE Department at UW, we have a preexisting laboratory
facility intended for precisely this kind of work. Only small expenditures will
be necessary for equipment, mainly in constructing non-traditional motion
sensors. We intend to carry out theoretical work which will extend the
preliminary results discussed in this projectl to the multivariable case. In
principle, these results can be incorporated into most any area of control
theory. Some of the more interesting implications of our results are related to
the well-established topics of Q-parametrization, robust stabilization, singular
perturbations, singular systems, and H2 and H( optimality. We propose to
carefully develop appropriate generalizations of these theories to the improper
plant case to the extent that time permits. Simultaneously, we intend to verify
the practicability of the results obtained relative to a variety of control
problems by conducting real-time, hardware-based experiments in our existing
laboratory facility.