* 9616444
* CISE/EHR/ENG/MPS Collaborative Research on Learning         Technologies:  Beyond Black Boxes: Bring Transparency and   Aesthetics Back to Scientific Instruments
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Mitchel Resnick, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 12/31/2000
* USD 880,658.00

9616444 Resnick, Michael Massachusetts Institute of Technology CISE/EHR/ENG/MPS
Collaborative Research Learning Technologies: Beyond Black Boxes: Bringing
Transparency and Aesthetics back to Scientific Instruments Massachusetts
Institute of Technology has been awarded $880,658 over 3 years for a
collaborative project between MIT, Wellesley College and the University of
Colorado, to develop computational tools and project materials to allow children
to create their own scientific instruments, engaging them in designing and
building, as well as in observing, measuring and interpreting. It is
hypothesized that more students, like scientists of old, will be motivated to
participate in scientific activities, and in addition the design process will
help them develop critical capacities for evaluation. The project promises to
provide students with deeper understanding of the relationships between science
and technology, and between science and the real world. The project will develop
a family of tiny, fully programmable computational devices (crickets) that
students can embed in everyday objects. Crickets can control motors and lights,
receive information from sensors and communicate with one another via infrared
light. The technologies will be evaluated in a range of settings, including work
with teachers in classrooms and a vocational-technical school. In addition to
testing their hypothesis, the PI's will evaluate theoretical learning issues of
balance between physical and virtual objects, and between "transparent" and
"opaque" objects.