* 9616864
* Student Participation at the IEEE - Engineering in          Medicine and Biology Society  Conference, Chicago           Illinois, October 30-November 2, 1997
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Robert Jaeger, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 04/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9616864 Jaeger This award provides support for innovative approaches to
improving the educational experience of students attending the 1997 IEEE/EMBS
(Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society) conference (Chicago, Illinois,
October 30-November 2, 1997), and to encourage students to participate more
fully in professional societies after graduation. The innovations will be
applied to the Pre-Conference Workshops and three Special Student Mini-Symposia.
It is hoped that this technique will serve as a model for other professional
societies seeking to increase student involvement in their proceedings. In past
conferences there has been poor attendance by students at the Pre-Conference
Workshops, primarily due to the additional registration costs. Funds from this
award would be used to support 80% of the registration fees for 50 students, who
would pay 20% of the fee. The criteria by which the applications are to be
judged are: evidence of the student's commitment to engineering and medicine,
the extent that the student is involved in a research project related to the
workshop requested, evidence that the student will take a position in a company
and will work in an area related to the workshop requested, and evidence that
the student's academic program of study would be complemented by attending the
workshop requested. Mini-Symposia in past EMBS meetings have largely been
tutorials on topics of general interest to practicing biomedical engineers. This
award provides support for three Mini-Symposia specifically directed to the
needs of students who are about to move to the workplace from a formal
educational experience. The effectiveness of the innovations is to be documented
by the PI from the preparation of a statistical summary of student participation
and an analysis of the evaluation questionnaires to be completed by the student
participants. ***