* 9616206
* A New Approach for Processing Compressed Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Shahram Latifi, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2001
* USD 256,000.00

As the amount of digital information increases rapidly, the ability to store,
transmit, or process digital data efficiently becomes a significant issue. Any
further improvement in handling digital information, beyond technological limits
in storage capacity and communication bandwidth, should come from manipulating
compressed data. In the first part of this project, execution of common
operations in document image understanding and OCR on CCITT-G4 compressed data
is examined. These operations include: blob coloring, thinning, and
morphological techniques. Direct manipulation of JBIG-coded documents with and
without progressive coding is another objective of this project. For JBIG data,
skew estimation and connected component algorithms are investigated. In
addition, image processing algorithms for compressed binary document images and
engineering drawings are implemented. The second part of this project deals with
the feasibility of developing a new source code that allows quick string
matching (exact and approximate) for OCR-generated text data. Furthermore, a new
lossless binary image compression scheme that allows fast skew estimation for
image rotation is developed. Algorithms developed under this project should
contribute to efficient utilization of storage and bandwidth in information,
computation and telecommunication technologies.