* 9616102
* Dissertation Research: Creation of Cultural Identity        by Expatriate Corporate Wives in the US
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1997,07/31/1999
* Dennis McGilvray, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1999
* USD 11,988.00

This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Colorado. The student will study the relationship between
Japanese corporate wives' self-identity and their experience of home-making in
the alien environment, for them, of the United States. As wives and mothers,
Japanese women are responsible for the cultural reproduction of the home, and
the project will investigate how they cope with the challenges of reproducing a
Japanese home in a foreign place. The student has studied Japanese wives in a
small, dispersed expatriate community in Denver. This project will extend her
ethnographic, participant-observation research into two other expatriate
communities: in a medium-size `company town` environment in Ohio, and in a
large, diverse expatriate community in the NYC metropolitan area. In each area
she will develop an informant pool of 15-20 key housewife informants and will
interview Japanese corporate officials, government officials, and other
professionals who come into contact with Japanese residents. Variables to be
studied include corporate organization and policies, the employment situation,
subjects' life history, and social networks. This research is important because
it will add to our knowledge of how the transnational, globalization of families
affects their core function of reproducing home culture while adapting
positively to an alien location. Japan, as a world power, has long had
expatriate families in other regions of the world, who have remained
distinctively `Japanese`. This research will advance our understanding of the
fundamental processes of this sort of cultural creation and maintenance in this
important case.