* 9616639
* Dissertation Research:  The Influence of Cooperative and    Competitive Behavior on the Evolution of the Chaco Anasazi  of the American Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Katharina Schreiber, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, Mr. John Kantner will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He wishes to address a central
anthropological question of how complex societies arise. Since this phenomenon
has been observed in many parts of the world and appears to have occurred
independently in each, understanding of this process should increase our
understanding of the basic principles which underly social organization and
social change. Considerable research on the prehistory of the Southwestern
United States has shown that over time small egalitarian groups increased in
size and transformed into socially stratified hierarchical societies.
Anthropologists have offered several hypotheses to explain this process. One set
of theories focus on the principle of `adaptation` and see this development as a
means to respond to a changing and unpredictable environment. Another set
envisions this outcome as the result of political competition in which opposing
groups work to increase their own power each other's expense. Mr. Kantner argues
that this question can most effectively be examined at the level of regional
system rather than individual archaeological site and it is this latter approach
which has most often been employed. He has constructed a data base for the Chaco
Anasazi area of New Mexico, has hypothesized the patterns predicted by each
model and is currently employing GIS analysis to study a large body of material.
NSF support will supplement this research through the chemical analysis of
ceramic materials selected from a series of sites. It is important to understand
whether or not the Chaco settlements were integrated into a larger cooperative
unit or whether competition among them was the norm. Through compositional
analysis it is possible to determine the sources of clay and on this basis
determine the relative degree of interaction. This research is important for
several reasons. It will increase our understanding of how complex societies
develop and shed new light on the prehistory of the United States. It will also
assist in training a promising young scientist.