* 9616298
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Studies on Fibre-Matrix   Bonding and Physical Properties of Carbon-Carbon Composites Made with Carbon Fibres of Different Morphologies
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* L Manocha, Sardar Patel University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2000
* USD 19,355.00

9616298 Manocha Description: This is a research project in materials science
entitled U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Studies of Fiber Matrix Bonding and
Physical Properties of Carbon-Carbon Composites Made with Carbon Fibers of
Different Morphologies. The project which adds an international component to
domestic research is under the direction of Danny Edie of Clemson University and
L.M. Manocha of Sardar Patel University. The goal of the research is to develop
a low-cost carbon fiber for high- performance materials. The ongoing NSF
supported research at Clemson has shown that mechanical and thermal properties
of low-cost pitch-based carbon fibers can be greatly improved by producing non-
circular fibers. The ultimate properties of these non-circular fibers are
influenced by flow conditions during extrusion and the molecular make-up of the
mesophase precursor. The collaboration with Professor Manocha s group will
permit testing and evaluation of these non-circular fibers in carbon/polymer and
carbon/carbon composites. This addition to the testing at Clemson will determine
if the enhanced fiber properties translate into improved composite performance.
Scope: This collaboration adds an important dimension to domestic research
through the inclusion of complimentary Indian expertise in fabrication and
characterization of carbon/carbon composites. The Indian counterpart heads a
strong research program in this area and is recognized internationally for his
work with this class of high- temperature materials. The U.S. investigator s
expertise is in fiber formation and characterization. The project provides an
opportunity for graduate students at both universities to gain a unique research
perspective through participation in an international team. This joint effort is
well balanced technically and should result in mutual benefits. ***