* 9616749
* Quantum Phenomena in Complex Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Anupam Garg, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/28/2001
* USD 185,000.00

9616749 Garg This grant consists of a theoretical study of quantum phenomena in
complex systems. The specific projects include (1) macroscopic quantum tunneling
or resonance in ferro and antiferromagnetic particles of size 50-75 A, domain
walls in magnetic wires and in SQUIDs (Superconducting Quantum Interference
Devices) and (2) decoherence effects in quantum computers. The PI has earlier
proposed that nuclear spin dissipation is critical to understanding both the
coherence effects as well as tunneling in magnetic particles. This grant
continues further exploration of possible dissipation sources and their
consequences in the experiments. Quantum computers are devices which aim to
exploit the linearity of the superposition principle to achieve computational
parallelism. The operation of these computers, however, requires strict
coherence between all their elements. Using the techniques developed in the
first project, it may be possible to analyze whether an interaction with
environment is too deleterious for the desirable properties of a quantum
computer. %%% This is a mid career PI who has emerged as an acknowledged expert
on applications of quantum mechanics to complex systems, in particular on the
effect of environment on quantum phenomena. The proposed research has both
fundamental and somewhat more applied aspects. In the first category, he is
proposing to study quantum phenomena that are commonly seen at the microscopic
level, but rarely at the macroscopic level, because they are masked by
environmental noise. Specifically, he is proposing to study these quantum
effects in small magnetic particles and narrow wires, where the chances for
experimental observation are believed to be highest. In the second category he
proposes to consider the limitations of recently proposed quantum computers as
they are influenced by the environment. This influence is widely accepted as
being detrimental to the operation of quantum computers, but the current under
standing in the field is largely qualitative. The PI proposes to make
quantitative assessments of its severity using methods developed in the course
of studying macroscopic quantum phenomena.