* 9616574
* Correlations, Fluctuations and Elementary Excitations in    Insulating and Doped Quantum Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2001
* Rajiv Singh, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/2001
* USD 177,000.00

9616574 Singh This mid-career PI has been successful in rejuvenating the
technique of high temperature series expansion in statistical mechanics and has
applied it to a wide variety of problems in quantum magnetism. The new magnetic
materials in this study include, apart from the technologically important high-
temperature superconductors and colossal magnetoresistance Perovskites; the
inorganic spin-Peierls CuGeO3 and quasi two dimensional spin gap materials
CaV4O9. In this grant the high temperature series expansion is supplemented by
zero temperature high order perturbation expansion and exact diagonalization
(especially the Kernel Polynomial method) for finite lattices. The focus will be
to calculate the temperature dependent spectral properties of the various
quantum spin models, e.g. Heisenberg-Ising, and their parent models of strongly
correlated electrons such as, Hubbard, t-J, Kondo-lattice and double exchange
models. %%% This mid-career PI has been applauded for revitalizing the technique
of high temperature series expansion in statistical mechanics. He has
successfully applied this technique to gather critical insight in the properties
of several novel magnets. This grant is to support a continuing growth of his
research program which includes consideration of additional, more complex
techniques. The results will be compared to a variety of experiments.