* 9616389
* Complex Adaptive Systems and Learning---AAT Planning        Grant Proposal
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Michael Jacobson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 09/30/1998
* USD 75,504.00

9616389 Jacobson There are two overall goals of this proposed planning project:
(a) conduct preliminary research into cognitive and learning aspects associated
with emerging areas of scientific inquiry dealing with complexity adaptive
systems, and (b) develop a mock-up of a theory-and research-based technological
learning environment to help students learn the intellectual perspectives being
identified in complex adaptive systems research and how these can be applied
across a wide range of natural phenomena. Research into systems, the operation
of the immune system, economic-has identified how many disparate phenomena can
be characterized by the interactions of numerous individual elements that self-
organize at a higher systems level, and in turn show emergent and adaptive
properties not exhibited by the individual elements. There are also ways that a
complex adaptive system takes in data from its environments, finds regularities
in the data, and compresses these perceived regularities into schemes that are
used to describe and predict its future. Unlike complex nonadaptive systems such
as stars or galaxies, a complex adaptive system exhibits evolutionary processes
in that these schemes are subjected to selection pressures in the context of
specific environmental conditions that tend to change the schemes over time.
Further, complex adaptive systems seem to function best under conditions that
may be described as intermediate between chaos and order-sometime referred to as
the edge of chaos. A central hypothesis of this project is that in order for
learners to understand relevant scientific phenomena from the perspective of
complex adaptive systems, they will need to acquire new ways of thinking, ways
that focus on the self-organizing, emergent, and adaptive features of the
complex whole rather than the reductive decomposition of complexity into simple,
isolated parts. A second and related hypothesis of this project is that these
new ways of thinking may be counter-intuitive or conflict wi th commonly held
beliefs, and thus require students to undergo a process of conceptual change
before they can understand important conceptual perspectives associated with
complex adaptive systems. Obtaining base-line data concerning these hypotheses
will be important in order to inform the development of technological and
nontechnology learning materials and activities for students as they learn about
complexity and complex adaptive systems. There are four components of the
project: (a) review of the scientific, psychological, and learning science
literatures on the content related to complex adaptive systems and the cognitive
factors relevant to learning about difficult, counter-intuitive scientific
knowledge, (b) consult with content experts in areas involving complex adaptive
systems, and with cognitive psychologists and science educators with expertise
in scientific knowledge representation, misconceptions, and conceptual change,
(c) conduct exploratory studies of students and teachers working on problems
involving complex adaptive systems and using existing complex adaptive systems
simulation software, and (d) develop a mock-up of an integrated case-based
hypermedia, visualization, and computer modeling learning environment dealing
with complex adaptive systems phenomena such as the flocking behavior of birds
and selected cases of biological evolution. It is heed that the results of this
research will provide insights into the nature of the understandings experts and
novice college and high school students have about various complex adaptive
systems phenomena. In addition, this project should prepare for future work into
the development of technological learning environments that can help students
deeply learn centrally important ideas in this emerging area of scientific
inquiry with relevance to a wide range of natural phenomena.