* 9616372
* Support for Computerization of the Field Museum Malacology  Collection:  Pulmonate Land Snails
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Rudiger Bieler, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 08/31/2001
* USD 240,360.00

9616372 Bieler The collections of Recent pulmonate gastropods (land snails) at
the Field Museum of Natural History (FMNH) contain about 3.5 million specimens
in about 208,000 dry shell and alcoholic lots. FMNH's land snail collection is
one of the most comprehensive in the world, especially for the eastern U.S.
species. These collections comprise a unique resource for ecological,
environmental, systematic and other studies. The holdings, including many
primary types, and "orphaned" historic collections from other institutions, have
never been inventoried, and much of the information has remained inaccessible.
NSF funding will provide computer cataloging staff, and equipment and supplies
for re-housing and expanding the pulmonate snail collection. Results of the
project will include: counting of specimens, updates of certain label
information, re-housing of problem lots, production and distribution of new
labels, archival storage of specimens and labels, separation of previously
'hidden' type material, updated and expanded collection arrangement, further
development of authority fields, and presentation of the data, data model and
authority files on FMNH's World Wide Web site. The project is funded by a
partnership among the NSF, the USGS Biological Resources Division, and the Field
Museum, which is matching the award with staff time, hardware and software for
the database system, and additional supplies.