* 9616287
* The Effect of Dissolved Organic Matter on the Photolysis    and Bioaccumulation of Synthetic Organic Compounds in Two   Lakes on Ross Island, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Yu-Ping Chin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/1998
* USD 50,067.00

ABSTRACT The effect of persistent synthetic organic contaminants (SOCs) on the
Antarctic ecosystems is poorly understood. Dissolved organic compounds (DOM) are
ubiquitous to all surface waters in Antarctica and these substances may play an
important role in the fate of SOCs. DOM is capable of acting as a quasi-sorbent,
thereby altering the speciation of SOCs in the water column. DOM is also highly
photoreactive and is able to form chemical transients that can transform SOCs.
This dual-role nature of DOM could have pronounced effects on the
bioavailability of SOCs to aquatic organisms. This exploratory research will
study processes that control the fate of SOCs in the presence of DOM from two
small lakes on Ross Island. Bioaccumulation experiments using phytoplankton and
cyanobacteria from these sites will be conducted in an effort to understand the
effect of DOM on the bioavailability of SOCs. A chlorinated biphenyl congener
and pyrene have been selected for study because they represent classes of
contaminants found in Antarctica and they possess a wide range of physiochemical
properties. Photolysis experiments using artificial sunlight simulators will be
studied to determine the role of DOM as photocatalysts in the transformation of
the two target analytes. The results from this exploratory research will provide
the groundwork for a much larger field project that will study these processes
both in situ and ex situ using other SOCs.