* 9616599
* Fluvial Geochemistry of the Himalaya and Tibet
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1999
* John Edmond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/1999
* USD 99,950.00

Fluvial geochemistry of the Himalayan orogen and the Tibetan Plateau will
constrain three important issues in paleoenvironmental geochemistry: 1. The
extent to which the uplift has accelerated aluminosilicate weathering over pre-
collision conditions. such an acceleration has recently been postulated to be
the cause of a reverse greenhouse effect responsible for the climatic
deterioration of the last ~50 my. 2. The generality of the enhanced flux of U
observed in the preliminary sampling of a few of the Himalayan streams and the
Ganges-Brahmaputra. This flux appears to be between 10 and 15% of the global
total and could help account for the ~50% increase in the U/Ca in foraminiferal
calcite now in the process of being developed. 3. The origin and cause of the
uniquely high fluxes of radiogenic Sr observed in the rivers sampled to date.
This flux accounts for the dramatic rise over the last ~40 my in the seawater
87Sr/86Sr ratio as recorded in marine limestones. If such a flux enhancement is
characteristic of Himalayan-style continental collisions then the isotope curve
must be regarded as a marker of specific geologic events rather than a proxy for
weathering rates in general as assumed in current model simulations of paleo-
pCO2. A very extensive suite of samples has been collected from the headwaters
of the Indus in Northern Pakistan, the Indus and Brahmaputra tributaries in
Tibet and the headwaters of Ganges tributaries in Nepal. This sampling program
is on-going. These will be analysed for the major species and for U, Sr,
87Sr/86Sr, Rb, Cs and Ba. This data suite will constrain the deconvolution of
the aluminosilicate versus limestone and evaporite contributions to the flux and
hence the magnitude of the net CO2 sink. Coupled with existing data and
geological information it will help identify the sources and causes of the
elevated fluxes of U and radiogenic Sr.