* 9616712
* Time-Resolved Structural Studies of Reacting Molecules Using Stroboscopic Gas Electron Diffraction Synchronous with     Photoexcitation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* John Ewbank, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 07/31/1999
* USD 117,000.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professors J. Ewbank and L. Schafer of the Chemistry Department of the
University of Arkansas will continue to apply stroboscopic diffraction
techniques to the structural dynamics of chemical reactions. Laser-excited
molecules in the vapor phase will be studied using time-resolved electron
scattering in order to provide information about the time evolution of
structures and vibrational probability distributions in reacting molecules. The
time resolution will be extended down to the picosecond time domain and will be
used to study UV-induced isomerizations of unsaturated organic compounds such as
trans-stilbene, and structural and distribution dynamics following IR
multiphoton absorption-induced processes such as intramolecular vibrational
energy redistribution and dissociation reactions. Experimental observations of
the structural kinetics of energized molecules in non-equilibrium distributions
are an important chemical frontier which will stimulate advances in theory.
Traditional gas electron diffraction (GED) has relied on the use of the
photographic plate to record and store the information generated by the
diffraction of electrons by molecules. This method was therefore limited to
studying the structures of stable molecules. Current research in molecular
dynamics concerns itself with how the structure and conformation of a molecular
system evolves during a chemical reaction. Experimental information about such
processes can be obtained only by means of techniques in which the time plays an
essential role. The method of real-time GED developed by the principal
investigators has shown great promise in making important contribution to the
understanding of the properties of short-lived species. The aim of this project
is to capitalize on this potential and contribute to our understanding of the
basic aspects of molecular dynamics.