* 9616259
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Hermits, Kings, and Convergence:    Integrating Molecules and Morphology to Study the Phylogenetic Relationships of the Anomura (Crustacea: Decapoda)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1997,02/22/1999
* Alan Harvey, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 02/22/1999
* USD 69,998.00

9616259 HARVEY Hermit crabs are best known for using empty snail shells as
shelters. Most morphological features that define hermit crabs as a group seem
to be adaptations to the asymmetrically coiled shell. A surprising number of
species, however, use objects other than snail shells for shelters, or use no
shelter at all. These hermit crabs tend to be more symmetrical than their shell-
using relatives, and those that use no shelters are also often "carcinized";
that is, the abdomen is reduced and tucked under a wide, heavily armored
carapace. Such crabs may not be recognized as hermit crabs, but may instead be
wrongly placed in other crab groups. The lack of a reliable phylogenetic history
has made it impossible to resolve long-standing questions concerning the
evolution of shell use, asymmetry and carcinization in hermit crabs. In this
collaborative research project, Alan Harvey (morphology) and Cliff Cunningham
(molecular sequences) will integrate extensive morphological and molecular data
to generate a robust phylogeny for the hermit crabs and their allies (i.e., the
Anomura). With this phylogeny, Harvey and Cunningham will determine 1) how many
times anomuran crustaceans independently adopted the shell-using habit; 2)
whether the carcinized morphology of nonshelter-using hermit crabs evolved from
the asymmetrical morphology of shell-using hermit crabs, or vice versa; 3),
which features of both the carcinized and asymmetrical morphologies are
influenced by the presence and type of shelter used by hermit crabs.