* 9616608
* RUI:  Investigation of Spectroscopic and Laser Properties   of Rare Earth Ions in Crystalline Hosts and Organic Dyes in Solvents and Solid State Media
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Dhiraj Sardar, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2001
* USD 108,214.00

9616608 Sardar This is a project at an RUI institution to continue a successful
program which provides undergraduate students with research experience in laser
spectroscopy. Students are actively involved in the study of optical properties
of rare earth ions doped in crystalline host materials, and novel organic dyes
in solid plastic materials. Measurements include time-resolved spectroscopic
techniques to study energy transfer characteristics and mechanisms. Processes
such as energy transfer between sensitizers and activators, fluorescence
quenching, Stoke's shifts, and the effect of host materials on such processes
are studied. The research aims to help students understand and solidify their
thinking about energy levels, selection rules, radiative and nonradiative
processes. Students actively participate in weekly group discussions interacting
with fellow students and the PI. %%% The project is primarily oriented toward
providing research education experience for undergraduates in materials physics
studies including advanced characterization tools and analysis methods to
address basic research issues in a topical area of high technological relevance.
The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
level to important aspects of processing and fabricating photonic devices such
as lasers and sensors. An important feature of the program is the way in which
research and education are integrated through the training of students in basic
research in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***