* 9616526
* Gender, Learning Curves, and Intellectual Functioning
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2002
* Robert Josephs, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2002
* USD 203,918.00

There are few things as vital to a young person's ability to succeed in modern
U.S. society as academic success. It is common knowledge that poor grades and/or
poor standardized test scores effectively seal off vast portions of potential
opportunity. Unfortunately, poor academic performance is not evenly distributed
among individuals. With respect to math and science performance, for example,
the scores of academically stigmatized persons (e.g., female and African-
American students) on standardized tests are typically lower than their non-
stigmatized counterparts (males and whites, respectively). Recently, several
investigators have suggested a social psychological explanation for these
differences: academic situations (e.g., exam situations) are especially
threatening to women and African-Americans due to the potential these situations
are perceived to have in confirming the negative stereotype of low ability
associated with these individuals. As difficulty is experienced in these
situations, the threat of confirming the negative stereotype presumably evokes
anxiety and self-doubt, thus interfering with intellectual functioning, which in
turn leads to poor performance. Based on this logic, the proposed research will
test the theoretical proposition that a stigmatized person's awareness of the
improvement and mastery experienced on a set of study problems -- a pattern of
performance described by the typical learning curve -- prior to taking an exam
will improve the person's performance on the exam. Awareness of improvement and
mastery is hypothesized to reduce the anxiety and self-doubt that is believed to
impair the intellectual performance of stigmatized individuals (specifically,
women and African Americans) in standardized and classroom testing situations in
two ways. First, such awareness acts to provide a proximal and vivid example of
one-s success in dealing effectively with difficult exam situations. Second,
improvement as a result of practice tells the student that performance on the
real exam is the result of a malleable skill, as opposed to a fixed ability.
Thus, poor performance may be attributed to lack of sufficient practice, rather
than poor native ability. The ultimate goal of this program of research is to
provide scientists, educators, and students with a practical understanding of
the relationship between preparation and academic performance in academically
stigmatized (and possibly, math anxious) populations. Armed with such an
understanding, academic performance among traditionally low-achieving groups can
be markedly improved.