* 9616606
* Spectroscopy of Multiply-Charged Transition Metal Ions      Clustered with Solvent
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1997,02/25/1999
* Lynmarie Posey, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 02/25/1999
* USD 251,700.00

Lynmarie Posey of Vanderbilt University is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program to study the gas-phase spectroscopy of doubly-charged
transition metal (TM) ions clustered with solvent. Coordinated doubly-charged TM
ions are quite common in the condensed phase, but not in the gas phase, since
the second ionization potential (IP) of the metal is greater than the ligand IP,
and the metal ion repels the resulting positive ligand. Electrospray ionization
(ESI) has been used to transfer the clustered doubly-valent ion from the
condensed to the gas phase, without reduction of the metal. She will combine ESI
and laser spectroscopy to study (a) the electronic absorption spectroscopy of
the neutral solvent to assess the electronic or structural perturbations
resulting from coordination or electrostatic binding; (b) change in the lowest
energy ligand-to-metal charge transfer band as a function of the number of
solvent molecules; (c) d-d transitions. Systems to be investigated are first row
TM ions clustered with various neutral solvent molecules which differ in their
basicity, polarity, steric bulk and vibrational structure. Most of the
interesting chemistry involving transition metals occurs in the condensed phase
yet the analytical tools providing the most precise information are often gas-
phase techniques. It is clear then that one must ensure that the gas-phase
system and condensed phase system are as similar as possible. The electrospray
ionization technique will allow transfer of the chemically interesting solution
phase species to the gas phase where high resolution laser spectroscopy can be
brought to bear to provide extremely detailed information on the structure of
the divalent transition metal ions.