* 9616631
* Robust Fuzzy Logic Control Strategies for Enhancing Power   System Damping
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2002
* Hashem Nehrir, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Momoh
* 06/30/2002
* USD 267,469.00

ECS-9616631 Nehrir In order to fully utilize the transmission capacity of
transmission lines, significant advances need to be achieved in power system
control as applied to the damping of low frequency electromechanical
oscillations. Power system stability characteristics generally restrict the
maximum allowable power transfers on transmission lines to be significantly
below power transfers at thermal limits of the lines. The stability
characteristics of power systems depend on damping devices and damping control
strategies employed. While there are many devices that can be used in power
systems to achieve damping, the strategies that are currently used to control
these devices generally do not provide enough stability enhancement to enable
operation of transmission lines near their thermal limits. The development of
better damping control strategies for large power systems is the focus of this
research. The characterization of large power systems in real time is difficult
because of random load changes and time-varying operating conditions. One avenue
to controlling systems that are not precisely characterized is fuzzy logic
control (FLC). FLC is a branch of intelligent control that currently is
receiving considerable attention. In the power systems area, several studies
have been conducted recently on the use of FLC in small power systems. In this
research, we propose to explore ways in which FLC can be configured with power
system control devices such as power system stabilizers and static VAR
compensators to dampen low-frequency oscillations in large-scale power systems.
The first phase of the research will consist of a fundamental study to determine
how FLC's can be structured in multiple-device nonlinear dynamic systems to
increase damping and to enhance stability robustness. Some preliminary design
considerations in this regard are described in this proposal. In the second
phase of the research, methods of FLC design will be developed for use in
conjunction with power system control devices for robust damping of low-
frequency local and interarea oscillations in large-scale power systems.
Alternative design strategies such as supplementary FLC and FLC with supervisory
control and adaptive versions of fuzzy controllers suitable for application to
large-scale power systems will be developed to account for wide variations in
the system operating conditions. Methods of tuning fuzzy controller parameters
will be explored using advanced signal analysis and identification algorithms.
Several simulation models will be used. Initially, controller design
methodologies and performance will be evaluated on a basic three-machine, nine-
bus power system. This will be followed by a fundamental study and evaluation of
their use on more complex systems, including a reduced-order (17-machine,
46-bus) model of the western North American power system. The proposed research
is a collaborative effort between the Department of Electrical Engineering at
Montana State University (MSU) and that at the University of New Mexico (LTNM).
The lead institution will be MSU with primary expertise in power systems and
control. The University of New Mexico will participate in the work (20% of the
effort), with primary expertise in fuzzy systems, and will explore conditions
under which fuzzy logic control can guarantee stability of large-scale nonlinear
dynamic systems with multiple oscillatory modes. The work will foster
collaborative efforts between faculty and graduate students at the two
universities. The research should advance the state of the art both in power
system damping and FLC. It will also have a big impact on graduate and
undergraduate education; direct student involvement at both graduate and
undergraduate levels has been planned. One of the research tasks will involve
participation of undergraduate students in the implementation of FLC controllers
on laboratory-scale power systems. Results of the research will be presented at
appropriate conferences and will be pu blished in technical journals.