* 9616602
* A Distributed Architecture for Global WWW Cache             Integration
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas J. Greene
* 02/28/2001
* USD 569,957.00

This award supports a three year project to continue investigation of Internet
web caching. It is a follow-on to a successful two year project which deployed
caching servers at the five NSF-funded supercomputing centers and at FIX-West.
The project resulted in considerable international participation and an early
version of caching software called Squid which is now being used at over 400
sites. This follow-on project does the following: ... encourage greater U.S.
participation. ... continue Squid code development and maintain the public
domain code base for experimentation and collaboration. ... hold at least one
workshop to improve exchange of ideas among caching researchers. ... standardize
the Internet Caching Protocol (ICP) to assure interoperability between
implementations. ... develop an automatic cache discovery system. ... assist in
improving the web software, http, to support caching. ... collaborate with other
caching research groups to use multicast for distributing data between caches.
... develop specifications for high performance caching hardware, and work with
the vendors in developing such equipment. ... investigate research questions
such as scaling, recording system performance and information provider hit
statistics, and improving statistics gathering to enable better caching
simulations.