* 9616741
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Molecular Interactions of Actin
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* David Thomas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 04/30/1998
* USD 14,100.00

9616741 Thomas This award supports the participation of American scientists in a
U.S.-Japan-Australia seminar on Molecular Interactions of Actin, to be held in
Maui, Hawaii from April 1-5, 1997. The co-organizers are Professors David D.
Thomas of the University of Minnesota, Toshio Yanagida of Osaka University in
Japan, and Cristobal G. dosRemedios of the University of Sydney in Australia.
This seminar will focus on the role of actin in the process of contractility and
cell movement, and will examine how actin interacts with other proteins at the
structural level. Actin is a biomedically important protein that plays an
essential role in the contraction of all muscles and is a major component of the
cytoskeleton which is crucial to the function of every cell in both animals and
plants. This seminar will bring together researchers from the United States,
Japan and Australia who have developed complementary techniques to study actin
biophysics. The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese and Australian
scientists will enable the U.S. scientists to advance their own work, and will
set the stage for future collaborative research projects. Seminar organizers
have made a special effort to involve postdoctoral researchers. The proceedings
of the meeting are expected to be published in a book entitled Actin and Actin-
Binding Proteins. ***