* 9616824
* RUI:  Observations of Circumnuclear Rings in Starburst      Spiral Galaxies and Supernovae Monitoring
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* Debra Elmegreen, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 04/30/1999
* USD 71,629.00

ABSTRACT D. ELMEGREEN This Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award is
for support of two distinct but logistically and scientifically related projects
in observational astronomy. The first project concerns starbursts in
circumnuclear rings. Spiral galaxies with starburst activity are often barred
with nuclear rings located near the inner Lindblad resonances (ILR's). The
theory of gas flow indicates that an ILR tends to trap gas that is flowing in
because of bar torques. The collected gas forms stars if a critical density is
exceeded. The project will compare bar properties (bar luminosity fraction,
radial profile, arm/interarm contrast) in bursting and non- bursting galaxies.
The star-forming properties of nuclear rings will also be studied by monitoring
45 barred galaxies for ILR ring variation due to supernovae or other events.
Spectacular star formation rates in ILR ring bursts suggest at least 0.5 ILR
supernova per year in the sample of 45 galaxies. For various reasons, previous
ILR supernovae are likely to have been missed by existing search programs. Data
for the project will consist of data from our existing Kitt Peak National
Observatory (KPNO) 2.1m observations of several starburst galaxies with high
angular resolution in J and K bands, which reveal ring structure that is
described in published carbon monoxide (CO), Hydrogen-alpha and Hubble Space
Telescope (HST) observations. The results from the analysis of the photometry of
these rings will enable one to estimate ages and stellar densities for
comparison with theoretical stability thresholds. Existing and planned
observations on the Burrell-Schmidt 0.6 meter telescope in the B and I band will
supplement planned BVRI 0.8 meter Vassar Observatory observations to assess the
bar properties of each galaxy, and 0.8 meter observations will be used for the
variability search. The second project is to monitor extragalactic supernovae
discovered by others. Broadband (BVRI) light curves are a n important component
in understanding the nature of supernova explosions, serving as a constraint on
explosion and precursor models, a test of the homogeneity of spectroscopic
classification, a possible basis for the calibration of type Ia distance
indicators, a classification criterion for some type II events, as well as
important data for the determination of some astrophysical parameters (such as
distance, age at time of discovery, explosion energy) for individual events.
Unlike spectroscopic studies, light curve monitoring requires a modest aperture,
but a sizable time commitment. Searches typically find at least a half-dozen
outbursts that will remain within the photometric reach of the 0.8 meter
telescope for weeks or months each year. This project, which would build upon
our present collaboration with our colleagues in the Keck Northeast Astronomy
Consortium, would monitor each light curve on every clear night until reaching
signal-to-noise limits. The new 0.8m telescope and CCD camera at the Vassar
College Observatory is expected to achieve first light in March 1997. This
telescope will be dedicated to the light curve project as well as to appropriate
segments of the barred spiral project, especially the search for variability.
Both projects will also make use of facilities at the national astronomy
observatories, and will involve undergraduate students at every stage.