* 9616908
* Soft X-ray Molecular Spectroscopy: Dissecting the Continuum
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Erwin Poliakoff, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 12/31/1999
* USD 359,472.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Poliakoff will identify and characterize aspects of the
photoelectron ejection process which retain their molecular character far from
threshold using soft X-ray molecular spectroscopy. Electronically excited
photoions will be created using tunable synchrotron radiation, and their
dynamics will be investigated via their dispersed fluorescence. These studies
are unique in that the range of kinetic energies probed extends hundreds of eV
into the ionization continuum, where the molecular character of the electron
ejection still persists. Vibrational and rotational energy deposition into
molecular photoions over a broad range of photoionization energies will be
determined. Earlier experiments on simple molecules will be extended to examine
small polyatomic molecules. The results of these experiments will provide a
useful database for experiments employing photoionization and will furnish
insights into fundamental scattering phenomena, thereby aiding the continued
development of molecular scattering theory. In the experiments performed in this
project, the motions that electrons make when molecules dissociate under the
influence of high-energy light will be correlated with the motions of the
nuclei. The light used in these studies will come in part from a synchrotron
radiation source at Louisiana State University. The data acquired in these
studies is inaccessible by other techniques and will be used to guide and shape
theoretical models for these processes. Some of the processes studied in this
project are relevant to understanding the physical and chemical reactions
involved in the X-ray processing of materials.