* 9616522
* Molecular Genetics of Pre-Mating Reproductive Isolation     in Mimulus
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Douglas Schemske, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/29/2000
* USD 250,000.00

9616522 Bradshaw In the central Sierra Nevada mountains of California there are
two monkeyflower species, Mimulus lewisii and M. cardinalis, which are
pollinated by different animals -- M. lewisii is bumblebee-pollinated, while M.
cardinalis is pollinated by hummingbirds. The flowers of each Mimulus species
differ in color, size, shape, and nectar production to best attract the
appropriate pollinator. The two monkeyflower species do not crossbreed in nature
because of their different pollinators, but artificial hybrids can be produced
easily by hand-pollination. Offspring from the hybrids display a tremendous
variety of floral traits, since each offspring has inherited part of its genome
from a bee-pollinated ancestor and part from a hummingbird-pollinated ancestor.
No two hybrid offspring are exactly alike. More than 200 hybrid offspring will
be taken to Yosemite National Park in California, where M. lewisii and M.
cardinalis are found together naturally, and the rates of bumblebee and
hummingbird visitation measured by direct observation. New genome mapping
techniques, originally developed for studying human disease and for plant and
animal breeding, will be used to determine which genes in the flowers are
responsible for attracting bumblebees and hummingbirds. The working hypothesis
is that a few genes, such as those governing flower color and nectar production,
will have a large impact on which pollinator chooses to visit a particular
flower. Investigating the genetics of speciation -- the process by which one
species splits into two or more new species -- is fundamental to understanding
the origin of biodiversity. Speciation results from genetic changes that prevent
the two species from crossbreeding. Since Darwin, there has been debate about
the number and magnitude of genetic changes required for speciation. One view is
that reproductive isolation is the cumulative result of many mutations, each
with a small effect, over long periods of time. Alternatively, others have
suggested that a few genes of large effect play a prominent role, and that
speciation could occur rapidly. This issue has not been resolved, largely
because detailed genetic studies have been limited to a few organisms, such as
fruit flies, which have a long history as experimental models. Improved methods
in genome research make it feasible to use wild monkeyflower species to
establish a synthesis of modern laboratory molecular biology with ecological
studies in the field. This general approach could be used to address many long-
standing questions in biology.