* 9616730
* Mobile Doppler Radar Observations of Tornados
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Calvin Swift, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2000
* USD 285,962.00

9616730 McIntosh While much has been learned about the structure of tornadic
storms over the last few years, some problems still remain unsolved. For
example, progress has been made over the last decade in understanding the
structure of tornadic thunderstorms and the general environment they create that
is conducive for tornado development. Still unresolved, however, are details of
how and why tornadoes are triggered in some storms, but not in others and the
knowledge of the detailed structure of the tornado itself. Scientists from the
University of Oklahoma and the University of Massachusetts propose to continue a
productive cooperative effort to study the near environment and detailed
structure of tornadoes. In the first year of this project, substantial
improvements will be made to a mobile, high-resolution, ground-based, 3-mm
wavelength, pulsed Doppler radar from the University of Massachusetts. The radar
upgrades will allow collection of data with improved resolution in both time and
space. In the second and third years, the improved mobile radar will be deployed
in a collaborative effort between the University of Massachusetts and scientists
from the University of Oklahoma. The objective is to map the Doppler velocity
and reflectivity fields in and adjacent to tornadoes and their parent
circulations. The purpose of the experiment is to learn how and why tornadoes
form, and to determine their internal structure. If successful the researchers
will obtain the highest-resolution measurements ever made of the structure of a
tornado and its near environment. This may lead to better understanding of the
process of tornado genesis and improved forecasts. ***