* 9616600
* Dissertation Research: Investment in Female Education as an Economic Strategy Among U.S. Mexican Households in Nogales, Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1997,09/30/1998
* James Greenberg, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 09/30/1998
* USD 12,000.00

This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Arizona. The project is to examine the extent to which US-
Mexican households in Nogales, Arizona, invest in the education of their female
members as an economic strategy. The project will select a random sample of 460
households and measure the various factors (migration history, job security,
informal sector activities, household size and network characteristics, housing
type) that affect their vulnerability or ability to survive economic hardship.
The hypothesis to be tested is that households which have invested in their
female members' education will be more stable. Methods include ethnographic
participant-observation and in-depth interviews as well as a questionnaire
survey of households. This research is important because the site of the project
is a free trade manufacturing and assembly zone (known as maquiladora), which is
an intense location for NAFTA activities. New knowledge about how local families
react to these new opportunities in general, and the impact of household
investment on the education of female members in specific, will advance our
understanding of how working class families secure their livelihood. This
knowledge will be useful to policy makers concerned with promoting the economic
and social security of working class families.