* 9616138
* Early Embryonic Heart Function and the Influence of InternalExternal Environmental Factors on Developmental Trajectories
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1997,09/29/1998
* Warren Burggren, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 09/29/1998
* USD 139,000.00

9616138 Burggren Our understanding of the forming cardiovascular system of early
embryos remains extraordinarily limited for any vertebrate, including mammals.
Simply put, the vertebrate embryo remains a "black box" from an "organismal
physiology" perspective. Consequently, the major objectives of this proposal are
to: 1) investigate the onset of cardiovascular function by determining
experimentally the physiological mechanisms leading to flow and pressure
generation in early stages of heart development; 2) clearly define and delineate
the "critical windows" for cardiovascular development; 3) determine whether
"development trajectories" - established early in embryonic development and
dictated by genotype - can be diverted through challenge by environmental
factors to produce altered embryonic/larval phenotype. Measurements will be made
zebrafish, the African clawed frog, and the domestic fowl. The first phase of
experiments will include measurements during the early embryonic period of in
vivo physiological variables. The second experimental phase will consist of
rearing populations of developing embryos under low oxygen and assessing their
physiological performance and anatomical development. These studies on early
embryonic cardiovascular development and how relevant environmental factors
(e.g. hypoxia) impact it will have very broad applicability to both vertebrate
physiology and developmental biology, particularly in the almost complete
absence of similar published data for vertebrate embryos.