* 9616591
* Workshop on Events as Grammatical Objects, Ithaca, N.Y.,    Summer 1997
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Carol Tenny, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 02/28/1998
* USD 17,670.00

Research in lexical semantics, logical semantics, and syntax has converged on a
growing recognition that the grammars of natural languages structure and refer
to events in particular ways. Lexical semanticists who have studied how verb
meanings are organized across languages, have observed recurrent patterns in how
verbs encode time, causation, stativity, and other characteristics of events.
Logical semanticists who have studied the truth-conditional properties of
sentence meaning, have also found it necessary to refer to elements of meaning
related to the semantics of events, such as causation and temporal properties.
Syntacticians, studying the general structure of sentences of human languages,
have discovered a growing body of phenomena in which the semantics of events can
be seen to interact with syntactic structures. These three disciplines are
concerned with different tools, approaches, and questions, but there is now
enough convergence on the idea of events as grammatical objects in both syntax
and semantics, that dialogue and cooperative research across these disciplines
is possible. This is a workshop on Events as Grammatical Objects, from the
combined perspectives of syntax, lexical semantics, and logical semantics. This
workshop brings together eminent researchers from these three areas specifically
to address this issue. A workshop is an excellent way to spark this interaction,
that otherwise would occur only sporadically if at all. This kind of meeting has
not been attempted before. This workshop is exceedingly cost-effective for a
number of reasons. The workshop will be held at the Linguistic Society of
America's 1997 Summer Institute at Cornell University, where some of the
participants in the workshop will be teaching courses, reducing travel
expenditures. A number of courses relating to topics on the syntax or semantics
of events are planned for the 1997 Institute, and other scholars working on
events will be able to participate as part of the audience, i ncreasing the
opportunities for productive dialogue on these topics. Finally, cross-
fertilization and joint research will multiply the effective power of these
researchers to attack the questions that could lead to an integrated theory of
events in natural language.