* 9616947
* Field-Scale Nonaqueous Phase Transport Processes in         Heterogeneous Aquifers
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Lynn Gelhar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 09/30/2002
* USD 305,944.00

9616947 Gelhar This is an award to provide support for research on the behavior
of dense, nonaqueous phase liquids when present in an aquifer being considered
for or being subjected to decontamination. The objectives of the project are to
determine the role of aquifer heterogeneity in field-scale flow of immiscible
liquids, the distribution of residual nonwetting liquids and the rate of
dissolution from the residual phase, and to develop strategies for data
collection and analysis during aquifer decontamination. The research will
involve a stochastic characterization in which local scale behavior is assumed
to be well represented by conventional equations used to describe conservation
of mass and momentum. The field-scale response will involve using linear
perturbation methods that relate the statistical description of heterogeneity of
soil properties to the observable field-scale response. The investigator plans
on adapting techniques he has successfully applied to understanding unsaturated
flow in porous media while also addressing additional factors that must be
considered including flow of a nonwetting phase, trapping by capillary forces
and subsequent dissolution. Addressing as it does the effects that dense,
nonaqueous liquids have on decontamination of aquifers, one of the expected
outcomes of this research will be to improve the engineering design of aquifer
decontamination procedures. However, results will also be applicable to a range
of environmental protection and resource development problems that require
prediction of field-scale transport processes such as radioactive waste
management and enhancement of petroleum production. ***