* 9616768
* Investigation of Field-Activation in Combustion Synthesis:  The Use of Field as a Processing Parameter
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Zuhair Munir, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Farley Fisher
* 09/30/2000
* USD 338,352.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9616768 This study is an investigation of the use of electric
fields in self - propagating high-temperature (combustion) synthesis (SHS). It
builds on previous work to develop an understanding of the interactions between
electromagnetic fields and self-sustaining combustion waves. The focus is on the
macrokinetics of wave propagation in the presence of a field and on
microstructural developments within the combustion zone. Models and experiments
are used to study field activation as a function of thermophysical properties of
reactants and products. Relationships of interest include the effects of the
field on the velocity and temperature of the combustion wave, on phase
transformation, and on modal change (steady/nonsteady state) in wave
propagation. The effect of the field on the mechanism of combustion is
investigated using the Boddington-Laye analysis of temperature profiles and
compared to experimental observations on profiles in the combustion zone. The
results are extended to determine the effect of the field on compositional
distribution in functionally-graded materials. Incorporated into this study are
collaborations with two Italian research groups. Dr. Umberto Anselmi-Tamburini
of Pavia will participate in the study of field effects on the kinetics and
mechanisms of the combustion process. Dr. Giacomo Cao of Cagliari will be
involved in studies of formation of intermetallic compounds by SHS.
Understanding the interactions between electric fields and self-propagating
combustion systems will enable the use of the field as a processing parameter in
the synthesis and consolidation materials. ***