* 9616784
* A Systematic Study of the Electrical Properties of Grain    Boundaries Formed by Wafer Bonding
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2001
* David Clarke, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2001
* USD 310,500.00

9616784 Clarke A systematic study of the electrical characteristics of grain
boundaries in both a covalent semiconductor (silicon) and an ionic semiconductor
(zinc oxide) is proposed in order to establish relationships between grain
boundary crystallography, dopant concentration and electronic states, intrinsic
and extrinsic. Such basic relationships are lacking in large part because of the
difficulty in preparing large, flat areas of grain boundary of controlled
misorientation that can be characterized both electrically and structurally. To
overcome this limitation, as well as to control the concentration and type of
grain boundary doping, it is proposed to use the rapidly developing technology
of "wafer bonding" to prepare well-defined grain boundaries. Amongst the
specific objectives of the proposed research are: the functional dependence of
the number and energy of defect states with angular misorientation for twist
boundaries in silicon; the demonstration that ZnO epitaxial films can be wafer
bonded to form grain boundaries, and the subsequent extension to identifying the
defect states produced by individual and combined dopants of ZnO grain
boundaries as a function of crystallographic misorientation; and the development
of a simulation scheme for describing the electrical characteristics of
polycrystalline semiconductors in terms of the grain boundary defect states. %%%
The proposed research will study the electrical properties of grain boundaries
in polycrystalline semiconductors of importance in advanced electronic systems,
such as zinc oxide-based varistor ceramics (used in electrical surge protection
systems) and solar cells made from polycrystalline silicon. Understanding these
properties will enable materials scientists to design improved materials that
meet the requirements of tomorrow's high performance applications. %%%