* 9616711
* Collision and Surface-Induced Dissociation of Singly and    Multiply Charged Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Jean Futrell, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 08/31/2001
* USD 375,000.00

The detailed reaction dynamics of ion-molecule interactions forms the focus of
the research of this project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program. Professor Futrell and his coworkers at the University of Delaware
utilize crossed molecular beam methods to probe the collision induced
dissociation processes relevant to ion activation in analytical mass
spectrometry. This unique approach provides information about energy
partitioning, fragmentation mechanisms, and energy release which improves the
fundamental understanding of mass spectrometric fragmentation patterns. This
approach is being extended to high molecular weight, multiply charged ions
produced by electrospray ionization, and to the investigation of ion-surface
interactions and the process of surface induced dissociation. The use of tandem
mass spectrometric methods has provided much structural information about
biologically significant compounds, especially with the advent of low energy
ionization methods such as electrospray. The use of ion-noble gas or ion-surface
collisions to activate the analyte ion has added significantly to the power of
these methods. The research of this project is directed to developing the
detailed mechanistic understanding of these activation processes, improving
their applicability for analytical mass spectrometry.