* 9616981
* The Computer as a Scientific Instrument
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Bruce Bruemmer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce E. Seely
* 02/28/2001
* USD 199,781.00

The electronic digital computer has brought about significant changes in several
fields of science. Computer-based modelling and statistical analysis tools have
automated data collection, storage and analysis. Computer simulations have
allowed scientists to visualize phenomena they could not observe in nature. Yet
such applications also raised questions for the practice of science: Are
simulation and data analysis valid sources for causal models? Can experiments be
replaced or supplemented by computer simulations of the same processes?
Computing has transformed the practice of science in many disciplines, yet no
history of scientific computing has yet been written. As a first step toward
this goal, the investigators will examine the use of computers as scientific
instruments in diverse fields of biological, physical, and behavioral science.
The proposers will begin with a systematic bibliographic search of primary and
secondary sources for several fields of science for the period from 1975 through
about 1975. Then they will undertake historical research, including archival
analysis, on-site visits, and a selected set of interviews. Although the
approaches to material in each field of science will vary from one investigator
to another, their efforts will be united by a common goal and common research
questions, including efforts to situate the computer within its institutional,
social, and intellectual context; to understand how the computer changed
scientific practices and was changed by them; and to analyze how computers were
used to promote the authority of certain institutions, individuals, and methods.