* 9616969
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Effective Visual Presentation of Computer Generated Information
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Catalin Roman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/1998
* USD 80,000.00

96-16969 Roman, Gruia-Catalin Hubbard, P. M. Washington University in St. Louis
CISE Research Instrumentation: Effective Visual Presentation of Computer
Generated Information The instrumentation grant will fund four SGI graphics
workstations connected to a high speed communication network to provide a
testbed configuration supporting four projects whose common goal is to enhance
the computer's ability to communicate information in visual form for human
consumption. Query -Based Visualization of Distributed Computations-
Visualization for Network Management- Practical Computational Geometry- Time
Critical Graphics Operations. Query-based visualization is a technique that
allows one to explore an executing distributed computation in a totally visual
environment. A graphical vocabulary is used to formulate questions about and
construct answers regarding the state of the computation. This will lead to a
novel perspective on visual debugging and monitoring of distributed software.
The network visualization, management, and control project seeks to explore the
use of visualization and interactive steering in an environment characterized by
high-speed, high-volume data production and a demand for rapid response. The
techniques developed in this work will be applicable to a wide range of complex
applications that can benefit from human-directed, dynamic adjustment of
parameters. Practical computational geometry project deals with the issues of
simplicity and robustness in geometric algorithms, seeking a theoretical
understanding of fundamental problems in computer graphics, computational
biology, and visualization. Finally, time-critical computer graphics is a
research effort to develop graphical operations such as rendering and collision
detection that adapt to resource limitations with minimal impact on human
performance.