* 9616766
* Broadband Atmospheric Opacity Measurements at Millimeter andSubmillimeter Wavelengths
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Gene Serabyn, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 03/31/2001
* USD 189,774.00

July 10, 19971aSerabyn/Abstract ATM-9616766 Accurately calibrated measurements
of atmospheric opacity across the near-millimeter and submilimeter wavebands (3
- 0.3mm) are proposed. The measurements will be carried out using a Fourier
transform spectrometer at the Caltech Submillimeter Observatory on the summit of
Mauna Kea. The broadband natrue of the spectrometer will enable measurements
covering up to a decade in frequency, while the high altitude site will provide
access to extremely dry atmospheric conditions, allowing through-atmosphere
observations at frequencies well above those possible from seal level. The goal
of this project is to relate the measure braodvand atmospheric opacity curves to
the atmospheric water vapor content, in order to address issues such as the
collisionally broadened lineshape of the H2O molecule, the "quasi-continuum" H2O
opacity contribution far from resonance, and ultimately, the dry-air
contribution to the continuum opacity. A better understanding of the H2O
collisionally broadened lineshape is important not only as a discriminator of
collisional lineshape models, but also because of the significant impact water
vapor opacity has on radiative transfer and energy balance in our atmosphere,
and on the propagation of radiation in remote sensing and communications
applications.