* 9616564
* Collaborative Research on Learning Technologies: Toward the Development of a Center for Collaborative Research on       Learning Technologies
* CSE,EIA
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Robert Semper, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 09/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9616564 Semper, Robert Friedlander, Larry Exploratorium CISE/EHR/ENG/MPS
Collaborative Research on Learning Technologies Program: Toward the Development
of a Center for Collaborative Research on Learning Technologies The
Exploratorium in San Francisco, California has been awarded funding in the
amount of $50,000 for a period of 12 months to initiate a planning effort
leading to the creation of a Center for Collaborative Research on Learning
Technologies. The Center will draw upon the efforts and expertise of a wide
ranging group of San Francisco Bay Area participants from industry, research,
and education to formulate powerful responses to challenges and opportunities in
science, mathematics, engineering and technology education. During the proposed
planning period, the Center will initiate reexamination of the basic methods and
practices of these fields in light of the pedagogical potential to newly
developing learning technologies. At the heart of the Center's activities will
be a set of carefully selected projects that address major educational
challenges and opportunities. The Center is particularly interested in projects
that focus on the convergence of new hybrid technically-augmented learning
spaces/situations and new pedagogical theory. By focusing efforts on a specific
problem or content area of sufficiently wide interest to the fields, the Center
will be able to identify core issues for education as a whole; and thus be able
to design generalizable research strategies. It is anticipated that important
work will be undertaken by members from primary and secondary school system and
by informal educations (such as directors of public libraries or broadcasting
groups) of different kinds.