* 9616707
* Nutrition and Temperament
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1997,08/31/2002
* Theodore Wachs, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2002
* USD 649,042.00

This research examines the relationship between nutrition and infant
temperament. Temperament refers to individual differences in behavioral
tendencies that are stable across time and situations, and that appear very
early in infancy. The study builds on previous research conducted in Guatemala,
involving a group of women, some of whom had received nutritional supplements
when they were children and some of whom had not. The same women are now of
child-bearing age and have children of their own. The current project will
examine whether a mother's own nutritional history during early childhood can
influence her childrens' temperament, cognitive capabilities, and nutritional
intake. It is expected that inadequately nourished children whose mothers did
not receive nutritional supplements during their childhood will show a
temperament pattern involving lower levels of: positive emotionality, activity,
soothability and cooperativeness. These children are also expected to show
higher levels of: negative emotionality, inhibition, and distress. In contrast,
it is expected that adequately nourished children whose mothers did receive
nutritional supplements during their childhood will show the reverse pattern of
temperament. The research has strong potential for broadening our knowledge of
biologically-based behavior, and for refining our understanding of the
relationship between nutrition and individual differences in behavior.