* 9616677
* Dissertation Research: Ethnic Identity, Tourism and         Development in Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Renato Rosaldo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1999
* USD 9,753.00

This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
Stanford University, studying the relationship of racial and ethnic
stratification in people (both local and foreign) involved in the tourist
industry in Ethiopia. The tourists come from a social system where race often
signifies lower social status, while the Ethiopian social system uses ethnic
group identity and not race is the marker of status. Through intensive
interviews and participant observation of tourists and natives in four distinct
regions of the country, the student will investigate how notions of nationhood,
statehood, and race influence both Ethiopian and foreign English-speaking
tourists' perceptions of themselves and of each other. This study of Ethiopian
racial discrimination is valuable because it is not based on an ideology of
white supremacy, but instead on the dominance of one regional ethnic group above
others. Methods include historical, ethnographic, and mass-media research on how
different definitions of history are used to support claims of regional
difference. It will also advance our understanding of the impact of tourism, as
well as the impact of development programs, on local systems of social
stratification. In addition this research will contribute to our nation's
expertise about this important area of the world.