* 9617680
* Methyl Bromide Cycling by Marine Phytoplankton              and Associated Bacterioplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Patricia Matrai, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/29/2000
* USD 307,063.00

9618533 9617680 MATRAI ABSTRACT Concern about declining ozone concentrations in
the atmosphere in the last two decades has led researchers to look for compounds
that destroy ozone, other than chlorofluorocarbons. One such compound is methyl
bromide (CH3Br) which is presently believed to be the largest source of Br in
the stratosphere. Methyl bromide and derived radicals can destroy 5-10% of
stratospheric ozone on a global basis and more on a regional basis. The major
natural source of CH3Br to the troposphere appears to be marine, biogenic
production and subsequent sea-air exchange; the output from biomass burning due
to wildfires is unknown. Anthropogenic sources include biomass burning,
automobile exhaust, and, mainly, fumigation. Models predict a global
anthropogenic contribution of 25-54% of total emissions, the remainder being the
natural contribution. This clearly indicates the importance of natural sources.
The principal losses for atmospheric CH3Br are photolysis, air-sea exchange,
surface losses to soils and plants, and biological degradation in soils.
atmospheric concentrations of methyl bromide appear to be increasing at a rate
of 3% (+1%) per year. Due to its anthropogenic sources, a proposal currently
exists to drastically curtail its use as a fumigant and thus reduce its input to
the atmosphere. This reduction would affect the balance between natural and
anthropogenic effects on the atmosphere. This reduction would affect the balance
between natural and anthropogenic effects on the atmospheric concentration of
CH3Br. The oceans play an important and complex part in controlling the
tropospheric burden of methyl bromide. Sea surface can act both as a source and
a sink to the atmosphere. To determine the net availability of dissolved CH3Br
for air-sea exchange, the various compartments and mechanisms involved must be
understood. This study will assess the extent and rate of CH3Br production by
marine phytoplankton in the laboratory and in the field in o rder to determine
the relative importance of the mechanisms by which methyl bromide cycles in the
oceans.