* 9617633
* Ponce Science and Mathematics Systemic Initiative Planning  Phase
* EHR,ESR
* 10/01/1996,11/30/1997
* Acenet Bernacet-Mendez, Puerto Rico Department of Education
* Standard Grant
* Gerald E. Gipp
* 11/30/1997
* USD 100,000.00

The five educational districts serving the city of Ponce, Puerto Rico, have
joined together to propose a self-study on the status of K-12 science and
mathematics, and technology education (SMTE) for the purposes of designing a
plan for the systemic reform of SMTE in the Ponce schools. Ponce has a total
population of 47,901 children between the ages of 5-17, of which 33,226 or 69%
live in poverty according to the U.S. Census. The eight educational districts in
(Ponce I-IV) serve a student population of over 30,735 in 75 schools. These
districts are part of the Puerto Rico Department of Education which is the
central educational agency on the island comprising 100 districts with eight
educational regions. A total of 890 teachers are providing instruction in
science or mathematics in the five Ponce districts, 646 at the elementary level,
169 at the intermediate level, and 75 in high schools. The Planning grant will
support the establishment of an ongoing system to monitor the quality of the
city's science and mathematics program and the articulation of a coherent and
comprehensive plan to transform science and mathematics to higher level learning
opportunities for all students. The effort will be carried out in collaboration
with the central level programs of Science and Mathematics of the Department of
Education, The Resource Center for Science and Engineering (RCSE) at the
University of Puerto Rico, the city of Ponce, community organizations and the
private sector. The Puerto Rico Statewide Systemic Initiative program will play
a major collaborative role in supporting the planning activities, as well as
other such as Dwight D. Eisenhower Programs, Title I, Puerto Rico Education
2000, and School to Work programs.