* 9617484
* CISE Research Instrumentation: File Server and Storage for  Spoken Language Technologies
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1998
* Mark Fanty, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9617484 Fanty, Mark A. Cole, Ron, A. Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and
Technology CISE Research Instrumentation: File Server and Storage for Spoken
Language Technologies This research instrumentation grant enables the purchase
of a new file server and storage to be used for several research projects:-
Segment-Based Language Recognition;Speaker Identification; Improving the
Connectionist Approach to Automatize Speech Recognition;Robust and Portable
Design Systems. Language recognition: the automatic identification of which
language is being spoken from an excerpt of speech. A large 22 language
telephone speech corpus is being collected. Speaker identification: the
identification of who is talking from an excerpt of speech. A large corpus of
realistic data collected over several channels across a large span of time is
being collected. Improving the connectionist approach to automatic speech
recognition: the extension of CSLU's neural network technology to large
vocabulary recognition, providing an efficient alternative to the well-studied
HMM systems. A large amount of data will be necessary. Robust and portable
dialogue systems: the technology needed to build practical spoken language
systems for the telephone packaged in a toolkit to make it accessible to a wide
community. A large, regionally diverse cellular telephone corpus is being
collected. Collectively, these corpora provide a valuable resource for research
nation-wide as well as for the research described here. In each task domain,
large amounts of annotated speech data are needed in order to study the sources
of variability in speech, to train and evaluate recognition algorithms, and to
compare research results across laboratories.