* 9617318
* Tornadogenesis and Associated Phenomena
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Joshua Wurman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/2001
* USD 323,127.00

9617318 Rasmussen During the Springs of 1994 and 95, a field program entitled
the Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX) was
executed by a combination of NSF and National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administrations sponsored scientists. The primary objective of VORTEX was to
evaluate several hypotheses pertaining to low-level mesocyclone intensification,
and tornado formation, maintenance, and demise. The observations collected
include ground-based (mobile and stationary) and airborne Doppler radars, mobile
surface and balloon borne meteorological instruments. Eight of the VORTEX cases
are of primary interest in the investigations supported under this award. First,
several cases of tornadogenesis will be examined. The Dimmitt and Friona, TX,
tornadic cases of 2 June 1995 were particularly well sampled by the suite of
VORTEX sensors. Observations made near the Hanston, KS tornado (16 May 1995),
Kellerville and Allison, TX (8 June, 1995), and Temple, OK (17 April 1995) also
will be analyzed. These cases span a large variety of tornadoes, from a brief,
weak tornado in an unexpected location to one of the most severe tornadoes ever
observed (in terms of the combination of damage path width and intensity). In
order to begin to adequately evaluate hypotheses concerning tornadogenesis and
low-level mesocyclone intensification, the Principal Investigators will compare
the tornadic cases described above with several well-sample non- tornadic
supercells. All of these storms will be studied using a combination of airborne
Doppler radar, the newly developed "Doppler-on-Wheels" (DOW), mobile
mesonetwork, upper air soundings, and stereo photogrammetric cloud mapping. The
synthesis of all of these data sources is considered vital to any comprehensive
understanding of the dynamics of the processes being investigated. The proposed
work is of vital importance to progress in understanding supercell dynamics and
issues of t ornado formation and demise. If proposed hypothesis regarding
tornadogenesis are verified, then it is possible that a new radar tornado
signature could be developed with the potential of significantly reducing false
alarms and increasing the probability of detection of tornadoes. ***