* 9617750
* NSF/DARPA DDFRP:  The Distributed Design and Fabrication of Metal Parts and Tooling by 3D Printing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Emanuel Sachs, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,350,000.00

The goal of this research is to provide a "clean interface" between design and
fabrication for mechanical parts to be made by Solid Freeform Fabrication using
Three Dimensional Printing as a prototypical process. The "clean interface" will
be modeled after the practice in the design of integrated circuits. It is
predicated upon the availability to the designer of representations capable of
expressing a wide range of fabrication capability of Three Dimensional Printing,
coupled with the ability to ensure that designs created with this representation
are manufacturable. This program will investigate: (1) representations for parts
with local composition control, a capability not now addressed by existing
representations; (2) design rules which capture in simple terms the limitations
of the fabrication technology, such as limitations on variation of local
composition; (3) simulations for aspects of process technology which cannot be
captured as simple design rules, for example for the surface texture resulting
from layering; and (4) the derivation of instructions for a Three Dimensional
Printing machine from comprehensive part representations, which include local
variation in composition. This program will also operate an interactive
communication link to designers in order to test hypotheses about how designers
use the tools provided to them. Parts will be fabricated based on remote input
from designers at sites in industry, academic research programs, and in an
undergraduate course in manufacturing. A successful "clean interface" between
design and fabrication will allow the designer of parts to be made by Solid
Freeform Fabrication to send information to the fabricator and to get back a
good part without any discussion with the fabricator. This clean separation
between design and fabrication for mechanical parts will: (1) facilitate
distributed design and fabrication; (2) lower the barriers to entry for users of
Solid Freeform Fabrication; and (3) empower designers to make more co mplete use
of the flexibility of Solid Freeform Fabrication processes, while guaranteeing
manufacturable designs.