* 9617315
* CISE Research Instrumentation: A Network of Workstations for High Performance Computing
* CSE,EIA
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1997
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/1997
* USD 71,857.00

9617315 Das, Chita, R. Sivasubramaniam, Anand Pennsylvania State University CISE
Research Instrumentation: A Network of Workstations for High Performance
Computing This instrumentation grant funds the purchase of 8 UltraSPARC
workstations and an 8-port Myrinet switch to set up a Network of Workstations
(NOW) laboratory at the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the
Pennsylvania State University. The NOW laboratory is to be used as the
experimental platform for several research projects, including in particular the
following four: -Efficient Communication Support for a Network of Workstations
-High Performance Geographical Information Systems -Index Caching on a Network
of Stations -Communication Characterization of Parallel Applications The first
project focuses on deriving efficient software mechanisms for providing low
latency and high bandwidth communication for parallel applications. The second
interdisciplinary research project plans to develop a High Performance Temporal
Geographical information System (GIS) on the NOW platform. The third project
proposes to examine database performance issues using a client-server
architecture. The last project aims at characterizing the communication behavior
of parallel algorithms by direct execution of different applications, simulating
several network architectures, and developing a faster execution-driven
simulation environment on the NOW platform.