* 9617555
* SGER:  Applications of Remote Sensing and Image Processing  in Studies of Forest Tree Population Dynamics and Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1996,05/31/1998
* James McGraw, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/1998
* USD 25,000.00

9617555 McGraw This research tests the feasibility of censusing forest tree
populations using remote sensing for the broad purposes of inventory, projection
of future population levels, and screening the forest for rare, endangered or
otherwise unique individuals ('bioprospecting'). High resolution color and color
infrared photographic images of mapped, forested plots will be collected with
35mm cameras in fifteen overflights for a period of one year. Methods will be
developed to automate the process of circumscribing individual tree canopies
from scanned images. New image processing approaches to identify individuals to
species will be developed which rely on differential phenological development of
species and differing spectral reflectance properties. The ultimate goal of
these techniques will be the censusing of populations of trees from remote
imagery in a manner suitable for input to size-dependent matrix population
models of forest tree population dynamics. In the future, satellite-borne
sensors will likely be capable of both high spatial and spectral resolution
image capturing. Population-level applications of remote-sensing are in their
infancy. If data from such sources can be used for forest inventory, population
projection and 'bioprospecting', the studies made possible will have regional
and global applicability to numerous serious environmental problems.