* 9617689
* Amphi-Atlantic Phylogeography of the Clam Genus Lasaea: A   Test of Transoceanic Dispersal Hypotheses for a             Direct-Developing Clonal Taxon
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Diarmaid O'Foighil, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2000
* USD 190,672.00

Amphi-Atlantic Phylogeography of the Calm genus Lasaea: a Test of Transoceanic
Dispersal Hypotheses for a Direct-Developing Clonal Taxon A prevailing paradigm
in marine biology is that an extended pelagic larval phase is a prerequisite to
long-distance dispersal of sedentary benthic invertebrate taxa. Three hypotheses
have been proposed to explain how taxa lacking extended pelagic larval
development have effected transoceanic range extensions. Hypothesis A attributes
a key role to ancestral dispersal via planktotrophic larvae followed by
evolutionary loss of this developmental mode, and long distance dispersal
capabilities, in descendent populations. Hypothesis B states that transoceanic
geographic ranges are very recent in origin and stem from undocumented human-
mediated transport within historical time frames. Contemporary anthropogenic
transoceanic exchange on a massive scale is occurring among global shallow-water
faunas, primarily via the ballast water of ocean going vessels. Hypothesis C
assumes that spontaneous rafting events, which involve the passive transport of
sedentary or sessile life-history stages on drifting objects, have acted as the
primary dispersal mechanism for species having life-history traits that enhance
both rafting ability and colonization ability. These traits are characteristic
of many clonal taxa with extended geographic ranges, including sponges,
ascidians, scleractinian corals, cheilostome bryozoans and hydroids. However,
there has been no test of these competing hypotheses. The proposed research will
investigate phylogenetic relationships among direct-developing populations of
the primarily asexual, polyploid clam genus Lasaea along a transoceanic
dispersive pathway: the North Atlantic Gulf Stream System. The biogeography of
Lasaea is remarkable in that it is the exact opposite of predicted patterns
based on the assumed linkage of extended pelagic larval development and enhanced
geographic range. Species with planktotrophic larvae are restricted to the
continental margins of the western Pacific (Australia and Japan) whereas
genetically divergent direct developers have collectively attained a truly
global distribution, including large numbers of oceanic islands. Asexual,
direct-developing Lasaea fit the putative profile of an effective rafting
colonizer and the proposed work will test the three competing dispersal
hypotheses for North Atlantic continental margin and oceanic island populations
which are exclusively composed of direct developers. A distinctive phylogenetic
tree topology has been predicted for each hypothesis that seeks to explain how
direct developing Lasaea have successfully colonized Bermuda and The Azores from
putative continental source populations. These predicted phylogenetic
distinctions stem from evolutionarily significant differences in the temporal
parameters of the competing hypotheses, together with a dispersal polarity
imposed by North Atlantic surface circulation patterns. Genetic variation among
the study populations will be assessed using mitochondrial gene sequences, in
addition to allozyme analyses and ploidy determination by cell flow cytometry.
Results will reveal evolutionary relationships and gene flow patterns among the
North Atlantic study populations and the derived phylogenetic tree topologies
will be tested for congruence with those predicted by each of the competing
dispersal hypotheses. Preliminary results demonstrate the technical and
scientific feasibility of the study system and provide provisional support for
both Hypotheses B and C.