* 9617702
* Microbial Ecology of Hydrothermal Plumes: An                Interdisciplinary Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1997,03/01/1999
* Anna-Louise Reysenbach, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/01/1999
* USD 87,200.00

9617702 Reysenbach In order to better understand the chemical processes
occurring in hydrothermal plumes and develop predictive models of
hydrothermally-derived chemical fluxes, it is necessary to characterize the
effects that microbial activity have on plume chemistry. The main objectives of
this project are: 1. To characterize the diversity and define the structure of
microbial communities associated with chemical fluxes within the hydrothermal
plume environment, utilizing molecular phylogenetic techniques; 2. To map
changes in the diversity and structure of the microbial community as the plume
ages; 3. To examine the abundance and activity of specific members of the plume
microbial community through the use of fluorescent rRNA probes. This research
will provide significant new information about these poorly defined microbial
effects which in turn will aid in the development of realistic models of
chemical fluxes in hydrothermal systems. A fourth objective of this project is
to provide an opportunity for the new Ph.D. (E. McLaughlin) to broaden her
research experience as defined in the RIDGE program announcement. A postdoctoral
position in Dr. Reysenbach's laboratory will allow E. McLaughlin to learn and
utilize molecular phylogenetic techniques. Thus, fostering "cross-disciplinary
fertilization" by combining the molecular phylogenetic expertise of the host
laboratory with the geochemical knowledge obtained during the candidate's thesis
work.