* 9617196
* CISE Research Instrumentation: A Myrinet Testbed for        Research in Distributed Real-Time Environments
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Jennifer Hou, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Rita V. Rodriguez
* 07/31/1998
* USD 52,000.00

9617196 Hou, Chao-Ju Jennifer Han, Ching-Chih Ohio State University A Myrinet
Testbed for Research in Distributed Real-Time Environments The instrumentation
grant will fund several Sun SPARC stations, one 8-port and seven 4-port Myrinet
switches and host interfaces, and two software licenses for Open-Invention
visualization to support distributed real-time system research in Computer and
Information Science and Engineering. The equipment will be used by five research
projects, including - Design and implementation of a load sharing mechanism; -
Application of distance-constrained task model to message scheduling; - Design
and implementation of a fast restoration mechanism; - Design and implementation
of multisensor integration algorithms that take advantage of load sharing and
real-time communication schemes; and - Design and implementation of matching and
scheduling algorithms, all in distributed heterogeneous environments. All
projects are composed of two synergistic parts: development of effective task
management schemes, communication protocols, or multisensor integration
algorithms based on a rigorous analytical foundation, and their validation with
software system building and experiments. The experimentation is essential,
since a true evaluation of system performance can only be obtained through
implementation and direct measurement. The research instrumentation allows the
construction of an inexpensive distributed real-time environment to conduct the
work described.