* 9617197
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  High Speed Cluster at the   University of Wyoming
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1998
* Shivakant Mishra, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1998
* USD 55,755.00

9617197 Haines, Matthew D. Miser, Shivakant University of Wyoming CISE Research
Instrumentation: High-Speed Cluster Computing at the University of Wyoming This
instrumentation grant enables research among the faculty in the Computer Science
Department at the University of Wyoming, where distributed computing constitutes
a focus area of research. Most research today in the area of distributed
computing centers around high-speed, high-bandwidth networks. This funding will
enable research in at least three areas.- Runtime Support for Multidisciplinary
Applications on Cluster Computers- Building Dependable Software using Group
Communication Services - Real-time Distance Monitoring of Medical Information-
The first is runtime support for multidisciplinary applications on cluster
computers, in which several computing nodes are connected with a high-speed
network to form a cluster computer. This research area will focus on language
and runtime support to enable efficient execution of multidisciplinary
applications on this platform.-The second area of research involves building
dependable thread-based communication services to enable reliable distributed
software. The goal of this research is to design reliable group communication
services that can exploit a high-speed network.- The third area of research
supports real-time distance monitoring of medical information. The goal of this
research is to evaluate the abilities of a high-speed network to support real-
time transmission and consumption of multimedia medical information.