* 9617694
* Agricultural Innovation and Resource Management in Ghana
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1997,10/27/1998
* Christopher Udry, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/27/1998
* USD 137,273.00

This project entails an intensive program of field research in Ghana. The goal
of the research is to formally model the incentives individuals face with
respect to land resource management in an area faced with ecological stress. The
farming system in the study area is undergoing a remarkable transformation from
an established system of maize and cassava intercropping to intensive vegetable
production. The primary challenge in this transition is finding techniques which
will maintain soil fertility under the new cropping system. Three central
economic issues arise. First, the development of innovative methods of fertility
maintenance is characterized by social learning i.e. farmers know of each
other's experiments. Second, there is a close relationship between property
rights (vested critically in the individuals within the household) and
incentives to apply techniques for soil fertility maintenance. Finally,
decision-making with respect to soil fertility maintenance depends critically
upon characteristics of the markets, and in particular the capital markets
available to farmers. The fieldwork consists of three simultaneous and
interactive components. One is a multi-round survey to collect the basic data
required for econometric analysis. The first rounds of the survey will use
questionnaires that have already developed. These questionnaires will be
modified or dropped, and new survey instruments added, as the theoretical
framework that seems most appropriate changes. A second component, therefore, is
continued theoretical work in response to the incoming questionnaires and to
observations from less formal conversations between myself and survey
participants. These less formal interactions are the third component of the
fieldwork, one that is aimed at developing a descriptive characterization of the
institutions in the study area which are most relevant for decision making with
respect to land resource management.