* 9617308
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Prototyping Equipment for    Application Specific Architectures
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Robert Owens, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 02/28/2001
* USD 80,770.00

96-17308 Irwin, Mary Jane Owens, Robert M. Penn State University CISE Research
Instrumentation: Prototyping Equipment for Application Specific Architectures
This research instrumentation grant enables two distinct research projects: -
Low Power, High Performance Architecture Design - Massively Parallel,
Application Specific Hardware System Design The first project focuses on the
design of low power, high performance hardware systems for use in mobile
applications. This project includes the design of CAD tools which support the
design of low power systems and the study of low power module and processor
architecture alternatives. A subset of the designs will be selected for
fabrication, using the requested chip fabrication expenses, and evaluation,
using a subset of the prototyping support equipment, to validate simulated speed
and power consumption measurements. The second project focuses on the design,
implementation, and use of massively parallel, application specific hardware
systems for signal and image processing applications. A specific example is the
MGAP-2 which is a single board coprocessor containing 49,152 fine grain
processors (on 32 custom VLSI chips). Experience with the MGAP family of
architectures has provided insight into derivative architectures which hold a
promise of improved performance, flexibility, and/or physical size. A subset of
these derivative designs will be implemented using the requested chip
fabrication expenses, prototyping support equipment, and hardware prototyping
accessories to validate their benefits.