* 9617025
* Doctoral Dissertation:  The Tactics of Innovation:          How Engineers Produce Proprietary Knowledge, the Case of    Antilock Braking Systems
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Michael Mahoney, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/1999
* USD 11,335.00

This Ph.D dissertation concerns engineering design practices and the process of
invention in large organizations. Research is focused on the research,
development, and engineering of antilock braking systems for passenger
automobiles between 1953 and 1978. The investigation centers on research and
development conducted in the United States, Great Britain, the Federal Republic
of Germany, and Sweden. The international focus is designed to highlight the
construction of a community of practitioners who spanned national as well as
company lines. Standard practices emerged within this community. The main
sources are several hundred published articles from professional journals and
conference proceedings. Of equal significance are several dozen interviews with
participants. The most important companies were located in Germany - Teldix,
Robert Bosch, Alfred Teves, Mercedes Benz, and BMW. Outside of Germany - Lucas
Industries of England, Kelsey-Hayes and Bendix in the U.S., and research
institutes at U/Michigan, Penn State, Technical University at Braunschweig, and
the Motor Industries Research Association and the Road Research Laboratory in
England, and the Staten vag-och trafikinstitut in Sweden. Support will provide
travel expenses to conduct research in Germany, England, Belgium, Switzerland,
Sweden, and Washington, D.C.