* 9617270
* RUI: The Fusion of Liability and Damages in Negligence      Cases
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2001
* Edith Greene, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2001
* USD 187,727.00

Greene 9617270 The law assumes that jurors will determine liability for
negligence reprehensibility of the defendant's actions and that they will
determine damages by considering the severity of the plaintiff's injuries. This
research examines whether jurors' decisions about liability and damages are
interdependent or fused ant the conditions under which fusion may occur. The
research draws on theorizing about hindsight bias in heuristical reasoning. In
judging liability, jurors are assumed to evaluate the reasonableness of the
defendant's behavior in light of the risk that was (or should have been)
apparent at the time, and not by hindsight in light of consequences. In
determining compensation, jurors are assumed to decide upon a fair amount in
damages in light of the severity of plaintiff's injuries and not by hindsight in
light of defendant's actions. Hindsight bias suggests that outcome information
is integrated into a person's knowledge of evens preceding the outcome. Three
cognitive mechanisms are proposed to describe this integration and are tested in
this research. The first two studies address these issues using jury simulation
methodology. The reprehensibility of the defendant's actions and severity of
harm are manipulated. All jurors watch a videotaped trial of a negligence case
and make individual determination of liability or of damages. They then
deliberate in groups of six to reach a verdict and complete a post-deliberation
questionnaire. In the third study, .the effectiveness of three classes of
debiasing techniques: admonishing jurors to base their judgments on the
evidence, requiring jurors to give a rationale prior to stating their liability
determinations or damage awards, or bifurcation the liability and damages
evidence and decision making are tested. These studies will contribute to
knowledge of juror decision making and effective trial processes. %%% The law
assumes that jurors will determine liability for negligence reprehensibility of
the defendant's act ions and that they will determine damages by considering the
severity of the plaintiff's injuries. This research examines whether jurors'
decisions about liability and damages are interdependent or fused ant the
conditions under which fusion may occur. In judging liability, jurors are
assumed to evaluate the reasonableness of the defendant's behavior in light of
the risk that was (or qhould have been) apparent at the time, and not by
hindsight in light of consequences. In determining compensation, jurors are
assumed to decide upon a fair amount in damages in light of the severity of
plaintiff's injuries and not by hindsight in light of defendant's actions.
Hindsight bias suggests that outcome information is integrated into a person's
knowledge of evens preceding the outcome. The studies address these issues using
jury simulation methodology. In the first two experiments, the reprehensibility
of the defendant's actions and severity of harm are manipulated. All jurors
watch a videotaped trial of a negligence case and make individual determination
of liability or of damages. They then deliberate in groups of six to reach a
verdict and complete a post-deliberation questionnaire. In the third study, .the
effectiveness of three classes of debiasing techniques: admonishing jurors to
base their judgments on the evidence, requiring jurors to give a rationale prior
to stating their liability determinations or damage awards, or bifurcation the
liability and damages evidence and decision making are tested. These studies
will contribute to knowledge of juror decision making and effective trial
processes. ***