* 9617578
* The Exact Measurement of Productivity, Outsourcing, and its Effects on Wages:  An Agenda for Research
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2000
* Robert Feenstra, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 02/28/2000
* USD 186,078.00

The recent economic performance of less-skilled Americans is an important policy
topic and the subject of intense academic attention. Over the last two decades,
the wages of low-skilled workers have fallen dramatically, both in absolute
terms and relative to those of high-skilled workers. The two most widely cited
explanations for the rise in wage inequality are skill-biased technical change
and trade with low-wage countries. Despite the vast literature, there is little
agreement among researchers on the relative contributions of trade, technology,
and other factors to the recent wage changes. This project will develop an
empirical framework that identifies how trade and technology affect factor
prices and apply the framework to data from developed and developing countries.
The literature on trade and wages focuses overwhelmingly on trade in final
goods. A substantial portion of U.S. trade, however, is the result of
outsourcing -- the import of intermediate inputs by domestic firms. Outsourcing
by U.S. firms moves labor-intensive tasks, such as the production of components
or the assembly of final goods, to low-wage countries. This changes the range of
production activities that U.S. firms perform at home without necessarily
changing the final goods that they produce. In this way, the effects of trade
can look like the effects of technical change. This project will develop an
empirical methodology that can distinguish these. It will be demonstrate that
estimating the effects of trade and technology on factor prices depends
crucially on using the correct measure of productivity. The framework that will
be developed makes it possible to decompose changes in productivity into the
portion attributable to innovation, measured using industry data on R&amp;D
spending and investments in information technology and new capital equipment,
and the portion attributable to outsourcing, measured using industry data on the
import of intermediate inputs from abroad. The framework will first be applied
to data on manufacturing industries in the United States. This will allow
estimates of the relative contributions of technological change and
globalization to recent U.S. wage changes. In addition, several complementary
lines of research we will be pursued which will: (1) extend the analytical
framework to examine the effects of foreign outsourcing and imports of capital
and technology on labor markets in Mexico, (2) examine whether outsourcing by
U.S. firms is contributing to the integration of labor markets in low-wage
countries in the Western Hemisphere, and (3) measure the extent of outsourcing
between developed and developing nations in Asia and estimate the effect of
outsourcing on labor markets in the region.