* 9617383
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Design and Evaluation        of Architectures, Programming Environments, and             Applications for Shared-Memory Systems
* CSE,EIA
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1997
* John Bennett, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 12/31/1997
* USD 82,932.00

Adve, Sarita V. Aazhang, Behnaam Rice University CISE Research Instrumentation:
Design and Evaluation of Architectures, Programming Environments, and
Applications for Shared-Memory Systems This research instrumentation grant
facilitates acquiring a shared-memory multiprocessor to support the following
research projects: -Design and Evaluation of ILP-Based Shared-Memory
Multiprocessors -Parallelizing Compilers for Shared-Memory Systems- Interactive
and Adaptive Techniques for Tuning the Performance of Shared-Memory Parallel
Programs -Parallel Algorithms for Communications Systems -Signal and Image
Processing. The following research is thus enabled:- Architectural techniques to
exploit instruction-level-parallelism in shared-memory multiprocessors: Fast
simulation methods are the key enabling technology for this research. The
proposed multiprocessor enables the development and use of high-performance
parallel simulators. - Compilation techniques for High Performance Fortran
(HPF): The proposed multiprocessor is a cost-effective platform for HPF compiler
development and an important target for evaluating the compiler-generated
parallel code. - Runtime techniques to identify and remedy performance
bottlenecks in shared-memory programs: The multiprocessor is the desired
platform to develop and evaluate the techniques. - Algorithms for wireless and
network communication systems: Most such algorithms must meet stringent real-
time constraints. The multiprocessor enables the development of parallel
algorithms to meet these constraints.- Algorithms for signal and image
processing for applications including geophysics, radar, and medical imaging
diagnostics: The multiprocessor is needed to test and develop parallel and
resource-intensive sequential algorithms on real data sets. Overall, the
proposed system enables the above research in three critical ways: enables
parallelization of applications that cannot be run sequentially, provides a
testbed for compiler and tools research, and provides cost-effective resources
for sequential but resource-intensive tasks.