* 9617905
* Collaborative Research: Factors Affecting Ethnic Differences in Adult Mortality
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Richard Rogers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2000
* USD 73,100.00

This is a study of ethnic differences in adult mortality. It will employ
demographic conceptual and methodological approaches to accomplish three main
research goals both for cause-specific and multiple-cause mortality. First, it
will develop a more comprehensive model relating risk factors to ethnic
mortality differentials than has heretofore been presented. Second, the work
will broaden the range of ethnic categories typically found in mortality
studies. Third, it will employ a unique data base that links detailed
demographic, socioeconomic, family structure, health, and behavioral factors to
mortality of ethnic groups. The specific aims of the project are to: (1)
Assemble and adapt an integral, prospective database that will permit
simultaneous examination of demographic and socioeconomic background factors,
family structure, health behaviors, and health history factors in an analysis of
ethnic variations in adult mortality by cause of death. (2) Broaden the range of
ethnic categories typically found in mortality studies to include Mexican,
Native, African, Asian, and Caucasian Americans. (3) Uncover why some ethnic
groups, notably African Americans, experience relatively high mortality risk
from circulatory diseases. (4) Reveal why African Americans suffer
disproportionately high rates of cancer mortality. (5) Show why respiratory
disease mortality is disproportionately high among Caucasian Americans. (6)
Illuminate why Mexican, Native, and African Americans exhibit relatively high
rates of diabetes mortality. (7) Illustrate why Mexican, Native, and African
Americans die at relatively high rates from social pathologies. (8) Extend the
cause of death analysis to include both underlying and multiple causes of death.
(9) Account for variations in ethnic mortality patterns by sex and age
groupings. (10) Use continuous-time hazard rate models, which allow a
multivariate examination of the risk of death by ethnic group. The ethnic
differences in mortality that have so long persisted i n the U.S. represent a
troubling and challenging question. While mortality differences between groups
are continually better-documented, particularly between African and Caucasian
Americans, the explanation of differences has been weak, particularly when
numerous ethnic groups are compared. For example, so little is known about
Mexican American mortality that their favorable mortality rates are often termed
an "epidemiological paradox." Even less is known about the differing cause
patterns of death exhibited by Asian and Native Americans. Thus, the principal
purpose of this research is to explain ethnic differences in cause-specific
mortality, using a model that relates demographic, socioeconomic, family
structure, behavioral, and health history factors to both underlying and
multiple cause mortality differentials. A more comprehensive and more specific
model will make it easier to identify key areas where social programs, public
policy, medical treatment, and future research can have the most beneficial
effects.