* 9617183
* Regulation of Antifreeze Protein Activity in Insects:  An   In Vitro Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2002
* Kathleen Horwath, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 02/28/2002
* USD 321,064.00

9617183 Horwath Recently, proteinaceous antifreezes, once thought to be an
adaptation restricted to polar fishes and overwintering terrestrial insect, have
been found among much broader phylogenetcally diverse groups of both plant and
animal species. Yet, despite the now numerous examples of their role in survival
of subzero temperatures, very little is known about the cellular mechanisms
regulating production. This study will use a newly developed cell culture system
derived from the beetle, Tenebrio molitor, to begin for the first time a more
direct assessment of environmental, hormonal, and cellular mechanisms
influencing production, storage and secretion of a specific insect antifreeze
protein. This is possible because this in vitro system allows one to track and
quantitate specific antifreezes from their biosynthesis, throughout their
trafficking within the cell, through to secretion into the blood, using
sensitive and specific biochemical, immunological, and computer imaging tools.
In addition, molecular studies that have recently resulted in cloning of a
specific insect antifreeze gene, will be expanded to obtain more molecular
characterization of this gene and other possible homologues. Thus, through a
combination of in vitro and molecular approaches, this project will do much to
unravel the cellular and genetic mechanisms contributing to antifreeze activity
and thus effective cold hardening, and should lead to practical cryobiological
applications.