* 9617547
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Earthquake Engineering Research on   Steel, Composite and Hybrid Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2001
* Stephen Mahin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 09/30/2001
* USD 210,000.00

This project addresses the intellectual opportunity as well as the need for
technical coordination of research efforts being undertaken simultaneously in
the U. S. and Japan on two topics of national importance. They are: (1)
U.S.-Japan Cooperative Earthquake Research Program: Composite and Hybrid
Structures, NSF Initiative No. 94-154, and (2) U.S.- Japan Partnership for
Advanced Steel Structures. While these are separate cooperative research
elements, they focus on several similar technical issues and involve some of the
same key individuals and institutions. As a result, they are coordinated within
a single NSF activity. The objectives of this project are to: (1) Facilitate
exchange of basic information and concepts as well as personnel between the U.S.
and Japan; (2) Coordinate research efforts on a cooperative basis on topics of
mutual interest; (3) Facilitate the exchange of data and results of the specific
projects undertaken; (4) Provide a focal point for diverse, independent research
projects being conducted in the U.S. and abroad in order to more rapidly advance
progress on issues of national importance; (5) Synthesize the results and
identify overall observations and conclusions from the various projects
undertaken; and (6) Identify areas of needed future research of pioneering
nature, as well as areas where generated knowledge is sufficient for
implementation. These objectives are being achieved by various means, including;
(1) Convening annual joint meetings of researchers participating in the program;
(2) Enabling a panel of senior technical advisors of nationally recognized
experts to attend the meetings in order to provide input related to the needs of
the professional and industrial communities, and facilitate dissemination of
information generated in the project of these various groups; (3) Establishing
work groups (or sub-committees) that focus on and accelerate the progress of
research within narrower disciplinary areas; (4) Gathering summaries of
technical reports and test data from each participating project and distributing
the summaries through the World Wide Web and other means; and (5) Developing and
distributing final documents summarizing the overall findings, observations and
conclusions for each element. This project will bring the development and
implementation of all current and future US-Japan Cooperative Research
activities in these two important subject areas into a well balanced and
coordinated program.