* 9617327
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Robotics Equipment for       Research on Assistive Intelligence
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Benjamin Kuipers, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/2001
* USD 32,000.00

9617327 Kuipers, Benjamin J. Wood, Kristin L. The University of Texas at Austin
CISE Research Instrumentation: Research on Assistive Intelligence To support
several ongoing research projects in computer and information science and
engineering, the Departments of Computer Sciences and Mechanical Engineering at
the University of Texas at Austin are acquiring a mobile robot configured as an
intelligent wheelchair. It consists of a powered wheelchair base augmented with
proximity sensors, visual sensors, manipulation capability, speech input and
output, and onboard computation. The robot provides a test and application for
our Spatial Semantic Hierarchy theory of spatial knowledge in the cognitive map,
and for our research on goal-oriented computer vision. It also supports a
collaboration between University of Texas researchers and occupational
therapists at the Rosedale School in Austin, developing the intelligent
wheelchair as assistive technology for people with disabilities such as cerebral
palsy. Advances in intelligent robotics serve the assistive technology
application by improving the service the wheelchair can provide for its driver.
Meanwhile, the presence of an intelligent driver can compensate for limitations
of the robot.The results of this research should be important for other
application areas where intelligent man-machine systems would be useful,
including space telerobotics, manufacturing and construction automation, and
intelligent transportation systems.