* 9617800
* Lateral Deposition and Geochemical Evolution of Mining-     Related Metals in Floodplain Sediments
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1997,10/19/1998
* Robert Pavlowsky, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 10/19/1998
* USD 116,922.00

Pavlowsky This research project will investigate the geochemical and geomorphic
processes that determine the spatial variability of the sedimentation of metal
contaminants in a floodplain. The study area is the Blue River watershed of the
Upper Mississippi valley zinc and led mining district (Wisconsin). The study
area affords the research benefits of a relatively simple physical landscape and
a concentrated period of metal contamination (1900-1920). The research design
calls for 1,310 samples to be taken from 5 cross-sections, 4 point bars, and
several active-channel locations selected strategically according to
geomorphological criteria. The stratigraphy and geochemistry of the floodplain
deposits will be mapped, and the sediment-metal associations will be identified.
The results will be used to calibrate watershed-scale models of contaminant
dispersal and to identify specific floodplain locations that have the highest
potential for toxic effects or remobilization. The research promises advances in
two dimensions: a clearer understanding of sediment residence time and in situ
chemical alterations to floodplain contaminants; and better predictions of the
dispersal of metal contaminants from point sources to both proximal and distal
floodplain sinks. The combined longitudinal-lateral study addresses fundamental
gaps in our understanding of toxic metal storage and remobilization in
watersheds, and it should provide information important for future environmental
management.