* 9617018
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Deciphering the Discourse  of Fertility: Reproduction, Migration and Family Formation  in Guadeloupe
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1998
* Jane Schneider, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 03/31/1998
* USD 5,560.00

This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the City University of New York. The student will investigate the rapid
fertility decline which took place in Guadeloupe between 1960 and 1982, which
appeared to signify that France had successfully stemmed population growth in
this overseas department. The demographic literature correlated low fertility
with `modernization` and a `European` type of family, inferring that assimilated
Guadeloupeans have moved away from displaying traits associated with a
`Caribbean` family model. However, between 1962 and 1982 a changing opportunity
structure, particularly government sponsored labor migration, may have played a
role. The hypothesis to be tested posits that low fertility is not associated
primarily with a `European` family model, but can be found among women who are
situated in a variety of family forms. The hypothesis will be tested using
extensive life history and structured interview data from a sample of 40
Guadeloupean women from diverse socio-economic backgrounds. This research is
important because it will advance the theory of fertility declines in developing
countries, by testing the effects of labor migration, and by fitting the general
theory to this particular case. In addition the project will advance our
scientific capacity by training a graduate student in demographic anthropology,
and will also advance our nation's expertise about this important region of the
world. %¥┐╝/% ║Á╝¢║Á│¥╣└Á ¥©╝?┐À© ¥©Á╣╝ ┴?╝, ╣&gt; ¥©Á Â?╝Á╣À&gt; %/▓?╝/¥?╝`
&gt;0 ─ ­