* 9617510
* Log Multiplicative Association Models for Multivariate      Categorical Data with Latent Continuous Variable            Interpretations
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Carolyn Anderson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2000
* USD 133,703.00

The investigator makes connections between some recently developed models for
categorical data and various existing models used in educational and
psychological measurement. The observed relationships between variables is often
postulated to be due to a small number of unobserved or latent variables.
Frequently, the observed variables are discrete or are measured discretely
(e.g., the response option selected on a multiple choice question or survey
item, occupation, religion, highest degree earned). The investigator identifies
equivalences between some more recently developed models for categorical data
and existing latent variable models. The implications of these connections for
the application and integration of these different models in social and
behavioral science research, especially psychometric, will be examined. A second
line of research that the investigator will undertake is in developing models
that allow a researcher to incorporate (continuous and/or discretely measured)
covariates into the models. This innovation will allow the association between
categorical variables to be analyzed at the level of the individual, which
permits tests of theories and hypotheses about underlying processes or
mechanisms that give rise to observed relationships between discretely measured
variables. The developments and innovations resulting from this work will expand
the statistical tools available to social and behavioral science researchers in
their investigations of the relationships between observed variables and
theorized latent variables.