* 9617279
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  A Physical Layer Radio      Communications Laboratory
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1998
* Umit Ozguner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/28/1998
* USD 71,000.00

96-17279 Michael P. Fitz Steve Bibyk Ohio State University CISE Research
Instrumentation: A Physical Layer Radio Communications Laboratory This grant
supports instrumentation to enable the following research: -Narrowband Radio
Services Design Telecommunications Circuit Design Wideband Radio Design
Automated Highway System Communications. This project sets up a physical layer
radio research laboratory at the Ohio State University (OSU) which empowers a
variety of multidisciplinary research in data communication. The equipment
enables the construction and support of a highly flexible testbed for physical
layer radio research. This test bed consists of real-time digital signal
processors, microwave signal sources, high power linear amplifiers, antennas,
radio receivers, data acquisition electronics, workstation and personal
computers, and supporting electronic test equipment. The laboratory is the focus
of ongoing experimental work in the development of high performance narrowband
wireless modems and will spur new experimental work in wideband multiple access
radio design. In particular investigations into improving transmitter and
receiver antenna diversity and signal processing for interference suppression or
multiuser demodulation can now be backed with experimental feedback. Much
greater gains in bandwidth efficiencies are potentially achievable by being able
to measure and exploit the actual channel characteristics. Additionally the
laboratory will be the focus of ongoing research in the area of high power
amplifier linearization and very large scale integrated circuit design. Finally
much of this work supports a modem being developed for Intelligent
Transportation Applications (ITS). The Center for Intelligent Transportation
Research is a nationally designated center of excellence for automated highway
research (AHS). This laboratory will be the focal point for a wireless modem
development for potential use in AHS applications within the national ITS
program.