* 9617355
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Computation Engines and      Mobile Computing Testbed
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1998
* Dhananjay Phatak, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1998
* USD 19,940.00

9617355 Phatak, Dhananjay S. Gupta, Vipul State University of New York,
Binghamton CISE Research Instrumentation: Computation Engines and Mobile
Computing Testbed This research instrumentation grant enables research in the
following projects: -Fault Tolerance of Feedforward Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs) and Synthesis of Robust Nets-Constructive Algorithms to Incrementally
Build Feedforward ANNs that Lead to Efficient Hardware Implementations-Novel
Number Representations for High Speed and Low Power Arithmetic Circuits- Mobile
and High Performance Networking-Network Reconfiguration and Processor Scheduling
in Parallel Systems The project supports collaborative research in multiple
areas of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. The equipment consists of
computation engines supporting a small wireless Local Area Network and
peripherals. It is envisaged to serve a dual purpose: - providing the
computational power and graphical environment required by CPU/memory intensive
projects in Neural Networks, Signal Processing, and VLSI CAD, and -providing a
test-bed for mobile computing research. Neural net research includes synthesis
of fault tolerant networks, and constructive algorithms for efficient hardware
implementations. VLSI CAD focuses on low power designs crucial for today's
laptops and portables. Ultrafast algorithms and VLSI architectures are also
being developed for real-time arithmetic processing. As the computing paradigm
continues to shift from institutional to personal to mobile/ubiquitous,
supporting nomadic users becomes an interesting research challenge. The proposed
instrumentation supports exploration of mobility supporting protocols, security
and privacy for mobile users, specialized protocols for wireless media and
adaptive applications. In addition to these state-of-the-art research projects,
the proposed setup also enables novel experiments in integrating conventional
server functions (CPU/memory/data-storage/retrieval) with mobility support
services.