* 9617899
* Altruism and Spite in Games
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* David Levine, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2000
* USD 194,960.00

Project Title: Altruism and Spite in Games Project Abstract Altruism and spite
are common both in everyday life and in experimental economic settings. This
research develops simple models of preferences that can give a quantitative
explanation of altruism and spite, and explores the consequences of these
preferences in economic theory and practice. There are many models that can
explain the qualitative features of altruism and spite in economics experiments;
essentially what is observed is that there is heterogeneity, with some
individuals acting altruistically and other spitefully. Moreover, we observe
more altruism and spite as their cost is diminished. However, not all models can
explain the quantitative features observed in experiments: in particular the
simplest model of linear utility cannot explain the results from ultimatum game
experiments, as the population receiving offers appears more spiteful than the
population making offers. Our findings indicate that a simple linear model of
signaling with heterogeneous players in which the degree of altruism depends on
how altruistic other players are perceived to be can quantitatively explain a
variety of experiments. This research develops models that can explain
experimental data, and uses these models to understand how altruism and spite
impact on economic settings. I consider issues such as welfare reform and
charitable giving, discrimination, business organization and criminal behavior.
* One substitute that has been proposed for welfare is charitable giving with
government matching funds. If `warm glow` effects predominate, then donors may
care little for the impact of their donations, and a privatized system need not
be more efficient than a public welfare system. * A key question in the study of
discrimination is the type of institutional arrangements that may encourage or
discourage spiteful behavior. * The role of institutions in encouraging or
discouraging spite and altruism is also key in the study of business
organizations. Historically this literature has focused largely on the exchange
of information, and not questions of employee morale. Which institutional
arrangements make employee sabotage more or less likely? Which arrangements
encourage employees to internalize the goals of the firm? * In the study of
criminal behavior, the issue of respect for the law is important in explaining
differences between countries. The equilibrium degree of altruism and spite is
potentially an important variable in explaining these differences.