* 9617307
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Active Learning for Text,   Scene, and Biosequence Analysis
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1999
* Richard Belew, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/1999
* USD 40,000.00

9617307 Cottrell, Garrison W. Charles Elkan, University of California, San Diego
CISE Research Instrumentation: Active Learning for Text, Scene, and Biosequence
Analysis Adaptation to changing environments and changing goals through
autonomous learning is a central theme of research in the artificial
intelligence laboratory at UCSD. The workstations, robots, and neural network
hardware acquired through this grant will enable recently developed learning
methods to be tested in four large-scale, real-world applications.-Learning
Semantic Representations for Information Retrieval-Embedded Virtual Agents-MEME:
A New Software Tool for Sequence Analysis-Real Time Face and Object Recognition
in Embedded Agents. The first subproject will apply new algorithms for document
rerepresentation and response to human feedback to gigabytes of text in the
national TREC competition. Another project will port to the worldwide web
software agents that learn and interact now in a simulated artificial life
environment. A third project will scale up new software for finding patterns in
DNA and protein sequences into a tool capable of autonomously analyzing entire
genomes. Finally, a fourth project will validate new active vision methods for
recognizing and tracking objects by implementing these methods in mobile robots
with controllable cameras.