* 9617210
* Femtosecond Nonlinear Spectroscopic Studies of Chemical     Reactions in Condensed Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* David Jonas, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 03/31/2001
* USD 310,767.00

In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Jonas will study the elementary steps of chemical reactions
in solution. Two new types of multiple-pulse femtosecond nonlinear spectroscopy
will be developed in order to resolve the dynamics beneath the featureless
spectra of molecules in liquids. One technique will use a three-pulse sequence
to prepare and study transition states for thermally activated chemical
reactions with a time resolution on the order of 20 femtoseconds. The second
method will obtain the complete electric field information from four-wave mixing
signals such as the photon echo by heterodyne detection using spectral
interferometry. Experiments will study the role of the solvent in the
unimolecular ionic dissociation of alkyl iodides with the aim of determining
whether unimolecular ionic dissociation is activated by solvent fluctuations or
intramolecular vibrational excitation. Solvents have dramatic effects on the
rates of chemical reactions. They do this by altering the internal energy
structure of solute molecules, changing the reaction mechanisms, or allowing new
reaction paths. In this project two new experimental techniques will be used in
experiments which are designed to probe the effect of solvents on a few
different types of reactions, such as those which are expedited by increasing
temperature. The results of these studies should help us understand how
important solvent effects are in these different reactions. Such knowledge can
help determine the conditions under which reactions in solution should be run
for optimal desired results.