* 9617880
* Individual and Collective Conflict in an Honor Society:     Corsica, 1850 - 1930
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Roger Gould, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/1998
* USD 36,298.00

This is a study of individual and collective conflict. Social scientists have
long noted a connection between the notion of honor and the various forms of
violence that human beings use to defend their social positions. This connection
is especially clear in feuding, a type of conflict in which well-defined groups
in the same community engage in hostile competition over extended periods. But
existing scholarship in this area tends to offer either universal, idealized
models that disregard the context and intentionality of social behavior, or
richly textured, particularistic accounts of cultural and discursive practices
(conceptions of honor, social standing, masculinity and femininity, loyalty, and
so on). This research adopts a perspective that takes seriously the intentional,
interpretive aspects of feuding, but which nonetheless works with concepts that
can be translated across cultural contexts. The approach connects what scholars
already know about feuding with sociological research on the network context of
collective action. This is an historical study of individual and collective
violence in Corsica from 1850 to 1890, but the aim is to develop general
theories that will apply today in many societies. The advantages of the chosen
geographical and temporal setting are a broad time span, a clearly defined and
stable study population, and access to information that is often confidential in
contemporary court documents. Transcripts of roughly five hundred violent
incidents will be subjected to textual and statistical analysis to illuminate
the process by which individual conflicts become (or do not become) collective
conflicts. Feuding is a significant cause of violence, injury, and loss of life
within traditional communities. Insights gained by studying feuding can help us
understand similar phenomena, such as clan-based political conflict, civil war
based putatively on ethnic difference, and urban gang warfare. The most vexing
feature of violence in such contexts is the tendency of individual disputes to
become collective, vastly expanding the number of potential victims. This
research will be guided by the premise that escalation is not automatic but
depends on social processes that can be specified, understood and, in principle,
circumvented.