* 9617501
* Expectations and Economic Fluctuations
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1997,11/30/2000
* George Evans, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/2000
* USD 160,701.00

9617501 Evans This project addresses the important and as yet unresolved issue
whether expectations have power as independent variables to explain fluctuations
in aggregate economic variables such as GDP or inflation. A recurrent theme in
macroeconomics has been the hypothesis that expectations do matter, and that
their importance is of the same order of magnitude as monetary, productivity and
fiscal shocks. But standard dynamic macroeconomic models assume away the
possibility of an independent role in explaining economic fluctuations and those
models which allow for this possibility make unappealing assumptions. This
project constructs models in which expectations have an independent role and in
which such solutions are stable under adaptive learning. A new version of the
seignorage model of inflation will be developed which includes a fiscal
restriction (inspired in part by the European Union conditions for Monetary
Union) on the maximum size of the deficit relative to GDP. When this model is
studied under adaptive learning a number of novel features emerge. For example,
this project shows that it my be possible to become trapped in a high inflation
equilibrium, even when a low inflation equilibrium exists. However, a policy
which tightens the fiscal restriction can induce the economy to move to the low
inflation equilibrium. A second line of research will analyze the stability of
the rational expectations equilibrium (REE) in a general dynamic multivariate
linear model. Many applied macroeconomic models can be approximated by this
framework. The project derives general conditions for REE to be stable under
adaptive learning and apply the results to a range of examples. A third line of
research develops a version of an endogenous growth model which exhibits growth
cycles, i.e., equilibrium fluctuations in growth rates generated by self
fulfilling shifts in business confidence and investment. The underlying
mechanisms are based on (1) complementarities between capital inputs and (2)
monopolistic competition in the development of new designs. Related work
includes (1) a comparison to the data of the statistical time series
implications of the increasing returns growth model, (2) investigation of the
implications for asset prices of modeling asset demands as guided by a genetic
algorithm,, (3) the development of new technical tools for analyzing the
convergence of adaptive learning in the presence of multiple equilibria (4)
study of the implications for convergence of the presence of heterogeneous
expectations. ??