* 9617287
* Collaborative Research; Prolonged Production and            Trophic Transfer to Predators:  Processes at the Inner      Front of the Southeastern Bering Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* George Hunt, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 02/28/2001
* USD 1,035,326.00

ABSTRACT OPP-9617287 HUNT, GEORGE L. UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, IRVINE This
project is designed to test the hypothesis that elevated primary production at
the inner front continues longer than in the upper mixed layer of non-frontal
waters in the Bering Sea, and that this production provides an energy source
throughout the summer for a food web that supports shearwaters, salmon, and
their zooplankton prey. To test this hypothesis, the proposed collaborative
research will collect and interpret observations on physical and biological
features in the vicinity of the inner front to determine the availability of
nutrients in the euphotic zone, the physical processes responsible for enhanced
vertical flux of nutrients, primary production, the distribution, abundance and
trophic ecology of near-surface swarms of euphausiids and other zooplankton, the
distribution, abundance, and foraging ecology of shearwaters, and by stable
isotope enrichment in trophic pathways from phytoplankton to shearwaters at and
away from the front. The proposed research is important because it will be the
first examination of the physical processes of the inner front in post-bloom
primary production, focus on the ecological role of this extended production,
and relate the evolution of transequatorial migration patterns of seabirds to
biophysical processes that create predictable sources of prey.