* 9617532
* The Effects of Electoral Systems on Legislator-Constituency Relations:  A Five Country Study
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2000
* David Wood, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 100,988.00

This research systematically examines five nations to determine the influence
of electoral arrangements on legislators' constituency-oriented activity/.
Legislator involvement in constituency-oriented actions constitutes a key
element of representation separate from more commonly studied policy-based
representation. Evidence suggests that members of all legislatures engage in
some form of constituency-oriented activity. Unfortunately, analyses of such
activities, and their causes, are sparse for legislatures other than the U.S.
Congress. Rarer still are studies that examine legislator-constituent relations
comparatively across nations. Consequently, a causal-based, theoretically rich
understanding of legislator-constituent relations does not exist. By comparing
five nations with markedly different electoral systems, this investigation
produces a database making advancement towards such an understanding possible.
The project contributes to a greater understanding of the nature of
representation and the role electoral arrangements play beyond influencing seat
and vote distributions. The study involves personal interviews with national
legislators in Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom.
Interviewed are 50-60 legislators in each of the lower houses of the four
bicameral parliaments and in the only chamber of New Zealand's unicameral
Parliament. Samples are drawn in order to approximate the features of the
population of legislators in each legislative body. Additionally, surveys are
mailed to each district represented in each legislature. These surveys are
directed at senior staff who deal with constituent issues and supplement the
interview data. Other types of supplementary data (mainly electoral) are also
gathered. This study yields a rich dataset useful for scholars interested in
addressing a number of potential explanations for variation in legislator's
constituency-oriented actions. Additionally, the dataset is useful for analyzing
the linkage between constituency activity and incumbent electoral fortunes
(e.g., personal vote totals).