* 9618722
* Determination of Bio-optical Provinces in the North         Atlantic Ocean:  A Collaboration between JGOFS and WOCE
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* John Marra, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/2000
* USD 119,839.00

*** 9618722 Marra The last series of WOCE Hydrographic Program (WHP) cruises
will begin the North Atlantic in summer, 1997. For JGOFS, the collaboration with
the WHP has been for a CO2 survey, and for bio-optics and pigments, in order to
obtain a spatially extensive data set on upper ocean properties. For the WHP
section A20 (roughly along 55 W from the Grand Banks to Trinidad), data on bio-
optical (spectral irradiance, fluorescence, beam attenuation, chlorophyll-a) and
physical (temperature, salinity) properties in near- surface waters will be
collected at a station spacing of no more than 100 km. The objective of this
observational program is to determine whether the biogeochemical provinces that
have been described for the western North Atlantic have a big-optical basis. The
descriptions of the provinces rely on currents, water-column stability,
temperature, proximity to land, etc., but are only semi-quantitative. The
hypothesis to be tested is whether these provinces exist in a big-optical sense,
the null hypothesis being that there are no big-optical differences along the
transect beyond the distinction of Case- 1 and Case-2 waters. Since the cruise
will occur in summer, with surface temperature differences at a minimum, the
data collected will be a stronger test of the alternative hypothesis (that bio-
optical provinces exist) than otherwise. Once collated and organized, the data
will be made available to all investigators via the World-Wide Web. If
biogeochemical provinces can be shown to exist as big-optical entities, it will
allow greater precision in the calculation of primary production from satellite
imagery, and also prove useful in helping to classify ocean areas with respect
to their plankton ecology. Biogeochemical provinces are thus a means or
organizing the study of the mechanistic basis of plankton processes. It is
expected that the WHP cruises will occur after the launch (now scheduled for
February, 1997) of the new ocean color sensor, SeaW iFS, and thus this
observational program may assist in providing sea-truth for the satellite data.