* 9618767
* City Technology Curriculum Guides
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Gary Benenson, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 03/31/2002
* USD 1,319,172.00

9618767 Benenson Technology is broadly defined to include the entire array of
artifacts, systems and processes which constitute the designed - as opposed to
the natural - world. Examples in the lives of students include the toys,
appliances, utensils, furniture, clothing, timepieces and fastening devices of
everyday life, the arrangements of furniture, the organization of the school
day, and methods of facilitating smooth flow of traffic within the school. City
Technology Curriculum Guides provide ideas for helping children to analyze
existing technologies and to develop, build, and test their own designs. Topics
include Structures, Mapping, Mechanisms, Environmental Analysis and Design,
Coding Information, Fixing and Fastening, Electrical Appliances and Toys, and
Measuring Time. A parallel Workshop Leader's Guide is intended for teacher
educators responsible for professional development workshops. The development of
the Guides is a collaborative effort of engineering and education faculty at
CUNY City College and elementary and middle school teachers in New York. Summer
workshops introduce the existing materials and the new topics to a group of
experienced teachers. Each of the first two academic years, they will pilot test
four Guides in their classrooms. During the third year of the project, the new
Guides will be field tested in two sites in the New York City area, two sites in
the Northeast, and two sites in other locations across the nation. Upon
completion of field testing and editing, the Guides will be available
commercially.