* 9618108
* Privately Provided Public Goods:  Theoretical,              Econometric and Experimental Studies of Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* James Andreoni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory N. Price
* 03/31/2001
* USD 209,626.00

This project examines altruistic, charitable and cooperative behavior using
theoretical, experimental and standard econometric analyses. The project has
three parts. Part I studies the nature of altruism. The objective of this
component is to further our basic thinking about how economists should approach
issues of altruism and cooperative behavior. This part contains both theoretical
and experimental research. The theory incorporates the notion of an `empathic
altruist` - someone who judges the generosity of another based on what he
himself would have done. The experiments are variations on simple bargaining
games designed to sharpen our understanding of why subjects engage in apparently
altruistic behavior. Part II focuses on a particular aspect of this issue:
charitable giving. The unifying theme of this part is the design of institutions
to provide public goods. The part starts with a theoretical investigation of the
endogenous formation of charitable organizations and the role of fundraising.
This is followed with several experimental studies that should `reveal a
preference` for the particular institutional forms of charities. Part III of the
project is a standard public finance study of the determinants of volunteerism.
A significant fraction of households volunteer, and the average volunteer gives
hundreds of hours per year, yet we know very little about voluntary labor
supply. This component includes two empirical projects designed to investigate
the determinants of voluntary labor supply in the household using data from the
Current Population Survey.