* 9618526
* Organizational Characteristics Which Facilitate Major       Discoveries in the Bio-Medical Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Jerald Hage, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 03/31/2001
* USD 287,802.00

The goal of this project is to explain how the characteristics of research
organizations, and their departments and laboratories, facilitate or hinder the
making of major discoveries in biomedical science. The project focuses on four
types of research organizations (universities, free-standing research
institutes, medical centers and industrial firms) in three countries (Britain,
France and Germany) during the past century. Drawing on a four-year pilot study
of U.S. research organizations, the investigators propose that the following
organizational characteristics are critical for making major discoveries:
diversity and depth of scientific expertise, quality of scientific personnel,
differentiation of research into separate departments, integration of scientific
diversity, hierarchical coordination, and leadership capacity for effecting the
necessary integration. The central insight is that major discoveries tend to
occur in organizations that facilitate intense and frequent interaction across
diverse fields of knowledge. By extending the research to Europe, the
investigators can test the validity of findings from the U.S. pilot study in
contexts that offer considerable variation along the major dimensions of the
proposed theory. To test the theory the project will rely on Qualitative
Comparative Analysis, a method that systematically examines the logical
interrelationships among categorical variables. The project addresses two
central problems in the organization of science: how might research
organizations be structured to facilitate major discoveries and how can
organizations change to accommodate changes in scientific knowledge? The project
also builds intellectual connections between the literature on organizations and
research in the history and sociology of science, suggesting new avenues for
investigation.