* 9618777
* Study of Structure and Dynamic Interactions in Dispersions  of Particles in Liquid Crystalline Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1997,11/30/1999
* Davide Hill, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 11/30/1999
* USD 150,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal No: 9618777 Proposal Type: Investigator Initiated Principal
Investigator Davide A. Hill Affiliation University of Notre Dome This grant is
awarded through the Separations and Purification Program sub-element of the
Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of the Chemical and Transport
Systems Division. The principal investigator is Davide A. Hill of the University
of Notre Game. The objective of the proposed research is to seek methods for
improving the mechanical properties of liquid crystal polymer(LCPs) by inserting
filler particles with tailored shape and surface morphology. Despite their
outstanding thermal, chemical and dielectric properties, liquid crystal polymers
have found limited application for production of three-dimensional structures. A
severe drawback of these materials is the ease of fracture along surfaces of
strong molecular alignment. Liquid crystal polymers have high tensile strength
in the spinning direction but extremely weak lateral cohesion. The introduction
of filler material serves to anchor the chains and nucleate desirable
orientation patterns in a liquid crystal polymer matrix. Particle
characteristics will be selected to engineer materials with controlled
microstructures. The importance of the research is its potential to influence
the processing of liquid crystal polymers by improving the mechanical properties
of these useful materials. Such improvement in mechanical properties may open up
new areas of applications, including use as separations media. From a
fundamental viewpoint, the research will advance the understanding of dynamic
interactions and structure development in liquid crystal polymers.