* 9618133
* Hazardous-Industry Restructuring to Avoid Liability for     Accidents
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Gordon Rausser, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2000
* USD 114,902.00

Abstract Rausser 9618133 There is compelling evidence that indicates that when
liability for accidents is imposed on hazardous industries, usually with the aim
of inducing more responsible behavior on the part of its firms, those industries
respond to the liability by restructuring. Large firms that previously
integrated hazardous processes with their other operations suddenly decide to
segregate these processes into dedicated subsidiaries in order to shield their
other assets from any liability in case of accidents. Alternatively, they may
abandon the hazardous processes altogether and instead purchase required inputs
from external suppliers. Both the subsidiaries and outside suppliers are
typically undercapitalized: they fully expect to go bankrupt if and when an
accident occurs, but gamble on earning sufficient revenues until that time to
make the operation profitable overall. The existing literature on hazardous-
industry restructuring to avoid liability for accidents treat as fixed many of
the variables that informal discussion identifies as critical. This research
aims to build a rigorous economic model of a hazardous industry, taking explicit
account of firms' incentives to exploit means of avoiding liability through
bankruptcy. Key features of the model are tested using data on the trucking
industry from the Motor Carrier Management and Information System database
maintained by the Federal Highway Administration. The model will also be used to
evaluate alternative policy measures designed to force firms to take
responsibility for the harm they generate and take appropriate precautionary
measures. ***