* 9618123
* MRI: The Political Economy of the Informal Sector in Latin  America:  A Comparative Study of Costa Rica, Mexico, and    Nicaragua
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1998
* Edwin Aguilar, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

The informal sector of the economy is that which functions outside of the
regulatory reach of the state, where similar activities are regulated. For
example, an individual who works as a self-employed jack of all trades, working
solely for cash, and not reporting income or economic activities to the state
would be classified as an informal sector worker. By way of contrast, an
individual who worked for a plumbing service that complied with state
regulation, would be classified as a formal sector worker. In this Minority
Research Planning Grant the investigator undertakes a preliminary examination of
the political attitudes and behavior of informal sector workers in Central
America and Mexico, by focusing on three different countries in the region. The
countries are chosen in order to maximize differences in terms of regime type.
For purposes of this study, Costa Rica serves as a country with a stable,
relatively long term democratic regime. Nicaragua serves as a country that can
be characterized as a newer, not yet fully consolidated democratic regime.
Finally, Mexico serves as a quasi-democratic regime,. which is slowly moving
toward a more formal democratic system. In the most general terms, it is
hypothesized that political attitudes and behaviors differ significantly between
informal sector workers in the three countries because of the different regime
types. As a result, the political goals and relevant strategies by which
informal sector workers seek to influence their political world will vary from
country to country. Given the gap of knowledge that social scientists have
regarding the political nature of informal sector workers in general, even a
preliminary planning study serves a valuable role for social scientists. The
investigator employs open-ended structured interviews in order to collect data
and to pre-test survey instrument items to then be employed in a broader future
study. The research promises to fill a gap in the political science literature
relating to the urban informal sector of Latin America.