* 9618384
* Collaborative Research:  Weddell Sea Foraging: Behavior     and Energetic Strategies for Hunting
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Terrie Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 06/30/2000
* USD 40,967.00

Davis 9614857 Fuiman 9708151 Williams 9618384 To forage efficiently beneath the
extensive, unbroken fast ice along the Antarctic coast, Weddell seals
(Leptonychotes weddellii)have adapted to an environment that is very challenging
for an air-breathing predator. These adaptations enable Weddell seals to hunt
for prey at depth while holding their breath for 20 minutes or longer. This is
analogous to a lion or other large terrestrial predator holding its breath while
it locates, pursues and captures prey. In addition, Weddell seals must return to
the same hole at the end of a dive or know the location of other breathing
holes. Failure to locate a breathing hole will result in a seal's death by
drowning. This study will investigate the behavioral and energetic adaptations
that enable Weddell seals to forage in the Antarctic fast-ice environment. To
achieve this goal,the underwater behavior, locomotor performance (swimming
velocity, stroke frequency and amplitude, and three dimensional movements)and
energy metabolism of Weddell seals will be measured during foraging dives.
Hypotheses on general foraging strategies, searching behavior, searching
mechanics, modes of swimming, metabolic costs of foraging and foraging
efficiency for different environmental conditions and prey type will be tested.
Until now, it has not been possible to investigate the foraging behavior of
marine mammals in detail. To accomplish this study, a small video system and
data logger will be attached to the seals' backs and oxygen consumption will be
measured during voluntary dives from an isolated ice hole in McMurdo Sound,
Antarctica. Placing an instrumented seal in an isolated ice hole is a standard
protocol for studying the diving behavior of Weddell seals. The video system and
data logger will record video images of the seal's head and the immediate
environment in front of the animal. In addition, the instrument will record
time, depth, swim speed, compass bearing, water tem perature, stomach
temperature and ambient sound. Computer analysis of data on depth, swim speed
and bearing will enable investigators to reconstruct the three-dimensional,
underwater path of seals'dives. This new technology is fully operational and has
been used on other marine mammals. Observing the foraging behavior and prey of
marine mammals has been and continues to be a major obstacle to the advancement
of studies on their foraging ecology. The Weddell seal may be the single best
species in which to study the foraging behavior and energetics of deep diving
pinnipeds because: 1) data is available on their diving ability, 2) the
isolated-ice-hole protocol in McMurdo Sound enables recorders to be attached and
recovered reliably, and 3) they make daily foraging dives when placed in the
isolated ice hole. The proposed study will investigate both behavioral and
energetic aspects of foraging to obtain a better understanding of the special
challenges of obtaining food resources at depth while being constrained by
limited access to atmospheric oxygen. In addition, this study will greatly
advance our understanding of the foraging ecology of Weddell seals as large
predators in the Antarctic fast-ice environment.