* 9618385
* Collaborative Research: Recent Migration in China and the   Impact of the Hukou System
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2002
* Kam-Wing Chan, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Richard J. Aspinall
* 06/30/2002
* USD 137,023.00

Chan, Kam Wing Fan, C. Cindy University of Washington University of California,
Los Angeles The central objectives of this research project are to examine the
processes and outcomes of internal migration in the transitional Chinese
economy. Specifically the work focuses upon the role of socio-economic
segmentation resulting from the socio-political control mechanisms employed by
the state-notably the household registration (hukou) system. A comparison of
hukou and non-hukou migrations and migrants' socio-economic characteristics is
undertaken based on a large data sample drawn from the 1990 Census and 1995
Population Survey, as well as, small scale in-depth field interviews to be
conducted in Guangdong and Hubei provinces. Statistical and quantitative
analyses will be utilized to draw out relationships and findings. The research
promises to break new ground by exploring the dynamic interaction between state
institutions and the structural transformation of the economy. The problem will
also be evaluated in terms of existing historical-cultural, neo-classical, and
segmented labor market theories. The project will theorize the relationship
between the state, industrialization and internal migration in contemporary
China. The research will be carried out by two U.S. scientists as well as two
Chinese researchers. The research has important theoretical and policy
implications in regards to the processes defining migration in currently common
situations of structural adjustment