* 9618840
* Group Processes and Individual Differences in Standardized  Test Scores
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Jeffrey Houser, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1999
* USD 111,526.00

9618840 Lovaglia The proposed research extends a theoretical research program,
status characteristics and expectation theories, that has been fruitful in
explaining status hierarchies and stratification processes in small groups. In
certain situations, individual performance on standardized tests of ability may
be included within the scope of status characteristics theory. New theoretical
developments identify those situations in which status processes should affect
individual performance. The extended theory can then be applied to a fundamental
problem in social theory: the unequal performance of group members who share
similar histories and cultural backgrounds. Social theory now explains
differences in performance among group members as stemming from individuals'
backgrounds: being rasised in cultural enriched settings is associated with not
only high education and socioeconomic status, but high performance as well. The
extended theory seeks to explain differences in performance among group members
with similar educational, socioeconomic and cultural backgrounds. Lacking such
social theory allows the presumption that genetics determines the differences in
performance among those of similar background (e.g., middle class African-
American and European-American students who live in the same neighborhoods and
attend the same schools). Countering the genetic explanation, status processes
that stratify groups may explain differences in performance among those of
similar background. High status may increase the rewards and decrease the costs
of superior performance. Thus individuals relegated to low status positions may
perform poorly despite innate ability that is identical to high status
individuals who perform better. We propose to conduct a series of studies that
will test this theory in a new experimental setting. Computer programs will
create a group situation that models high status and low status group processes
commonly found in school and work situations. Subjects are the n assigned
randomly to a high status or low status position. These experiments will
determine the effect of different group processes on individuals' scores on
several standardized tests. The randomized experimental design rules out the
possibility that effects found could have genetic origins. ***