* 9618034
* NSF/DARPA DDFRP:  Distributed Design and Manufacturing Using Solid Freeform Fabrication: Computational and Design Tools
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Richard Crawford, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2001
* USD 435,561.00

The overall objective of this proposal is to develop the underlying
computational and design tools to take advantage of the confluence of current
distributed computational resources and emerging rapid prototyping technologies.
Recent advances in physical prototyping allow the production of freeform solid
objects directly from a computer model without part-specific tooling or human
intervention. These technologies have been termed Solid Freeform Fabrication
(SFF). Benefits of this technology include greatly reduced fabrication time and
cost, and the capability to achieve, in one operation, shapes that would
otherwise require multiple operations or in some cases would be impossible to
manufacture with standard techniques. In addition, advances in high performance
computational networks enable rapid dissemination of information related to the
analysis and design of engineering components and systems. Researchers and
industrial manufacturers have noted similarities between the potential for
layer-based SFF technologies in mechanical component manufacture and VLSI for
microelectronic component manufacture. For SFF to gain status as a viable
manufacturing approach comparable to VLSI, several technological shortcomings
must be addressed. First, an appropriate method for transmitting design data
must be developed, as current standards are inaccurate, incomplete, and
unextendable. Second, design/fabrication knowledge for assessing
manufacturability of designs must be encoded for use by both designers and SFF
fabricators. This research project will develop and demonstrate the technology
base needed to integrate advances in both SFF and distributed computation;
specifically to: (1) develop and investigate a new data exchange standard for
geometric data that incorporates three-dimensional part geometry, spatial
material variations, and fabrication directives (e.g., tolerances); (2) develop
a two-dimensional interface that can be used to transmit fabrication information
generated from the 3D data; (3) encode and demonstrate design rules checking for
the SLS process; and (4) test the exchange standards and design rules with
design examples from industrial partners. The focus of work will be the
selective laser sintering process, particularly for tasks 2 and 3. However, the
work will be performed with an eye for generality for all layer-based SFF
processes and for integration with the work of other research groups. Solid
Freeform Fabrication (SFF) technologies offer the potential for significantly
reducing product realization cycle times in many economic sectors, from
electromechanical and consumer products to the automotive and aerospace
industries. SFF currently finds application mainly for prototype fabrication and
limited production, but many researchers and commercial developers are intent
upon developing these technologies into valid and viable manufacturing
technologies. This research focuses on two keys to realizing this goal: (1)
developing appropriate and robust data exchange standards for representing
fabrication information; and (2) formalizing design-for-manufacture rules
specific to SFF fabrication techniques. Similar challenges faced the
microelectronics industry in its early days, and many researchers and
practitioners have noted the similarities of integrated circuit fabrication and
SFF manufacture. Completion of this research will provide a foundation for the
computational aspects needed for SFF to realize success similar to the
microelectronics industry.