* 9618865
* EPWG:  Integrating Gender Equity Training and Teacher       Retooling for the High School Computer Science Classroom
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Allan Fisher, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 08/31/2001
* USD 773,769.00

9618865 Fisher In 1999, the Educational Testing Service will change the
programming language used in its computer science advanced placement test, from
Pascal to C++. This presents a singular opportunity: most of the approximately
1,500 teachers of advanced placement computer science (APCS) courses will need
to seek training in C++ as well as in appropriate pedagogy for the new language
and its object-oriented style of programming. This project seeks to develop a
summer program that combines this retooling with training in gender equity
issues and practices that will enable teachers to recruit and retain female
students in computer science. It also provides them with the tools needed to
disseminate this knowledge to their colleagues. APCS courses represent a
particularly salient opportunity to increase women's participation in computer
science since girls tend to be well represented in early computing courses, but
continue to advanced courses in far smaller numbers than boys. By integrating
gender equity activities with needed training offered by an internationally
prominent computer science department with close ties to the Advanced Placement
program, we expect to attract a substantial fraction (nearly 20 percent) of APCS
teachers, who are key players in high school computing education nationwide. By
presenting gender equity practices in the specific context of the computer
science classroom, we expect to make their transition to practice by program
participants especially effective, as well as to attract male teachers in equal
proportion with female teachers, a goal that is seldom achieved in training
programs focused solely on gender issues. A substantial and permanent increase
in the number of high school girls who elect and pass the Advanced Placement
Computer Science course at their schools is expected. Since this course and its
instructors tend to hold positions of prestige at their schools, we also expect
a substantial secondary impact whereby the climate and pedagogy of all computing
courses in participant districts' high schools are improved.