* 9618871
* Scaffolding Young Children's Data-Based Scientific Research:Narrowing The Gap Between Children's and Scientists'        Inquiry
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Kathleen Metz, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 04/30/2001
* USD 530,041.00

PROJECT SUMMARY ~ . The Project Summary should include a statement of
objectives, methods to be employed, and the significance of the proposed
activity to the advancement of knowledge or education. Avoid use of first person
to complete this summary. DO NOT EXCEED ONE PAGE. (Some Programs may impose more
stringent limits.) Scaffolding Young Children's Data-Based Scientific Research
Narrowing the Gap Between Children's and Scientists' Inquiry The habitual poor
performance of US students on evaluations of both science and mathematics
achievement, together with the many societal and individual needs for scientific
and mathematical literacy, point to the importance of fundamental reform in
these subject areas. The results from the most recent National Assessment of
Educational Progress (1990) indicate that students continue to attain only a low
level of understanding in these disciplines. For example, in mathematics only a
minority of students demonstrate proficiency at solving non-routine, multi-step
problems. In science, only a minority of high school seniors have the knowledge
adequate to interpret scientific data in graphs or table form, or to design
experiments. Both the mathematics and science education communities have
formulated recommendations for reversing this dire situation. This proposed
project is framed in terms of a synergy we perceive between key recommendations
from the mathematics and science education reform literatures, recommendations
that when combined form the basis of an instructional approach powerfully
addressing needed changes in both subject areas. In short, the influential
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) has argued for a stronger
conceptual and applied orientation to mathematics curriculum, with the goal of
attaining a curriculum where children come to view mathematics as a powerful
means of sense-making and solving genuine problems. NCTM contends that the
nature of the problems in the curriculum needs to be greatly expanded, to
include extended open-ended investigations, many involving the children's
formulation of the question, decisions about how to go about solving the
problem, and representing and interpreting their results. According to NCTM,
even at the primary grade level children should be conducting data-based
investigations and reflecting on ideas of statistics and probability (NCTM,
1989). Although more groups are involved in developing recommendations for
elementary science education reform and there appears to be less consensus
concerning realistic educational objectives (American Association for the
Advancement of Science, 1993; National Academy of Sciences, 1995), the science
education community shares with the math education community the long-term goal
of developing independent and skeptical inquirers who hold rich visions of their
respective intellectual enterprises --of what it means to think scientifically
or mathematically. The project will develop science curriculum prototypes where
children design research and subsequently analyze and interpret their data.
Grounded in current concerns to have math curriculum more applied and to have
both math and science curriculum reflect the discipline's way of constructing
and evaluating knowledge, the model of science underlying the curriculum
encompasses preliminary explorations of the domain, fommation of questions,
planning of experiments, subsequent collection, representation and
interpretation of data, theory development, and revision and extension of
research. In order to support children's data analysis and eventual independent
inquiry, the curriculum prototypes will incorporate instructional support in
fundamental statistical concepts, such as randomness, chance variation, the Law
of Large Numbers and sampling. Since several cognitive literatures have
identified domain-specific knowledge as a key detemminant in adequacy of
reasoning, the project will concentrate the children's investigations in two
interrelated domains: (a) animal behavior (such as insect s, rodents, and birds)
and (b) child behavior. As technological tools can empower researchers in their
access to domain-specific knowledge-bases and the task of data representation
and analysis, the project reaming environments will provide technological tools
and scaffold the children's strategic capitalization thereof. The project will
closely examine the data-based research that instruction based on these
principles supports among children at the primary and upper elementary levels.
Project research will take place in two contexts: (a) intact elementary school
classrooms at the second and fifth grade levels, and (b) the laboratory. This
combination of contexts allows the project research to reflect the richness of
the classroom and the rigor and control supported by the laboratory. Analysis
will be conducted at both the macro and micro levels across the longitudinal
context of the school year, in order to examine the dynamics of children's
developing data-based research, in interaction with their emergent scientific
and statistical knowledge. The project is designed to make contributions to both
cognitive theory and educational practice. It integrates and advances the
research literatures of children's reasoning about chance and children's
reasoning about causality, through study of children's application of
uncertainty, chance and causality in their scientific data analysis. It advances
children's mathematics education, through design and investigation of children's
practice of mathematics in a context of rich meaning and purpose. Finally, it
narrows the gap between children's and scientists' inquiry, through scaffolding
children's research design and data analysis. NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)