* 9618698
* Social Insurance
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2002
* Peter Diamond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* LAURA RAZZOLINI
* 02/28/2002
* USD 229,497.00

9618698 Diamond This project consists of theoretical and empirical research on
the social security system. The theoretical work examines the tradeoffs among
labor market disincentives, provision of insurance, and redistribution. Some
workers lose their economic opportunities at younger ages than other workers. By
having a social security system that varies retirement benefits with the age of
retirement the government can provide insurance against this risk. However, any
such insurance involves a labor market disincentive. Thus one needs a way to
evaluate the balance between providing insurance for those in need and creating
distortions in the labor market. The theoretical work continues research that
has been done by the investigator in evaluating and optimizing this tradeoff.
Previous work considered a setting where individual workers are the same except
for the actual realization of their earnings opportunities. However, people
differ significantly in their life expectancies and in their utilities from
working. Thus this project extends the previous work to examine the tradeoff
between incentives for retirement and the provision of insurance in a setting
where there is also redistribution because different people have different life
expectancies. In addition, there will be a new modeling of the gains and costs
of redistribution using social security. The empirical part of the project is
based on calculating more thoroughly than before the financial incentives for
retirement generated by social security. This will go beyond previous work in
recognizing differences in ages between husband and wife and in recognizing
variation in life expectancy at retirement age. The calculation of financial
incentives when both husband and wife have worked under Social Security is
complex. Simulation of such incentives and the use of the simulations in
estimation of the responses of retirement decisions will be a major part of the
work. In addition, the work will recognize the use of calendar -year earnings in
calculating benefits, a use that has implications for the timing of retirement
within the year. ??