* 9618444
* US-Egypt Workshop on Manufacturing Technology               Alexandria, Egypt, December 7-9, 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Mansour Mohamed, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 105,459.00

Description: This award is to provide support for a `U.S.-Egypt Workshop on
Manufacturing Technology` to be held in Alexandria, Egypt, December 7-9, 1996.
The U.S. organizer is Dr. Mansour Mohamed, Head, Department of Textile
Engineering, Chemistry and Science at North Carolina State University in
Raleigh, NC. The Egyptian organizer is Dr. Nabiel A. Saleh, Vice President, the
National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. Twenty scientists representing U.S.
academic and industrial concerns will participate. From Egypt, participants will
include scientists from the NRC, academic institutions and public and private
industrial research organizations. The workshop will allow these scientists to
discuss the scientific and technical questions that affect the manufacturing of
products in four industries: textiles, paper and pulp, pesticides, and polymers,
and to identify areas where joint U.S.-Egypt research can benefit industries in
the two countries, and hopefully advance the state of the art in these areas.
The workshop plans envision exchange of state of the art papers, by the two
side, few weeks in advance of the December meeting, in depth discussions of the
information exchanged during the meeting and specific recommendations for viable
cooperative research projects. This project plan includes visits by separate
groups of scientists to specific industries in the four areas, in Egypt before
and following the three day meeting. Scope: This award supports U.S. scientists
in a project that has high priority for the two countries. There is an evident
need in Egypt, and in a large number of other developing countries, to bring and
adapt modern technologies and manufacturing procedures into its industrial
infrastructure if she is to maintain stable and improving economic conditions.
The U.S. side has a chance to deal with nascent industries, or old industries
that need to be revamped, and to gain valuable experiences in the process. Some
of the joint research projects that may result from this workshop could have
technical benefits to U.S. industries and to machinery manufacturers, and
instruments manufacturers in the U.S. This project is endorsed by the
Governments of the U.S. and Egypt. They plan to consider support of the joint
research within the scope of increasing the cooperation between the two
countries in the science and technology area.