* 9618112
* An Evaluation of Brown Algal Phlorotannin Synthesis,        Turnover, and Fate: A Comparison of Ecological Models
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Nancy Targett, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2001
* USD 198,482.00

9618112 Targett Brown algal polyphenolics are acetate-malonate derived
phloroglucinol (1,3,5- trihydroxybenzene) polymers with putative biological
activity (herbivore deterrents, digestion reducers, antibacterial agents) that
attain substantial concentrations in many brown algal species, and hence,
represent a significant investment of plant resources. Ecological theories, such
as optimal defense, resource availability, and growth differentiation balance,
have attempted to provide an inclusive theoretical framework that balances
improvements in plant fitness resulting from secondary metabolite production
with the metabolic costs of these compounds. However, experimental tests of
these theories have yielded mixed results. Our understanding of factors that
control plant production of secondary metabolites is limited because experiments
to date have focused primarily on correlations between plant stresses and plant
secondary metabolite concentrations, rather than rates of metabolite synthesis
and turnover. Information regarding phlorotannin concentration levels as they
correlate to various environmental factors has been useful in establishing
general trends, but increasingly, observations of inter- and intraspecific
variation in brown algal phlorotannin concentrations are falling outside of the
current theoretical framework. To truly understand the observed patterns of
plant phlorotannin concentrations, it is essential to understand the effect that
specific environmental factors have on rates of phlorotannin production and
turnover. The goals of this project are: 1. To establish an accurate
understanding of brown algal phlorotannin synthesis, turnover, and exudation
rates, 2. To establish the magnitude of variation in these rates as a result of
changes in nutrient (nitrogen) concentration, irradiance bevels, and grazing
intensity, 3. To use the data as a framework for the evaluation of the carbon-
nutrient balance hypothesis (CNB) and the induction hypothesis ( IND) in marine
systems, 4. To quantitatively evaluate the cost of phlorotannin synthesis and
maintenance under varying nitrogen, irradiance and herbivory regimes. This
research addresses several competing ideas that attempt to account for variation
in concentrations of carbon-based secondary metabolites in plants. It does so
with a direct experimental approach (lab and field) to measurement of rates of
phlorotannin synthesis, turnover and fate in temperate and tropical brown algal
species. Understanding these mechanisms is central to understanding issues of
resource allocation and cost of allelochemical production.