* 9618676
* Development of New Cascade Sequences for the Construction   of Novel Chemical Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Kung Wang, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2000
* USD 246,000.00

The Organic Synthesis Program supports Professor Kung Wang's studies at the
University of West Virginia of new cascade reaction sequences leading to the
construction of novel chemical structures. Reaction sequences based on the
cycloaromatization of enediynes and enyne-allenes, including
(Z)-3-hexene-1,5-diynes and (Z)-1,2,4-heptatriene-6-ynes, lead to polycyclic
carbon frameworks, while analogous cyclizations of enyne-ketenes, enyne-
ketenimines, enyne-isocyanates, and enyne-carbodiimides afford access to novel
polycyclic heterocycles. Cascade electrocyclizations of dienediynes provide
reactive benzocyclobutadienes, the unusual polycyclic dimers of which represent
synthetic entry to compounds containing multiple dibenzocyclooctatetraene units.
Cyclizations of enediallenes lead to the formation of o-quinodimethanes and to
the potential discovery of novel synthetic routes to estrone and tetracyclic
structures forming the basis of a number of naturally-occurring diterpenes. Many
of Nature's biologically active compounds display complex molecular structures,
and the attempted synthesis of such compounds, whether for purposes of structure
elucidation, large-scale production of scarce naturally occurring compounds, or
preparation of next-generation synthetic analogs, requires the continuing
development of new strategies to deal with their molecular complexity. By
exploiting unusual cyclization reactions of electron-deficient precursor
molecules, Professor Wang develops facile synthetic routes to a wide variety of
polycyclic molecular structures containing all-carbon atoms as well as compounds
containing nitrogen and oxygen atoms within their cyclic structures. These
cyclization reactions are significant in their own right from a chemical
perspective, addressing issues of fundamental importance with regards to organic
structure and reactivity. Additionally, the reaction chemistry provides
synthetic access to both recognized and novel chemical structures, affording new
synthetic routes for the preparation of steroids such as estrone as well as
other tetracyclic structures characteristic of a class of naturally-occurring
compounds known as the diterpenes.