* 9618578
* U.S. GLOBEC: Life History Events of Calanus Finmarchicus    (Copepoda) on Georges Bank, A Component of U.S. GLOBEC:     Ichthyoplankton and Zooplankton in the Georges Bank Region
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2003
* Charles Miller, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2003
* USD 745,000.00

Specific studies are designed to examine aspects of life history events in one
of the GLOBEC target species, the copepod Calanus finmarchicus. Individual
vector models will be developed for life history events, population growth, and
advective transport for C. finmarchicus in the Gulf of Maine and over Georges
Bank. Mandibular morphology and gonad development will be used to quantify the
proportions of individuals that decide to enter diapause or to mature. Tooth
formation will also serve to indicate when stocks are ending or continuing
diapause in autumn and winter months. Diapause/maturation decisions and sex
change frequency will be examined by analyses of DNA fragments. These studies
will document interannual environmental factors that influence sex
determination. Wax storage rates will be estimated by video microscopy and
Iatroscan chromatography. Work done by this project will constitute the western
Atlantic component of a international program titled TransAtlantic Studies of
Calanus finmarchicus. Parallel studies on life history decisions, sex change
frequency, and lipid storage will be conducted off Norway (two latitudes),
Iceland, northern Scotland and in the North Sea. +- ±- + _ Ûª? ÑOh ª' +'ª?0 h +
Õ $ H l + ¢ ? D R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Sheryl Miller @ -+Y+ª) @ -+Y+ª) @
Ù?E S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ++++++++++++ ` + ++++++++++++
++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ ? @ ªí- Microsoft Word 6.0 9 Õªe =- e O ª O < < < < <
< < f f f f f f p f 1 z z z z z z z z & ( ( ( F = = ÷ = T ' ` < z z z z z z < <
z z z z z z < z < z & P X < < < < z & z - z 0"