* 9618766
* Late Pleistocene Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations in the Inland  Levant:  The Wadi Al-Hasa Model (West-Central Jordan)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1997,11/30/2001
* Deborah Olszewski, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2001
* USD 116,435.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Nancy Coinman and Deborah
Olszewski will conduct two seasons of archaeological research at a series of
sites located in the upland region of western Jordan in the vicinity of Wadi Al-
Hasa. Although the area consists today of dissected floodplain, during the later
part of the last ice age it contained a lake and extensive associated marshland
which varied in size and configuration as climate changed. During their prior
work in the area Drs. Coinman and Olszewski have located a large number of
archaeological sites which span the time period between ca. 25,000 to 12,000
years ago and these form the focus of their present project. With the assistance
of students and a number of specialists the investigators will pursue several
goals. They will collect data to reconstruct in detail the changes in
paleoenvironment over time. Information on macro-climatic regimes, relative
moisture regimes and spring and tufa formations will be sought. Varying lake
levels and associated laucustrine features will be determined. Survey of
archaeological sites will be continued and occurrences mapped to determine
population distribution on the landscape at different periods of time. Several
rockshelters located in past research will be tested to determine the extent and
nature of archaeological deposits and excavation will be expanded at two sites
where past work has confirmed the presence of deep stratified deposits with good
overall preservation of faunal remains. On this basis it should be possible to
reconstruct the human response to dramatically changing environmental
conditions. Archaeologists wish to understand how human societies at a
technologically simple level adapt and map themselves onto a varied environment.
Because of the long prehistoric record and its role as one cradle of
civilization, many researchers have focused on the Near East and a number of
models have been proposed. The Al-Hasa area is interesting not only because of
its well preserved archaeological remains but also because preliminary data
indicates that the settlement pattern fits no known Old World model. Coinman and
Olszewski have devised another approach developed in an environmentally similar
region in the Western United States and wish to determine how well this fits the
Al-Hasa data. It is at the end of this period that domestic plants and animals
appear in the Near East and the research may also shed light on this basic human
transition to a settled way of life. This research is important because it will
increase our understanding of human adaptation. It will provide data of interest
to many archaeologists and assist in the training of undergraduate students.