* 9618390
* Patterns and Sources of Variability in Biological Weighting Functions for UVR Inhibition of Primary Production in California Coastal Waters
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Barbara Prezelin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/2001
* USD 430,000.00

Significant changes in UVR climatology have occurred all latitudes, except the
tropics, during the last 20 years with potentially significant consequences for
coastal oceanography. There is a pressing need to understand and be able to
forecast UVR effects on coastal primary production; in part because of the
central role carbon fixation plays in ecosystem dynamics, in part because of the
various but untested scenarios suggesting changes in production patterns in
response to changing UVR climatology, and in part out of concern for the
potential impact these scenarios might have on coastal societies. With prior NSF
funding, we have documented that inhibition of marine primary production by
solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is widespread in phytoplankton, macroalgae,
epilithic microalgae and ice algae in the Southern Ocean. To advance the
spectral modeling of solar UVR effects on primary production, we measured the
first of several action spectra or biological weighting functions (BWFs)
quantify the spectral sensitivity of primary production to UVR inhibition under
natural field conditions. We documented, for the first time, the significant
variability in these spectral algorithms and identified but have not tested
potential experimental, analytical and natural sources of that variability. Such
knowledge is required if the predictive linkages between optical models of UVR
and UVR effects on primary production are to be known. Lack of consideration of
UVR effects undermines the predictive accuracy of primary production models and
overlooks the regulatory roles that UVR plays in modifying cell processes that
define the photoecology of phytoplankton. It is likely that the nature of the
UVR challenges may differ in different ecosystems and the interactive effects on
food webs may be balanced differently. A feasibility study of surface
phytoplankton communities in the Santa Barbara Channel during 1995 indicate a
potential for significant, but highly variable, UVR effects on surface primary
production rates. Based on those findings and using proven techniques, we will
define the patterns and sources of variability in BWFs for UVR inhibition of
primary production in highly diverse California coastal waters and, thereby,
advance spectral modeling of UVR dependent primary production. The results of
this research project will also help identify the mechanisms by which UVA and
UVB regulate the polychromatic biology of phytoplankton and provide insights
regarding potential consequences of changing global UVB climatology on
phytoplankton ecology.