* 9618303
* Topics in Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1997,10/31/2002
* Martin Eichenbaum, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2002
* USD 228,245.00

9618303 Eichenbaum This research seeks to understand the extent to which
fluctuations in output and inflation in post-war US data are due to the fact
that monetary policy is conducted under discretion. This issue is addressed by
developing and analyzing a class of dynamic, quantitative, general equilibrium
models in which monetary policy is made by policymakers seeking to achieve well-
defined objectives. These models are used to determine whether the conduct of
monetary policy would have been better under alternative institutional
arrangements. This research is motivated by a variety of empirical and policy
questions, some of which appear to be puzzling from the perspective of
conventional theories. Example of these questions are: (1) Are Great Inflations
like we saw in the 1980's an inevitable by-product of discretionary monetary
policy? (2) Does discretion lead to excessive fine tuning, that is, too much
"leaning against the wind?" (3) What are the welfare gains, if any from imposing
limited forms of commitment on the monetary authority? (4) Does delegating
authority to a central banker necessarily entail repeated and risky battles to
reduce inflation? (5) Do theories based on delegation help account for the
evidence of regime switches in postwar US monetary policy? The persuasiveness of
any analysis of monetary policy depends crucially on the plausibility of the
model. The project constructs, estimates and evaluates the empirical
plausibility of alternative business cycle models. The research is aimed at
isolating frictions in agents' environments that help account quantitatively for
the fact that contractionary shocks to monetary policy lead to small movements
in the aggregate price level and real wages, svbustantial declines in output and
profits, and a significant rise in short term interest rates. The project
evaluates the importance of asset market, good market and labor market frictions
in the monetary transmission mechanism. In related work, the projects aims at
understanding the cyclical behavior of capacity utilization rates. This work is
important because empirically plausible models of the monetary transmission
mechanism must embody frictions that damp cyclical movements in the costs of
production. The project confronts microeconomic data with business cycle models
that allow for nontrivial technological heterogeneity across firms. Finally, the
project aims at estimating the magnitude of returns to scale and externalities
using microeconomic data. This work is important because a broad class of
theories relies on increasing returns to scale and/or externalities as a
propagation mechanism or for self fulfilling expectations shocks to be an
important source of impulses to the business cycle. ??