* 9618248
* The Challenge Zone:  Using the Internet to Support High     Standards in Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* James Pellegrino, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 03/31/2001
* USD 694,369.00

Bransford 9618248 Two challenges, based on the Jasper Woodbury, the Scientists
in Action Series and Project SMART, support middle and high school students
doing science and mathematics with understanding rather than just doing. The
challenges are featured on the Challenge Zone of the American Schools Directory
on the Internet along with the resources specially designed to help students
develop understanding of "big ideas" in science and mathematics emphasized in
the standards documents. The science challenge provides activities to increase
student understanding of river ecology. The mathematics challenge is organized
around a series of design tasks that invite students to invent mathematically
based tools to solve important classes of problems. The resources include
references to existing texts, software, video, Internet sites and suggestions to
teachers about ways to use challenges to increase student achievement. Each
challenge is divided into a series weekly of sub-challenges for groups of
students who respond with the best solution of the class. Other classes can
review, comment on and use the solution of any other posted solution. The sub-
challenges lead toward a project of local significance that can be done by the
class with the results posted on the Web site. Feedback from users is used to
refine challenges and resources. Mechanisms are developed to assess to student
learning and to evaluate the effects of feedback on the quality of the
challenges. A major focus is to determine unique contributions of the Web to
classroom learning.