* 9618077
* Collaborative Research: (ESH)  Hydrologically Coupled       Estimates of Decadal to Millennial Climate Variability      During the Holocene and Late Pleistocene: Estancia Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Bruce Allen, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2000
* USD 72,835.00

9618077 Allen A high-resolution record of climate changes, reconstructed from
lake sediments and shoreline features in Estancia Basin, central New Mexico, has
documented a land-based record of large and abrupt shifts in climate during the
latest Pleistocene. Nine major fluctuations in lake level between ~24 and ~12
kyr correspond, within errors of dating, to major isotopic shifts between
stadial and interstadial conditions in Greenland ice cores. Four of the
lowstands coincide with changes in ocean circulation and zones of anoxic
sediment in Santa Barbara Basin, at the same latitude. Estancia Basin also
contains a record of changes in hydrologic balance for conditions of extreme,
dry climate in the mid-Holocene. Previously funded research is providing the
temporal, spatial, compositional, and hydrochemical data and framework needed
for coupling hydrologic responses to Estancia Basin to changes in atmospheric
parameters through the application of physically based, landscape-scale
hydrologic models. This project will obtain the temporal, spatial, and
geomorphic data needed to define the mid-Holocene hydrologic response and
subsequent changes in hydrologic meteorological system will be employed in order
to modify and apply existing hydrologic models. We propose to use the highly
responsive hydrologic setting and a tested physically based model to link the
extreme changes in climate recorded in Estancia Basin with changes in
atmospheric conditions and climatic variables. Output from high-resolution
atmospheric models will be used as input to the hydrologic models in simulations
of key climate events. Hydrologic simulations for key climatic events, including
stadials, interstadials, and mid- to late Holocene climate changes will be
reconciled with output from atmospheric models, with the long-term objective of
testing hypotheses for explaining abrupt, decade- to millenium-scale changes in
climate. ??