* 9618533
* Evaluating the Flux of Uranium Isotopes from River-Dominated Shelf Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Brent McKee, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/1999
* USD 249,044.00

9618533 MCKEE ABSTRACT A clear understanding of uranium geochemistry in marine
environments is required to fully utilize U-Th. nuclides as radiochemical tools.
The uranium isotope signature of the ocean is greatly influenced by inputs from
river-dominated shelf environments can have a dramatic impact on uranium
concentrations in the ocean, and may have greatly influenced the uranium
isotopic composition of the ocean during past glacial/interglacial cycles. This
is possible because: (1) over 80% of the riverine uranium flux to ocean margins
is in a particulate form which can potentially be transformed to a more soluble
phase; (2) rivers discharge particulate uranium directly into shallow (&lt;200
m) shelf environments where dynamic processes (deposition, diagenesis, mixing)
can alter particulate materials before entering the ocean; and, (3) the possible
influence of shelf environments on oceanic geochemistry varies greatly between
glacial and interglacial periods (exposure and inundation); a point that has
important implications for the maintenance of steady-state uranium isotope
concentrations in the ocean during the past million years. Project objectives
are: (1) To better quantify the net uranium flux associated with river-dominated
shelf sediments; (2) To identify the processes controlling enrichment/depletion
of interstitial uranium concentrations in river-dominated shelf sediments; (3)
To define the active microorganisms present in river-dominated shelf sediments
and to gain some insight into the importance of biology vs. chemistry in the
rapid Mn (IV) reduction and associated U enrichments observed in these
environments and, (4( To identify the physical parameters that control net
uranium fluxes from shelf sediments (e.g., particulate uranium carrier phases,
rates of particulate deposition and burial, depth and frequency of sediment
mixing). To address objective one, riverine and shelf sediments from major
river-dominated area (totaling -35% of world sediment discharge) will be
analyzed for uranium isotopes to ascertain the extent to which particulate U is
transformed to a dissolved phase. To address objectives two and three, a series
of porewater and incubation studies are proposed using sediments from the Amazon
and Mississippi Shelves. To address the final objective, detailed interstitial
chemistry (including U isotopes) will be examined at selected sites on each of
the above shelves on time scales compatible to the characteristic patterns of
riverine particulate supply and sediment mixing.