* 9618580
* A 'Scientific' Examination of the Admissibility of          Scientific Expert Testimony Under Daubert v. Merrell Dow    Pharmaceuticals
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Steven Penrod, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2000
* USD 82,650.00

Abstract Penrod 9618580 On June 28, 1993 the Supreme Court ruled in the case of
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. creating a new standard for the
admissibility of scientific evidence and displacing the traditional Frye test.
Since then, many legal commentators have debated the effects of the decision on
trial court decisions concerning the admissibility of scientific testimony. This
research addresses empirically the admissibility question. Specifically, the
research will answer the following questions, among others: Has Daubert
generally lead to greater exclusion or admission of scientific evidence in
general? Are the courts applying Daubert to technical or specialized knowledge?
Is social science evidence more or less likely to be admitted under Daubert? Is
the review of scientific evidence more rigorous under Daubert? Is the focus of
scientific scrutiny methodology or results? Do the State courts apply Daubert
differently from Federal courts? To study these issues, cases decided before and
cases decided after Daubert are selected using a Westlaw search. Data are coded
on 58 variables assessing the criteria courts use to admit or not, expert
evidence. Changes before and after Daubert are compared. The results of this
research will inform legal scholars and social scientists as to the influence of
this important Supreme Court decision on the use of science in the courtroom.
%%% On June 28, 1993 the Supreme Court ruled in the case of Daubert v. Merrell
Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. creating a new standard for the admissibility of
scientific evidence and displacing the traditional Frye test. Since then, many
legal commentators have debated the effects of the decision on trial court
decisions concerning the admissibility of scientific testimony. This research
addresses empirically the admissibility question. Specifically, the research
will answer the following questions, among others: Has Daubert generally lead to
greater exclusion or admission of scientific evid ence in general? Are the
courts applying Daubert to technical or specialized knowledge? Is social science
evidence more or less likely to be admitted under Daubert? Is the review of
scientific evidence more rigorous under Daubert? Is the focus of scientific
scrutiny methodology or results? Do the State courts apply Daubert differently
from Federal courts? To study these issues, cases are selected using a Westlaw
search. Data are coded on 58 variables assessing the criteria courts use to
admit or not, expert evidence. The results of this research will inform legal
scholars ***