* 9618945
* Schoolyard Ornithology Resource Project
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Richard Bonney, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 09/30/2002
* USD 1,235,579.00

9618945 Bonney The Schoolyard Ornithology Resource Project (SORP), a
collaboration between the Cornell Lab of Ornithology (Lab), TERC, the Cornell
University Department of Education, and the National Audubon Society, will
design, field test, evaluate, and disseminate a resource package to help
teachers implement national bird research projects in their classrooms. Based on
the National Science Standards, SORP will offer teachers ongoing opportunities
to improve their science content knowledge and processes skills, as well as,
their ability to bring scientific inquiry to their classroom. SORP will also
empower teachers to undertake other projects that rely on the collection and
analysis of real data. Finally, through collaboration with the National Audubon
Society, SORP will provide a mechanism for teachers to receive classroom-based
mentorship from community members knowledgeable in ornithology, natural history,
and Internet-based technology, and specially trained to work with elementary and
middle school teachers. SORP builds on several earlier NSF-supported projects:
Project FeederWatch; Project PigeonWatch; the Cornell Nest Box Network; and the
new Classroom FeederWatch; in which thousands of participants, many of them
students, send carefully gathered data to the Lab for analysis and publication.
SORP products will include: * A Resource Manual with sample workshops that focus
on improving teachers' content knowledge in 1) ornithology-bird identification;
bird anatomy, physiology, and behavior; the complementary nature of structure
and function; bird systems; the importance of birds and their role in
environmental interactions; bird diversity and adaptation; and 2) science
process skills-questioning; designing and conducting an investigation;
collecting, recording, and analyzing data; communicating findings and
explanations; asking new questions. * Teacher assessments that use classroom
outcomes to measure progress. * A SORP Home Page and Practice Area that w ill
include opportunities for exploring data entry and retrieval, e-mail
communication, and data analysis both during and after workshops. It will also
include resources, both original and hot-linked, on both science content and
pedagogy, to help teachers extend their knowledge and skills. Workshops will be
held at the Lab and at training centers across the country, including National
Audubon Society Centers, for teachers wishing to implement bird studies and
other inquiry-based explorations into their classrooms. Netcourses will be
offered to help those teachers who are more isolated and want to include the use
of scientific data gathering in their instruction.