* 9618597
* High Performance Associative Memory: Practical              Generalizations of the Hamming Net
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1997,08/31/2001
* Mohamad Hassoun, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2001
* USD 301,011.00

The design of high performance associative memory has long been a goal of
artificial neural net researchers. A practical low-cost device which could store
and retrieve information similar to the human `content addressable` memory would
be recognition, data base, control systems, and robotics. Indeed, associative
memory is seen by most experts as a crucial component for the development of any
truly intelligent and brain-like system. The purpose of this project is to
design and implement a practical and low cost associative memory with following
properties: 1. High capacity. 2. High amount of error correction and tolerance
to noisy or partial inputs. 3. No spurious memories and no limit cycles. 4.
Provision for a `no decision` or ground state. 5. Fast memory retrievals. 6.
Ability to operate in an autoassociative or heteroassociative mode. 7. Practical
and low cost hardware implementation. The approach will be to generalize the
operation of the Hamming memory in order to design associative memory models
which retain all the high performance properties of the Hamming net, but allow
for a much more practical hardware implementation and faster retrievals. In
particular the project will explore four extensions of the Hamming memory: (i)
the Grounded Hamming Memory, (ii) the Decoupled Hamming Memory, (ii) Two Level
Decoupled Hamming Memory, and (iv) the Cellular Hamming Memory.