* 9618442
* The Plutonic Foundation of a Very Slow-Spreading Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Henry Dick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 08/31/2000
* USD 688,870.00

9618442 Dick This award will support a marine geological and geophysical study
of exposed lower ocean crust in the southwest Indian Ocean. Exposed crustal
rocks on shallow uplifted seafloor were discovered in this region during Ocean
Drilling Program operations. ODP site 735B sampled a 400 meter vertical section
of gabbros in this area providing a detailed record of crustal formation
processes. To date , however, it has been difficult to place these results into
a local context since no data are available on surrounding seafloor geology. The
present project will rectify this situation by undertaking detailed near bottom
observations and sampling. Canadian scientists will provide the ROV ROPOS as
primary survey vehicle, and rock drill would be modified for deployment on ROPOS
to allow direct sampling of observed rocks.The primary objective is to provide
detailed near bottom examination and sampling of seafloor to tie existing ODP
data to local environment and to provide detailed site survey for drilling to be
proposed which would sample at sites surrounding existing hole. Additional work
would include newly developed British rock drill to provide deeper sampling than
could be done from ROPOS vehicle. Samples and data would be used to identify
crustal formation process at this unique exposure of lower crustal rocks. ***