* 9618433
* Investigation of the Elementary Reaction Mechanism of       Surface Mediated Formation of PCDD/F from Aromatic          Precursors
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1997,12/15/1998
* Barry Dellinger, University of Dayton
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 12/15/1998
* USD 166,292.00

Abstract CTS 96-18433 Dellinger This is a study of the mechanism of formation of
polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDD) polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDF), and
related compounds (collectively PCDD/F). Previous work haq shown the process to
be catalyzed by fly ash in the range of 250-400(C. Transition metals such as
iron and copper also seem to catalyze the formation of these materials. A search
for evidence of surface mediated reactions tests a hypothetical mechanism for
the process. Samples containing various combinations of silicate and alumina
glasses (surrogates for fly ash), organic precursors (chlorobenzenes, phenol,
and other aromatic compounds), and chlorinating agents (chlorine, hydrogen
chloride, and transition metal chlorides) are prepared using resistively heated
wafers in a special adsorption cell. Chemisorption, Fourier-transform infrared
spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), laser-induced
fluorescence spectroscopy (LIF), micro-Raman spectroscopy, and other
instrumental and wet chemical techniques are used to probe reaction
intermediates. From these data, an elementary chemical reaction and kinetic
model for the formation of PCDD/F is developed. Elimination of emissions
containing polychlorinated dibenzodioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/F) from
combustion sources is among the most pressing of environmental issues. An
improved understanding of the origin and mechanism of formation of PCDD/F may
lead to a strategy to avoid their formation by process modification (pollution
prevention), obviating the need for post-process control measures.