* 9618229
* Genes, Development, Behavior, and Learning:  Conceptual and Methodological Issues
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Kenneth Schaffner, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Seely
* 07/31/2001
* USD 120,000.00

Behavioral genetics is an umbrella term encompassing studies purporting to show
a connection between the genetic make up of an organism and its behavior. Such
approaches have been applied to a variety of organisms, ranging from the
relatively simple worm (C. elegans), through the fruit fly (Drosophila) and up
to humans. Behavioral genetics research, involving both humans and simpler
animal model systems, has accelerated in recent years. Yet the advances of that
research have been questioned on both conceptual and methodological grounds, and
have also been viewed as contentious by some because of the social implications
of the work. The project will illuminate such issues by applying the tools and
perspectives of analytic philosophic to the arguments and evidence offered in
the scientific literature of behavioral genetics. Special attention will be
given to the logical possibility of disentangling `genetic` from `environmental`
influences, and the evidence required to do so in a convincing manner. The PI
will also examine the causal claims made from various theoretical perspectives
within behavioral genetics(e.g., developmentalist, interactionist,
connectionistic, and classical perspectives). The project will result in a
series of articles and a book, written for a variety of audiences that include
scientists and philosophers, policy makers, and the general public.