* 9618228
* Empirical Studies of Regulated Industries-Accomplishment    Based Renewal
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Frank Wolak, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2001
* USD 212,611.00

Wolak, Frank Abstract Currently, network industries such as telecommunications,
electricity, water delivery and postal delivery are being re-structured and
privatized in countries all over the world. Although the desire to improve the
efficiency of operation of these industries is the common goal, many very
different strategies are pursued in an attempt to achieve this common goal. The
lack of consensus about the optimal mechanism for privatization and re-
structuring of network industries is in part a result of the absence of a
consensus within the economics profession about the structure of production and
demand in network industries and the impact of the regulatory process on firm
behavior. The purpose of this research is to derive the necessary empirical
methods and undertake the data analysis required to move to a consensus on the
optimal process for privatizing and re-structuring these industries. This
research has to three major goals: (1) to expand the set of empirical methods
available to analyze firm and consumer behavior in regulated industries; (2) to
develop and implement empirical models of the impact of regulation on firm
behavior; (3) to apply these and other methodologies to determine how
restructuring should take place to achieve the maximum benefits to consumers.
This work will analyze the operation of the telecommunications, electricity,
water delivery and postal delivery services industries using these new empirical
methodologies. The telecommunications research will focus on household-level
demand for telecommunications services rather than aggregate demand; this
analysis is important because the debate over optimal re-structuring often
focuses on its impact on specific demographic groups such as the elderly and
poor. My research will develop and implement applied econometric methodologies
which expand the range of applicability of techniques for analyzing consumer
demand with zero consumption of some goods. Properly accounting for zero
consumption in the demand for telecommunications services is necessary because
many households do not consume any of a particular telecommunications service.
Examples include local and long-distance telephone service and cable television
service. Another common problem which arises in the analysis of household-level
demand is the lack of information on the specific prices faced by an individual
household. Hence, this work will also develop and implement techniques for
incorporating estimated distributions of prices, conditional on household
characteristics, into the household-level demand estimation. This allows us to
more accurately determine the consumption and consumer welfare implications of
proposed telecommunications policy changes. The research on the electricity
industry will analyze the actual operation of several restructured electricity
markets around the world to determine the impact of the design of a so-called
`competitive` electricity market on prices. The England and Wales electricity
market and Nord Pool (the Nordic Power Market) are among the markets to be
analyzed. This research will formulate and estimate a structural econometric
model of bidding behavior by the two large producers in the England and Wales
market in order to recover estimates of each firm's underlying cost function.
These cost function estimates will then be used to determine the impact of
alternative market rules and structures on the prices set by the market. The
postal delivery services research is concerned with the changing pattern of
household-level demand due to changes in the relative price of this good and the
increasing availability of substitute technologies. The proposed work will break
out the dimensions of the substitution away from postal delivery services due to
the specific competing technologies, such as e-mail and FAX machines. This work
will also develop alternative econometric methods for analyzing the demand for
infrequently purchased products. The final aspects of this work will study how
to recover the structure of production of postal delivery services and the rate
of growth of USPS total factor productivity in a manner that accounts for the
impact of the postal rate-setting process.