* 9618540
* Dissertation Research:  Rural Household and Community       Development in the Xunantunich Hinterland During the Late   and Terminal Classic
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1997,06/30/1998
* Wendy Ashmore, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1998
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Wendy Ashmore, MS Cynthia Robin will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. Building on prior research she will conduct an
archaeological survey and excavation at the site of Xunantunich located in the
Belize River Valley in a tropical lowland environment. Xunantunich is a Mayan
site which was occupied during the Late to Terminal Classic periods (ca.
600-1000 AD) and thus spans both the height and early decline of the Mayan
civilization. The site is unusual because in relation to its estimated
population size it contains a relatively small ceremonial center and a dearth of
monumental architecture. After the peak of Mayan development when most sites
decline in size the opposite appears to have occurred at Xunantunich and the
center grows larger rather than smaller. MS Robin wants to examine the
relationship between `central` and `rural` areas and through this gain insight
into how the polity was organized socially and politically and what forces held
the entity together. While much work in the Mayan region has focused on site
centers less is known about hinterland areas. MS Robin shall continue her
fieldwork to locate household areas since these can shed the most light on
social and economic organization. Using a methodology developed in prior seasons
she will extract soil cores spaced at regular intervals in areas of likely
habitation and through analysis of cultural remains thus recovered locate
homesteads for extensive horizontal excavation. She will also excavate in mounds
which result from longer term occupation by larger social groups. The ceramics,
lithics and other materials recovered will permit her to date individual sites
and to examine questions such as craft specialization and degree of hierarchical
differentiation. While it is known that Mayan settlements at the height of the
Classic period integrated large numbers of individuals into centrally controlled
social groupings the mechanisms used to accomplish this end are not well
understood and archaeologists disagree on the nature and strength of these
bonds. It is only through large scale excavation and survey that answers are
likely to emerge and MS Robin's research is directed towards this end. The data
she produces will be of interest to many archaeologists. The project will also
assist in the training of a promising young scientist.