* 9618121
* S-EPR:  Biogeochemical Evolution in Intense Hydrothermal    Plumes Emanating from a Superfast Spreading Center
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* James Cowen, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2000
* USD 393,559.00

The section of the southern East Pacific Rise (S EPR) between the Garrett
Transform and the Easter Microplate has one of the fastest spreading rates on
the global ridge system and is the locus of the most intense hydrothermal
activity, reflected in the density of venting sites and in the water column
plumes, of all mid-ocean ridge (MOR) systems studied to date. Recent submersible
and surface ship visits to this region by the French and Japanese/American (PMEL
NOAA) have revealed that hydrothermal plumes overlay over 60% of the ridge crest
between 14Ý50' and 18Ý40' S. Furthermore, dramatically variable vent fluid
chemistries result in distinct, and unusual signatures in the plume waters. The
intense, nearly continuous, and dynamic nature of the hydrothermal system over
this section of the S EPR provides for the most focused impact anywhere of the
global ridge system on the ocean geochemistry and biosphere. Research efforts
focused on the hydrothermal venting and plumes of this system will continue with
two NSF funded collaborative projects. M. Lilley, K.Von Damm, and J. Lupton have
been funded to perform a 25 dive submersible program on the S EPR, focusing on
the collection of vent fluds from several regions of documented venting south of
17ÝS. R. Collier has been funded to extend the submersible observations of the
hydrothermal vent characteristics to the water column hydrothermal plume at the
local (vent field) to segment scale. In addition, the Japanese/PMEL NOAA are
continuing their joint, interdisciplinary investigation of the distribution and
composition of hydrothermal venting/plumes along the EPR axis south of the
Garrett. A study of the geomicrobiology of the intense S EPR hydrothermal plumes
will be made in collaboration with the above funded programs. The goals of the
present proposal are highly complementary to and will extend the primary goals
of the funded Lilley/Collier programs; these studies will assess the rate of
change of microbial populations and biogeochemical processes in an evolving
plume. Collaboration with the Japanese/PMEL- NOAA (RIDGE Flux) S EPR project
will allow the determination of representative hydrothermal mineral and organic
C vertical fluxes at some of the same sites and to relate these fluxes to
biogeochemical transformation rates of hydrothermal constituents and
metalliferous sediment distributions and accumulation rates. Analyses and
interpretation of transformation processes and flux rates will be completed in
close collaboration with M. Lilley (UW) (and K.Von Damm and J. Lupton), R.
Collier (OSU), Japanese (T.Urabe, J. Ishibashi, H. Kawahata, K. Marumo, A.
Marnyarna, and colleagues) and PMEL /NOAA (E. Baker, R. Feely, G. Massoth, D.
Butterfield and colleagues) scientists.