* 9618365
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Preventive Law Through Plain Language: Testing a Pyscholegal Audience Based Evaluation  of Contract Perception and Comprehension
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1997,09/30/1998
* Steven Penrod, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/1998
* USD 5,465.00

Penrod 9618365 Standardized form contracts are used in the majority of modern
contractual transactions and have become an indispensable part of contemporary
commerce. Many times the meaning of these contracts is unclear to the public
because they are written in arcane language that is difficult for lawyers and
non-lawyers to decipher. This research uses a two-stage empirical process to
study plain language provisions .Both qualitative and quantitative methods are
used. The first stage explores contract schema of both lawyers and laypersons
elicited via focus group methods. Using the schema elicited in the first stage,
questions will be developed to measure the effects of provisions of plain
language statutes on comprehension, perceptions of enforceability and fairness,
and attributions toward the drafting parties. A true experiment will test these
effects with a sample of 232 adults. This research will inform schema theory and
extend the existing research on clarity of judicial instruction to the domain of
contracts. %%% Standardized form contracts are used in the majority of modern
contractual transactions and have become an indispensable part of contemporary
commerce. Many times the meaning of these contracts is unclear to the public
because they are written in arcane language that is difficult for lawyers and
non-lawyers to decipher. This research uses a two-stage empirical process to
study plain language provisions .Both qualitative and quantitative methods are
used. The first stage explores contract schema of both lawyers and laypersons
elicited via focus group methods. Using the schema elicited in the first stage,
questions will be developed to measure the effects of provisions of plain
language statutes on comprehension, perceptions of enforceability and fairness,
and attributions toward the drafting parties. A true experiment will test these
effects with a sample of 232 adults. This research will inform schema theory and
extend the existing research on clarity of judi cial instruction to the domain
of contracts. ***