* 9618669
* The Fallen Leaf Lake Conference on Horizontal Gene Transfer Sept. 12-15, 1996, South Lake Tahoe, CA
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,03/31/1997
* Clarence Kado, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/1997
* USD 5,000.00

Syvanen 9618669 The Fallen Leaf Lake Conference, initiated in 1985, is a
bienneally held international meeting devoted to the molecular biology and
genetics of microorganisms found in the environment. Past meetings have
emphasized bacteria that grow on plants and in the soil. The 1996 conference
will expand upon topics that have been previously covered to multidisciplinary
area of horizontal gene transfer. The conference will therefore include and area
of high priority in the assessment of risk in the release of genetically
engineered microoganisms as well as explore a subject with profound theoretical
implications. The Fallen Leaf Lake Conferences offer the special opportunity for
participants to interact with experts in a variety of fields that touch upon
horizontal gene transfer. Only the latest unpublished information is exchanged
and ample opportunity is provided during the course of the conference for
informal exchanges between participants. These conferences have an international
complexion (for example, the typical conference has participants from Europe,
Asis, Australia, South America, and the Middle East) and therefore the
conference provides excellent opportunities for graduate students and
postdoctoral to interact with internationally recognized experts. The conference
will bring together a variety of people who have thought about horizontal gene
transfer problems but from different perspectives. A multidisciplinary meeting
will be needed to cover these different perspectives -- agricultural, medical
and environmental microbiology, comparative systematics, virology, molecular
evolution and even some paleontology. This will cover, for example, work in
controlled field experiments that have measured movement of altered genes in
genetically engineered organisms to native species, epidemiological surveys of
during resistant genes in human pathogens and phylogenetic analyses of extant
organisms that show the role of horizontal gene transfer in their history. In
addition, a n umber of evolutionist will be invited to discuss evolutionary
patterns and trends, with special emphasis on some problems in systematics and
phylogenetics of plants.