* 9618452
* U.S.-Taiwan Cooperative Research:  A Pilot Experiment on    Neutrino Oscillation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1999
* C. C. Chang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 04/30/1999
* USD 30,770.00

9618452 Chang This is a 12 month award proposed by Drs. George C.C. Chang and
Chung Yun Chang, the University of Maryland, collaborating with Drs. P.K. Deng
and Shih-Chang Lee, Academia Sinica in Taiwan, and sixteen other researchers
from the Taiwan National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan University, Nanjing
University (China), Institute of High Energy Physics of Chinese Academy of
Science. Drs.George C.C. Chang and Chung Yun Chang request funds for travel and
communication to carry out the pilot experiment on neutrino oscillation using
anti-neutrino particles generated by the Taiwan nuclear power plants. neutrino
is one of the elementary particles in particle and astro-physics. Neutrino
oscillation may provide the information for many fundamental questions in
physics, such as whether neutrinos have finite masses or different masses for
different neutrino flavor transitions. This study addresses a very important
fundamental question in physics. The Taiwan National Science Council will
provide $200,000 for the first year of this experiment and one million dollars
per year for next four years if the initial experiment proves to be promising.
It is an exploratory project with potential major scientific payoff. The
majority of the laboratory and research cost will be provided by the Taiwan
National Science Council and the Taiwan Power Company. If successful,
experimental results may lead to answers to questions on fundamental properties
of neutrinos and to cosmological puzzles such as the deficit of solar neutrinos
and the properties of dark matter. The project is jointly supported by the
Taiwan National Science Council and the NSF. ***