* 9619786
* Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) in Rural       Transportation Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/1997,03/31/1999
* Sandra Parker, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 03/31/1999
* USD 113,776.00

9619786 Butler ABSTRACT The University of Arkansas (UofA) has become a primary
rural transportation research center through the existence of the Mack-Blackwell
National Rural Transportation Center (MBTC). The MBTC is a collaborative effort
of several colleges and departments at the University of Arkansas and other
colleges and universities, corporations, and government entities. The MBTC
focuses on education, research and technology transfer to improve the quality of
rural life through transportation. The primary engineering departments involved
with the MBTC at the University of Arkansas are Industrial, Civil, and Computer
Systems. The aforementioned departments have utilized undergraduate researchers
in numerous research projects and would like to be able to involve more
undergraduate students in research projects. Thus, it is proposed that a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site be developed at the
University of Arkansas which will focus on rural transportation engineering
research. The proposed program will increase the participation of undergraduate
researchers on rural transportation research projects and will facilitate
significant interaction between faculty and graduate and undergraduate students.
The MBTC has sponsored many research projects which examine the various aspects
of rural transportation. The projects have involved social, economic
psychological, technical, managerial, logistical and operational issues and thus
have facilitated interdisciplinary studies. The proposed REU will incorporate
projects from several different engineering departments with each project having
as its central them rural transportation. This REU is unique in that a rural
transportation research focus is taken that involves faculty advisors from
several disciplines working together to find the most effective and economical
methods of transportation to benefit rural living. ***