* 9619345
* Knowledge-Based Image Retrieval with Spatial and Temporal   Constructs
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1997,12/31/2001
* Wesley Chu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/2001
* USD 461,563.00

This research project employs a knowledge-based approach to retrieve medical
images by feature and content with spatial and temporal constructs. Selected
objects of interest in a medical image (e.g. x-ray, MR image) are segmented, and
contours are generated from these objects. Features (e.g., shape, size) and
content (e.g., spatial relationships among objects) are extracted and stored in
a feature and content database. Knowledge about image features can be expressed
as a hierarchical structure called a Type Abstraction Hierarchy (TAH). A
knowledge-based semantic image model is developed which consists of four layers
(raw data layer, feature and content layer, schema layer, and knowledge layer)
to represent the various aspects of an image objects' characteristics. The model
provides a mechanism for accessing and processing spatial, evolutionary, and
temporal queries. A knowledge-based spatial temporal query language (KSTL) is
formed which supports operators for approximate matching via feature and
content, conceptual terms, and temporal logic predicates. Further, a visual
query language is also developed that accepts point-click-and-drag visual iconic
input on the screen that maps into KSTL. The results from this research are
applicable to a variety of multimedia information systems.