* 9619509
* An REU Site in Civil Engineering and Geological Sciences at the University of Notre Dame 97-99
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Stephen Silliman, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 02/28/2001
* USD 160,500.00

9619509 Silliman ABSTRACT This proposal seeks an NSF Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site in the Department of Civil Engineering and Geological
Sciences at the University of Notre Dame. The site will be focused in
mitigation/reduction of natural and man-made hazards. The NSF support for 10
undergraduate students each year will allow them to become involved in the
research activities of the faculty of the Department during the summers of 1997
through 1999. This experience is designed to provide students with an improved
understanding of research and to encourage them to consider careers in research.
Support for this REU site will supplement the commitment of the Department to
such research activities, and provide students with the opportunity to
participate in ongoing cutting-edge research projects. The research activities
span the areas of expertise of the faculty in Civil Engineering and Geological
Sciences and include projects in water resources, bioengineering and pollution
control, and structural mechanics. Components of the program include
identification of exceptional students through nationwide recruitment with
emphasis on women and minority participation; matching of student research
interests with faculty; close interaction of graduate students and faculty with
the undergraduates to provide students with a fuller appreciation of graduate
study, university research, and careers in academia; an intense two month
research experience; and a mini-conference for presentation of results. The goal
of the program is to excite some of the best engineering students in the nation
about the challenges of a career in research. ***