* 9619308
* Module Based Multimedia Courseware Development for Power    System Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2000
* Jaime De La Ree, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2000
* USD 99,900.00

ECS-9619308 Phadke The objective of this collaborative project between Iowa
State University (ISU) and Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VPI) is to provide a
course development approach to power system engineering that allows flexibility
to today's fast-changing educational and industrial environment, increases
teaming efficiency via computer usage, builds on cooperative teaming methods,
modernizes course content, induces industry participation in academic course
design, extends power system education into other engineering fields, and
contributes towards attracting the very best students. We will accomplish these
goals via implementation of a modular course development approach whereby power
systeni-related teaming packets, called basic modules, are developed in the
proposed work. These basic modules, maintained and disseminated via the VyrEB,
will each consist of a presentation, a library, and at least one MATLAB-based
simulator. Each basic module is self-contained yet narrow enough to be included
as a component in quickly and easily developing a set of course material, and
module modification is simple, thereby allowing for module adaptation in
tailoring one or more to a specific need. A clear and realistic plan for
obtaining industry participation in module development is provided whereby
industry is involved in the specification of the modules and ultimately their
use through mini-courses held for employees. We expect to provide a new
direction in power systems education that will stimulate and motivate interest
simultaneously from prospective and present students and engineers in industry,
providing a linkage that is critical for maintaining quality power programs and
producing highly educated engineers. Our approach is also appropriate for use in
other engineering disciplines, and we expect the interdisciplinary outreach
embedded in this work will result in its wide dissemination, simultaneously
offering the additional benefit of integrating power system problems into other
curric ula.