* 9619854
* Theory of Dense Hydrogen and Correlated Quantum and         Classical Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Neil Ashcroft, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/28/2001
* USD 309,000.00

9619854 Ashcroft This theoretical grant supports a broad-based research program
dealing with various properties of condensed matter systems. There are three
specific topics to be studied: dense and metallic hydrogen; general many-body
theory; and, density functional theory. Theoretical studies will be done on
dense and metallic hydrogen and will include transport properties of dense fluid
hydrogen; novel broken symmetry states; pairing of pairs; and, persistence of
proton-pairing. Under general many-body theory, topics will include effective
electron- electron interactions in reduced dimensions; instabilities in layered
systems; two-component quantum systems and generalized scaling; revisiting
lithium as a model system for Eliashberg equations of superconductivity; and,
helium in a periodic field. Topics in density functional theory will include
studies of fullerenes and intercalated fullerenes; the Born-Green equation; the
average-ion mixing rule; statistical description of the dynamic crystalline
state; and, coarse graining and the inhomogeneous electron gas. %%% This
theoretical grant involves research on a wide variety of topics from condensed
matter physics - the study of atoms and molecules in condensed states such as
liquids and solids. Of particular current interest will be the study of
hydrogen, the most abundant element in the universe and usually in a gaseous
state, and its properties as it enters a metallic state in which it can conduct
electricity. Other topics of study will include superconductivity and the study
of fullerenes - a new form of carbon. ***