* 9619886
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Environmental     Monitoring and Modeling
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Deborah Nelson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 01/31/2000
* USD 183,891.00

9619886 Nelson ABSTRACT The University of Oklahoma School of Civil Engineering
and Environmental Science (CEES) proposes an 8-week REU at an interdisciplinary
research site at a closed landfill in Norman, OK, with the goal of encouraging
undergraduates to pursue research careers. Women, minorities, disabled persons,
and students at other institutions are the primary focus. Our objectives are to
(1) allow participation in active environmental research with an
interdisciplinary team, (2) encourage student-student and student-faculty
interaction through the formation of 2 student research teams, (3) provide
valuable field and laboratory research skills, and (4) maintain longterm contact
with students to encourage research careers. Although a separate project, the
REU will capitalize on NSF-funded research at the landfill. A common theme of
REU activities is understanding the physical, chemical, and biological processes
that transform the landfill environment. Student Team I will characterize the
physical state of ground and surface water at the landfill, and develop a
predictive, physics-based model. Soil cores extracted from the landfill will be
characterized, and kringing will be used to develop a complete soil map of the
landfill cap. Plant species will be enumerated, and evapo-transpiration
measured. Students will learn to utilize meteorologic and soil moisture data
obtained through remote sensing. Geographical information information systems
(GIS) will be calibrated and verified with site-specific data. Students will
also assist in evaluation of hydrodynamic processes via a forced characteristics
of the leachate from the landfill, and examine chemical and biological
interactions between soil and dissolved organic compounds present in the
leachate. Soil column will examine interactions of leachate with soil, and pre-
and post-column leachate samples will be analyzed with GC/MS and HPLC to study
biodegradation and bioavailability. Results will be used to conduct human health
a nd ecological risk assessments. Other student activities will include 24-hour
safety training, field trips to an EPA lab and a Superfund site, and
presentation of research results at the annual Norman landfill conference. ***