* 9619021
* EPWG:  Sisters in Science:  Intergenerational Partnerships  in Science, Engineering and Mathematics Education
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2003
* Penny Hammrich, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 07/31/2003
* USD 842,432.00

9619021 Hammrich The proposed multi-faceted initiative is designed to increase
science/math literacy of fourth and fifth grade girls, contribute to the
professional growth of current and future teachers, and increase the involvement
of volunteers and families in the education of Philadelphia's children. Building
linkages among schools, parents, community members, and SEM-related
organizations is an underlying strategy that ultimately will impact on the long
term sustainability of this project. By enhancing the capacity of current and
future teachers, families, and volunteers, to promote science and math literacy
among girls, the project will supplement other systemic initiatives recently
begun by Temple University and the Philadelphia School District. "Sisters in
Science" builds upon a successful multi-generational model project funded by
National Science Foundation. The overall goal of the proposed project is to
increase interest and literacy in science and mathematics among grade school
African American, Asian, and Hispanic girls in six Philadelphia urban schools.
Specific objectives include increasing girls' interest in science and
mathematics and enhancing their attitudes toward science and mathematics. The
project involves the girls, their families, and their teachers in the targeted
schools, and undergraduate elementary education students. Retirees and minority
women currently employed in SEM fields will serve as volunteers. Boys will be
involved in the classroom component of the project. The project is to provide a
two-year intervention at a crucial juncture in the formation of girls' attitudes
toward and achievement in science and mathematics. In Year 1, the program
involves students, parents, and teachers in two 4th grade classes in each of the
six elementary schools. In Year 2, these students (now 5th graders) continue to
engage in program activities, while a new group of 4th graders enters the
program. The same process occurs in Year 3. It is anticipated that this th ird
4th grade group will continue the program after the grant period has ended. The
project has five components: (1) Teacher training. Teachers will participate in
a one-week intensive professional development program and monthly curriculum
planning meetings that familiarize them with gender equity issues and teaching
strategies that facilitate girls' learning of science and math. (2) The
classroom activities take place once a week for one hour in each of the
designated classrooms. The PI, undergraduate elementary education students, and
volunteers will work with classroom teachers to implement activities that are
gender-sensitive and focused on the urban environment. (3) The after-school
program for the fourth grade girls is weekly at each of the schools and involves
girls in environmental service learning projects. The after-school program for
the fifth grade girls meets twice monthly on Saturdays at each school. (4) A
two-week summer program focuses on "city rivers." (5) Family education. Special
family events will be held on a quarterly basis and parents will be sent "Tip
Sheets" and home activity ideas on a regular basis.