* 9619195
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Rising Political       Participation of Senior Citizens:  The Role of the American Welfare State
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Henry Brady, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1999
* USD 12,000.00

Assertions have long been made in the comparative politics literature of
political science that social movements and interest groups shape welfare state
outcomes. In the current era of fiscal constraint and welfare state
retrenchment, elected politicians seek to support programs championed by vocal
interest groups and politically active beneficiaries while cutting programs that
benefit the politically quiescent. While plausible, such assertions have not
been backed by evidence. This Doctoral Dissertation research project
demonstrates, in the American case, that senior citizens, through their high
rates of political participation, have been able to perpetuate their welfare
state benefits while groups at lower levels of participation, such as the poor,
have suffered program cuts. Thus, the political participation of senior citizens
constrains governmental decision-making and shapes welfare state outcomes
because elected officials fear retribution from this vigilant and active group.
This dissertation project will employs a particularly valuable dataset, a series
of 211 national cross-sectional surveys conducted by the Roper Organization ten
times per year from September, 1973, through October, 1994. Each of the 211
surveys contains a battery of 12 participation questions, most of which are
unavailable in other longitudinal surveys. This project produces a concatenated
dataset of the twelve participatory acts and available political and social
covariates, a unique resource of 211 nearly monthly readings of political
participation in America. When publicly released, this dataset will provide a
valuable addition to the political participation survey repertoire. For this
project, the dataset is crucial for three reasons: it contains participatory
acts like petition-signing and letter-writing unavailable in any other
longitudinal dataset; encompasses the time period of interest, when seniors
overtook nonseniors in their rates of participation as evidenced in other data;
and, is the only monthly participation data available, which will show that
senior participation is responsive to specific threats to welfare state
programs. This Doctoral Dissertation research project promises to produce and
interesting and important dataset for use by other scholars.