* 9619665
* Environmental Engineering Research Experiences for          Undergraduates Site at Michigan Technological University
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Kurtis Paterson, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 01/31/2000
* USD 287,638.00

9619665 Paterson ABSTRACT The proposed three year project provides
opportunities, stipends, and support for ten undergraduate students to be
involved in ongoing research projects each summer in the Environmental
Engineering Program at Michigan Technological University. The project intends to
recruit students who: (1) are under-represented in the field (minorities and
women), (2) are undergraduates at other institutions, and (3) may not have
opportunities to conduct research at their undergraduate institutions. Student
participants will be between their junior and senior years with the purpose of
motivating the students to pursue graduate education. The program will include:
(1) a research project that is a self-contained part of a larger project, (2)
mentoring by a project faculty and graduate student, (3) regular project
meeting, (4) a weekly seminar series covering many aspects of environmental
engineering and graduate student life, (5) weekly educational tours to provide
first-hand contact with environmental problems and solutions, (6) a community
project to foster teamwork and social awareness, (7) a final report written by
the undergraduate researcher, and (8) a concluding symposium to provide all
participants and the public to learn from the student research presentations.
Research will be in all areas of environmental engineering; atmospheric systems
and air pollution control, surface water quality and water resources,
environmental systems modeling, pollution prevention, environmental chemistry,
wastewater, solid waste and hazardous wastes, and groundwater and subsurface
remediation. Faculty and students will be paired according to the interests of
student and faculty, needs of the faculty, and abilities of the student. ***