* 9619714
* Mathematical Sciences: Research Experience in Computational Group Theory and Hyperbolic Geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,08/31/2001
* Allen Broughton, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

An Undergraduate research experience for six students over seven weeks.
Computational group theory methods are employed to explore the geometry of
hyperbolic Riemann surfaces tiled by triangles and the induced tilings of the
hyperbolic plane. All tilings considered generate large symmetry groups of the
surface, and the geometrical and combinatorial properties of the tiling are
strongly reflected in the structure of the group and the groupOs action on the
geometry. The geometric and combinatorial problems need to be solved by massive
computations in the symmetry groups, as it is very difficult to visually
represent the complexities of these tilings. Motivated by these problems,
students will perform group theoretic experiments, make discoveries and
formulate conjectures by carrying out computer calculations using the software
package MAGMA. The end goal will be to discover and prove theorems about the
geometry and combinatorics of the surfaces and, of course, anything about groups
discovered along the way. In addition to this technical program, students will
be engaged in a companion program to develop their oral and written mathematical
communication skills, collaborative, and other professional skills. This will be
accomplished through required oral presentations and technical reports on their
work and a close, positive working environment among the students and the P.I.
in the Theorodrome, the computer laboratory/workplace devoted to the REU.