* 9619313
* Development of the Capability to Measure Proxies of         Microbial Activity Within Oceanic Crust
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Fabien Kenig, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 02/29/2000
* USD 31,913.00

This collaborative technology development project will be undertaken by
investigators at the Universities of Hawaii, Washington, and Illinois-Chicago.
Specialized seafloor instrumentation will be developed to test for the presence
of a sub-seafloor biosphere hundreds of meters below the water-rock interface,
by detecting specific metabolic products which accompany the hydrothermal fluids
as they vent from the crust into the overlying seawater. To test the sub-surface
biosphere hypothesis, an instrumented "bio- blanket" will be built and deployed
that isolates a small area of surface rock from seawater, and focuses up-welling
fluid through scavenging columns that serve as traps for metabolic (organic
carbon) products which are associated with these sub-surface microbial
communities. These diagnostic organic compounds should accompany the
hydrothermal fluid that is known to circulate within the upper crustal rocks and
eventually discharges into the overlying seawater at diffuse vent sites in
exposed rock outcrops. The proposed instrumented blanket would also measure up-
welling temperatures and velocities as the fluid vents into seawater. The
development of the bio-blanket will be in several graduated stages, with the
initial deployments being carried out at a ridge axis, where the fluid flux
levels are substantial, and the dissolved carbon metabolic concentrations are
relatively high. The direct detection of a wide-spread biological community,
living within the sub-surface ocean floor would dramatically alter estimates of
biological productivity and the global carbon budgets, and have a profound
impact on our philosophical view of the earth.