* 9619160
* Family Change During Adolescence and School Performance
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Gary Sandefur, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2000
* USD 108,856.00

9619160 Sandefur This project studies the effects of family structure, more
specifically the presence or absence of parents, and changes in family structure
during the high schools on high school graduation and college attendance. Using
data from the National Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS), the project
follows the 8th grade students (in 1988) for five years (through 1994). By 1994,
these individuals have had the opportunity to complete high school or obtain an
alternative high school certification through testing (i.e., Graduate
Equivalency Degree--GED), and begin college. Using data from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID), the project follows individuals from age 13-21. Some
individuals in the samples have completed high school and begun college, while
others have not completed high school or obtained a GED. The research studies
the changes in family composition during this critical period in the life cycle
when most individuals are completing their secondary educational experiences and
making decisions about post-high school activities, and the association between
these changes and the educational achievement of the individuals. In addition,
the research will explore the association of changes in family structure with
five key sets of mediating variables: family income, residential mobility and
school changing, social capital, self concept and locus of control, and behavior
in school. Finally, the research will examine the ways in which these mediating
variables help to account for the association between changes in family
structure and educational attainment. ***