* 9619306
* Restructuring Power Engineering Education to Meet New       Challenges
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Badrul Chowdhury, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 04/30/2001
* USD 215,762.00

ECS-9619306 Chowdhury Changes in the utility operating structure, increased
competition in a deregulated environment, lower margins of stability and
constrained expansion plans are all trends that point to future developments
that should provide ample challenge for engineers throughout the industry, On
the other hand, advances in power electronics, computer science and
microprocessor technology are opening doors for power engineers to provide
practical solutions to problems. Expanded automation of transmission and
distribution systems will be an important key to making the best use of utility
resources in the future. The development of semiconductor devices for high
voltage, high current applications, the so-called second silicon revolution, is
already bringing about fundamental changes in industrial equipment and utility
networks, The intent of the proposed project is to steer the power engineering
curriculum to meet these new challenges. The overall objectives are to form a
coalition of industry practitioners and academic personnel to examine long-term
educational needs in the power engineering discipline. The plans will include
(1) curriculum changes to incorporate changing trends in the industry, (2) new
educational tools, such as simulators and innovative software for computation
and visualization, (3) computer-aided laboratory exercises, (4) computer-
enhanced classroom lectures, (5) creating active learning environment by
introducing concepts of learning-by-doing, (6) involving the community colleges
in distance courses, and (7) involving high schools students in summer programs.
We firmly believe that there is a need to teach more breadth of topics and
spread the topics in power engineering over a number of courses outside of the
core power courses. Learning can be enhanced if the application of a specific
concept ties sub-disciplines of electrical engineering together. We need the
cooperation of industry representatives who can guide us to implement progra ms
that are practical and useful. The deliverables in this project will include
software that are appropriate for student use in labs and classroom; the design
of a simulator for studying the performance of FACTS devices; and the
methodology of the course restructuring process.