* 9619281
* Dissertation Research:  Grouping Patterns and Foraging      Strategies in Two Sympatric Mangabey Species
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Diane Doran, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/1999
* USD 11,000.00

This study will investigate the determinants of group size, cohesion, and inter-
group spacing in two mangabey species, Cercocebus galeritus agilis and
Cercocebus albigena, that live in the same areas of the Mondika Research
Station, Central African Republic. These two mangabey species reportedly differ
in their grouping patterns despite their morphological and ecological
similarities. C. albigena reportedly lives in relatively stable social units,
whereas C. galeritus groups often fragment into subgroups, yet at other times
aggregate into large hordes (or 'supergroups'). The study proposed here will
test hypotheses of how specific ecological factors (such as fluctuations in food
availability) and social factors (such as dominance hierarchies, and the
presence of infants and estrus females) influence group size, cohesion, and
spacing. Methods will include behavioral sampling of the two mangabey species as
well as ecological sampling to monitor the availability of food in their
environment. Results of this study will enhance our understanding of the
evolution of primate sociality. In addition, this study will provide the first
long-term data on social organization and foraging strategies in two sympatric
mangabey species. The behavioral data collected can be used with morphological
and molecular data to address the puzzling issue of mangabey phylogeny and
affinities with other old world monkeys such as baboons and macaques.