* 9619875
* CRB: The Role of Diversity in Ecosystem Function
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1997,08/31/2001
* John Callaway, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dr. Carol Johnston
* 08/31/2001
* USD 254,953.00

9619875 Zedler Conservation biologists focus on protecting biodiversity and
ecosystem management, yet there is little understanding of the linkage between
the numbers of species present and how an ecosystem functions. Recent
experiments demonstrate that where more species are present, biomass is higher,
more nutrients are retained, and drought resistance is greater. Unanswered are
questions regarding the type of species, the impacts on the most critical
functions, and how knowledge of diversity-function relationships might be used
to improve habitat restoration efforts. An unusual opportunity exists to
facilitate field experimentation with salt marsh vegetation in the Tijuana
Estuary in southern California and to make the results of these experiments
relevant to restoration ecology. A new restoration site, a salt marsh plain,
will be excavated in 1996 at the Tijuana River National Estuarine Research
Reserve. Experiments designed to investigate the effects of species richness and
composition on ecosystem function will be conducted at this site. Results from
these experiments will then be directly applied to the restoration project. The
test of how species richness affects ecosystem functioning relates directly to
the basic conservation tenet that diversity matters. Beyond this, the work will
have an impact on restoration ecology. Determining whether monospecific types or
specific combinations of species provide desired ecosystem functions will
suggest tools for accelerating nitrogen accumulation. The importance of
restoration for purposes of sustaining southern California's biodiversity is
indicated by the magnitude of mitigation funds being required to restore coastal
wetlands. Furthermore, locating the field experiments in the Research Reserve
will facilitate follow-up studies of long-term community dynamics, including
colonization by other plant and animal species.