* 9619750
* Undergraduate Research Experiences in Electrical Engineeringat the University of Minnesota
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2002
* Douglas Ernie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2002
* USD 500,542.00

9619750 Lucke ABSTRACT As we enter the 21st century, it is essential that a more
culturally diverse group of individuals be encouraged to pursue careers in
science and engineering. Consequently, the primary objective of this REU site
program in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of
Minnesota will be to provide women and minority undergraduates, and
undergraduates from non-research universities, with a challenging and rewarding
introduction to research in electrical engineering. Because our Department's
current efforts involving undergraduate research experiences focus mainly on our
own undergraduates, we intend to utilize the REU site program as a vehicle to
involve students from outside the University of Minnesota, with a strong
emphasis on recruiting women and underrepresented minorities. The program
centers around a ten week intensive summer research experience in which students
will be paired with faculty mentors. The main focus of the students'
participation will be through active involvement in research with complementary
educational activities, including a weekly seminar series focusing on their
research projects, career seminars/field trips, and specialized workshops on
assorted topics. As a capstone to their REU experience, each student will
prepare a final written report and give a presentation at a concluding poster
session. Social interaction between students and faculty will be enhanced
through organized parties/outings, with additional student-student interaction
provided by the community living environment in the dormitory housing
arrangements. Continued follow-up contact with the students after the ten week
summer program will provide for additional student involvement in the research
community and for evaluation and refinement of the program. ***