* 9619353
* Modelling Adhesion and Adhesive Metal Transfer to Improve   Aluminum Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1997,09/30/2002
* James Adams, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/2002
* USD 294,478.00

9619353 Adams This award is a GOALI (Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison
with Industry) grant which is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research
and Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences' Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities. It involves collaborative research between Arizona
State University and ALCOA. The grant has two objectives. One objective is to
use density functional theory methods to determine adhesive energies between
aluminum alloys and selected tool coating materials. The electronic structure of
each system will be analyzed to determine the critical factors that control
adhesion. This study will yield the first reliable database on metal-coating
adhesion energies, including the effect of the most common alloying elements
(Cu, Mg, Si, Mn, Zn). This database will serve as an invaluable design tool for
almost all aluminum manufacturing processes that involve load transmission
through tooling/workpiece interface. The second objective of the research is to
simulate adhesive metal transfer at the atomic scale. This will involve some
small-scale quantum molecular dynamics simulations, and some larger-scale
empirical molecular dynamics simulations. Simulations will focus on small scale
plastic deformation during bulk forming processes. Finally, based on results of
this work, selected coating materials will be tested by the ALCOA adhesive wear
research group using an adhesion balance in ultrahigh vacuum. Altogether, these
studies will aid in the selection of coating materials for aluminum forming
processes such as rolling, extrusion, forging and continuous casting. %%% This
award is a GOALI (Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry) grant
which is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research and Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences' Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. It
involves collaborative research between Arizona State University and ALCOA. The
grant has two objectives. Firs t, calculations will be made of the strength of
adhesion between aluminum alloys and various materials which are used for
coatings in aluminum processing. These results will be helpful in designing
aluminum manufacturing processes. Second, simulations of adhesive metal transfer
at the atomic level will be done. The focus will be on plastic deformation
during metal forming. The results of the calculations and simulations will be
tested in ALCOA laboratories. ***