* 9619606
* Collaborative Research:  RIDGE: Dispersal Potential of      Hydrothermal Vent Animals: Larval Energetics, Depth         Regulation and Field Distribution
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Craig Young, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2001
* USD 397,608.00

Young 9619606 The dynamic habitats at deep-sea hydrothermal vents are
temporally ephemeral and often separated from the nearest comparable habitats by
hundreds-to-thousands of kilometers. Nevertheless, the physiologically unique
organisms that depend on active vents not only maintain stable populations, but
also colonize new vent sites within months after they appear. This paradox
raises two major unanswered questions about the biology of vent animals: 1) Do
larvae of vent animals disperse between distant vent sites? and 2) If so, how do
they do it? These questions are central to understanding how vent populations
and communities persist over ecological time and how vent species persist over
evolutionary time. Presently, we know virtually nothing about how long larvae of
vent species live in the plankton, how far they disperse, or what biological and
physical parameters influence their dispersal ability. The three Principal
Investigators will combine their expertise in cold-water larval physiology
(Manahan), deep-sea larval ecology (Young) and larval dispersal models near
hydrothermal vents (Mullineaux) to investigate the biological and physical
factors that influence dispersal of vent larvae. This interdisciplinary study
will: 1) develop methods and high-pressure equipment for rearing vent larvae at
in situ pressures and temperatures; 2) measure the metabolic requirements and
changes in energy content during larval development in order to estimate larval
lifespans; 3) characterize the roles of vertical swimming and buoyancy in
determining how larvae position themselves vertically in the field; 4) determine
if the physiological tolerances for pressure and temperature change during
larval development; 5) determine the distribution and abundance of larvae in the
water column above vent sites; and 6) incorporate larval attributes
(distributions, vertical motions, physiological tolerances, metabolic
requirement s and energy stores) into hydrodynamic models developed by
collaborating physical oceanographers to investigate the retention times,
trajectories and fluxes of dispersing larvae. The studies will be the first
comprehensive investigations of the larval biology of the unique hydrothermal
vent fauna and will be conducted near 9N on the East Pacific Rise. This
information will significantly increase our understanding of larvae in deep-sea
environments, while providing data sets for comparison to larval biology in
polar and temperate oceanic regions.