* 9619765
* Applications, Algorithms and Extensions of Complementarity
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Michael Ferris, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 05/31/2000
* USD 150,010.00

Over the past few years, several robust algorithms have been developed for
solving nonlinear mixed complementarity problems, along with software aimed at
making these algorithms accessible to researchers with applications that employ
the complementarity framework. This proposal aims to continue and extend this
work by considering the complete solution process for complementarity modeling
in an interdisciplinary setting. The emphasis of the proposal is on developing
new practical computational methods that will robustly solve the large-scale
engineering and economic problems that will be formulated as part of this
proposal in consultation with application experts. In contrast to much of the
algorithm work that has been carried out to date, the solvers will be augmented
with special purpose techniques that will attempt to automatically convert
models to algorithmically advantageous forms and to diagnose deficiences in a
given model. This will enable much quicker solution of many applications, since
the solution time of an algorithm is typically much less that the time taken to
develop, modify and refine the underlying models. It will be ensured that the
algorithms and tools being developed are general purpose, easy to use and as
informative to the user of the algorithms as possible. A direct interaction with
experts in several application areas will determine how various physical
phenomenon can be succinctly modeled using the notion of complementarity. As
well as providing an automatic translation mechanism to convert nonlinear
programs into mixed complementarity problems. The project will address the use
of the complementarity framework for integrated assessment models in economics
and fracture problems in structural engineering.