* 9620103
* Integrating Research &amp; Education: Diversity Through         Engagement in Research
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2002
* Lee Bollinger, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/2002
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Michigan has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
National Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of Research
and Education. The university has recognized the importance of engaging students
in research experiences early in their undergraduate careers. The university has
begun to implement an institution-wide change process by focusing on female and
minority students, two groups that are traditionally underrepresented in science
and engineering. Through collaborative research with faculty and graduate
students and through the creation of living/learning/research communities, first
and second year students are electing to become and remain science majors in
increasing numbers. The university's efforts to integrate research and education
were designed with specific outcomes in mind: increasing the diversity of
participants in science and engineering through to graduation; building coherent
and lasting communities of students engaged in group inquiry experiences; and
increasing student confidence, performance, and career aspirations. The
university has achieved noteworthy success in attaining these goals. The
university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding, documenting,
and disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three years. Plans for
the use of the award funds include: expanding the linkages between the
undergraduate research program and the Women in Science Residential Program to
extend research experiences into the third and fourth undergraduate years;
evaluating the newly expanded activities; creating and distributing a handbook
for other institutions seeking to establish undergraduate research programs;
workshops for teams from other institutions; developing Web sites; presentations
at professional society meetings; and publication of articles in peer-reviewed
journals.