* 9620113
* Intragroup Socialization and Intergroup Perceptions
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1999
* Carey Ryan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/1999
* USD 27,393.00

Project Description. Intragroup processes and intergroup perceptions have long
been central concerns of social scientists and society in general. Researchers
interested in intragroup processes have examined the process by which new
members are socialized into a group. There has also been considerable research
examining intergroup perceptions. Indeed, the development, representation, and
perceptions of stereotypes about ingroups versus outgroups have been primary
foci of social psychologists for many years. The proposed research is based on
an integration of the literature from these two areas. The proposed research
examines the effects of two features of intragroup socialization on the
stereotypes that new members develop about ingroups and outgroups: new member
uncertainty about being accepted by the group and the use of abstraction- versus
instance-based information. These features of the socialization process will be
experimentally manipulated and their effects on new members' perceptions of
ingroups and outgroups assessed. The outcome of this work will be a more
complete understanding of stereotype change and development and, in particular,
the influence of group socialization on perceptions of ingroups and outgroups.
This work may ultimately help identify ways in which groups can promote more
positive and constructive intergroup perceptions. &amp;&amp;&amp; Project
Justification. Intragroup processes and intergroup perceptions have long been
central concerns of social scientists and society in general. In many groups,
individuals undergo an induction process during which they are socialized by the
group before they can become full-fledged group members. Many occupational
groups, for example, have a probationary period during which new members gain
experience with and information about their own group and relevant outgroups
through on-the-job training, formal training sessions, and informal interactions
with other group members. Thus, perceptions of ingroups and outgroups are likely
to undergo a great deal of change during this time. The proposed research
examines the effects of two features of the induction process on the stereotypes
that new members develop about their ingroups and outgroups. The outcome of this
work will be a more complete understanding of stereotype change and development
and, in particular, how induction into a group affects the perceptions of
ingroups and outgroups that new group members develop. This work may ultimately
help identify ways in which groups can promote more positive and constructive
intergroup perceptions.