* 9620019
* Integrating Research &amp; Education:  Extending and Sharing    Successful Models
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Richard White, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/2001
* USD 500,000.00

Duke University has been selected as one of ten recipients of the National
Science Foundation's Recognition Awards for the Integration of Research and
Education. Duke has embarked on a comprehensive and institution-wide effort to
integrate research and education in the major aspects of university life. A
Center for Teaching and Learning has been established to facilitate: a)
development of discovery-based courses; b) transfer of cognitive research
results on learning styles to classroom practices; and c) evaluate teaching
effectiveness of faculty for consideration in salary, promotion, and tenure
decisions. Campus networking (including dorm rooms) now provides students with
access to Web-based course resources and linkages to faculty research. A
Preparing Future Faculty program seeks to introduce graduate students to
effective teaching methods that engage students in research and discovery-based
activities. A new science building juxtaposes classroom teaching and faculty
research. The university's efforts to integrate research and education were
designed to create a new cultural paradigm on campus. Taken together, Duke
University's basic restructuring of the undergraduate curriculum, creation of a
mechanism that prepares graduate students to excel in their future teaching, and
a significant revision of the faculty appraisal system represent profound
change. The university is being awarded $500,000 with the goal of expanding,
documenting, and disseminating its exemplary practices over the coming three
years. Plans for the use of the award funds include: creating and implementing
two new science and technology course clusters; implementing a senior capstone
experience; expanding the summer orientation program for graduate teaching
assistants; conducting an on-campus dissemination workshop for sharing program
results; and conducting a three-day national conference to disseminate the Duke
University model.