* 9622974
* Mathematical Sciences:  Ergodic Theory and Applications     in Combinatorial Number Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Michael Boshernitzan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1998
* USD 44,923.00

Abstract Boshernitzan The central subject in this proposal is diophantine
properties of iet's (interval exchange transformations). Boshernitan's approach
in the study of iet's, contrary to the 'global' approaches of others (H.Masur,
W.Veech etc.), makes special emphasis on the way diophantine and algebraic
properties of the parameters involved may affect the dynamical properties of an
iet. Many results in analytical number theory are extendable to iet's. For
example, Boshernitzan's recent result, joint with C.Carroll, that minimal iet's
over a quadratic field must be pseudo-Anosof (self-similar) can be viewed as an
extension of the classical Lagrange's result on the periodicity of the continued
fraction representations of quadratic irrationals. Perhaps the most outstanding
conjecture in this direction is obtained from an attempt to extend to iet's the
famous Roth's theorem on the rate algebraic irrationals can be approximated by
the rationals. (The analogue of the corresponding Liouville's theorem is true.)
One of the tools at Boshernitzan's disposal in tackling the above problems is
his recent discovery of a connection between the rate of recurrence of typical
orbits in dynamical systems and the Hausdorff dimension of the space
(quantitative version of Poincare recurrence theorem). For iet's, this
connection works both directions. The same is true in many other situations
(Y.Peres, D.Ornstein, B.Weiss). The list of other Boshernitzan's interests
includes number theory, billiards in polygons, ergodic theorems along
subsequences of integers, Hardy fields (joint projects with M.Wierdl, D.Berend,
G.Kolesnik, I.Kornfeld and V.Bergelson). Because of the basic nature of the
present research proposal, it is hard at this point to assess accurately the
fields of possible applications. Among the subject which may benefit from our
research I would only mention the possibility of creation of new code
compression schemes useful in computer technology ( related to our discovery of
quantitative version of Poincare recurrence theorem) and possible applications
to laser technology (research with I. Kornfeld on interval translation maps).