* 9622802
* Mathematical Sciences:  Study of Pulse Propagation in       Birefringent Nonlinear Optical Fibers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Jianke Yang, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

9622802 Yang The objective of this project is to study the propagation and
interaction of optical pulses in birefringent nonlinear optical fibers. In such
fibers, nonlinearity, dispersion and birefringence all play an important role,
and the pulse evolution can be modelled mathematically by two coupled nonlinear
Schroedinger equations. In this project, we will study the propagation of such
pulses by examining the solution properties of these coupled equations. In
particular, we will thoroughly investigate the internal oscillations, radiation
and interaction of these pulses. A combination of analytical and numerical
methods will be used. The analytical methods include Hirota's method and the
perturbation methods. Hirota's method will be used to study the interaction
behaviors of the optical pulses. The perturbation methods will be used to study
their internal oscillations and radiation. The numerical methods will be used to
check the analytical results as well as to deal with cases where analytical
methods are not appropriate. The proposed research will provide theoretical
guidance to the design of the fast-speed fiber-optic telecommunication systems.
In addition, it will develop new analytical methods for studying non-integrable
wave systems. %%% This project will study the propagation and interaction of
optical pulses in birefringent nonlinear optical fibers. It is motivated by the
ongoing experiments on high-speed fiber-optic telecommunication systems using
solitonian pulses as information bits. It will address some basic theoretical
questions arising in the design of such telecommunication systems. For instance,
it will study the stability and degradation of pulse signals travelling along
the optical fibers. Its results will contribute to the realization of the
underlying new communication systems which could revolutionize the whole field
of long-distance information transmission. ***