* 9622269
* Comparisons via Stochastic Simulation, with Applications    to Manufacturing and Services
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1996,12/31/2000
* David Goldsman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 12/31/2000
* USD 170,669.00

Goldsman 9622269 A great many manufacturing and service systems are so complex
that the only analysis tool is discrete-event-stochastic simulation. Although
simulation is a powerful tool, it suffers from the shortcoming that it is an
experimental (not analytical) analysis and requires proper statistical analysis
of its output. Since here, the experimenter has complete control over the
experimental environment, much of classical statistics, with its emphasis on
independent observations, is not applicable, as it often behooves the
experimenter to purposely introduce correlation as a variance reduction
technique. This research concerns development of procedures to screen a large
number of systems, to find the best system, to compare alternative systems to a
known standard and to compare alternative systems to a default. There are many
classical ranking and selection procedures, but again, these assume the usual
independence assumptions that are not always present in discrete-event,
stochastic simulation. Most of the classical procedures also assume normality of
output data, and are developed to measure population means only. More often than
not, output data from stochastic simulations are not normal, and often, measures
other than mean responses, are of interest (e.g., the probability of an item
spending more than t months in production). Statistical efficiency, functional
relationships among systems to be compared, non-standard performance measures,
basic theory and implementation in the form of incorporation into existing
popular commercial simulation software will be considered in the research. With
the advent of easy-to-use simulation software, it is relatively easy to model a
rather complex system via discrete-event-stochastic system simulation. However,
most packages have no really adequate statistical analysis software built-in.
What this research will accomplish is not only the development of appropriate
and efficient statistical procedures, but also procedures which can be in
corporated into software packages and will be transparent to the users,
providing significant advancement for this very important area for studying
complex manufacturing and service systems.