* 9622730
* Spectral and Asymptotoc Problems of Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Evans Harrell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

Abstract Harrell 9622730 This project is concerned with the mathematical
analysis of several problems in spectral theory of differential operators
arising in quantum physics and reaction-diffusion. It is hoped that the results
will be of real use to physicists, while remaining in the realm of rigorous and
original functional analysis or differential-equations theory. Many of the
particular issues have to do with resonances and metastability, or with
connections among geometry, operator algebra, and spectra. The first specific
topic in the proposal concerns the eigenvalues of Schroedinger operators where
the potential energy involves curvature. This sounds abstract, but it actually
originates in the analysis of the shapes of phase regions of bistable metallic
alloys. The second topic looks at certain purely algebraic identities recently
discovered by Harrell and Stubbe, which turn out to apply, sharply, to the
partition function (= trace of the heat kernel), among other spectral
expressions. The third topic has to do with semiclassical analysis, an area in
which Harrell has worked for several years, but new features include magnetic
fields and time-dependent interactions. The final topic has to do with local
properties of eigenfunctions, such as their nodes, and some inverse problems
involving them. Mathematical machinery to be called upon ncludes perturbation
theory, asymptotics, and variational analysis. This project is concerned with
the mathematical analysis of several problems in physics, especially the physics
of atoms, molecules, semiconductors, and metallic alloys. Many of the particular
problems have to do with resonances and with metastable (slowly changing)
phenomena, and others have to do with the role of geometry in these areas of
physics. The goal of the research is to produce something new and useful to
working physicists and at the same time to elucidate the mathematical structure
which the physical theory relies on. The first specific topic in the proposa l
is to make estimates of the "normal modes" of an equation like those in quantum
mechanics, but where the potential energy involves curvature. This sounds like
an abstract mathematical problem, but it actually originates in the analysis of
metallic regions with two different stable phases, when one tries to find the
shapes of the regions with one or other phase. The second topic looks at certain
purely algebraic identities recently discovered by Harrell and Stubbe, which
turn out to apply to one of the central functions of statistical mechanics. The
third topic has to do with the differences between the theory of quantum
mechanics and the theory of classical physics, which applies to our world on a
larger scale. Harrell has worked in this area for several years; new innovations
include incorporating magnetism. The final topic has to do with some poorly
understood local properties of quantum mechanical wavefunctions, and how
measuring them might establish what sorts of forces are present. The methods
used come from both pure and applied mathematics, and physics.