* 9622997
* Mathematical Sciences:  The Geometry of Optimal             Transportation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Robert McCann, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 76,728.00

Abstract McCann 9622997 This proposal focuses on the analysis of a long-standing
problem which arises in economics and operations research as well as probability
and statistics. Given two distributions (f and g) of mass over a Riemannian
manifold M, the problem is to determine the most efficient way to rearrange the
mass of the first distribution to yield the second. Efficiency is measured
against a function c(x,y) which specifies the cost per unit mass for
transporting material from x to y --- so the problem can be formulated as a
linear program. However, when the cost function is related to the metrical
distance between pairs of points on M, then the problem has a rich structure and
deep connections to geometry and non-linear partial differential equations which
have only begun to be explored. For costs which are either convex or concave
functions of this distance, the goal would be to find a map from the manifold to
itself which minimizes the total transportation costs, among maps pushing the
measure f forward to g. Even on the line, this map can be intricate. Recent
developments in Euclidean space suggest some promising questions to explore:
What conditions guarantee existence and uniqueness of an optimal mapping? What
geometrical or analytic properties characterize the optimal maps? Can this
geometry be exploited fruitfully in applications? The motivation for this
research is illustrated by an example from economics: Given a distribution of
iron mines throughout the countryside, and a distribution of factories which
require iron ore, decide which mines should supply ore to each factory in order
to minimize the total transportation costs. The mines and factories lie on a
curved space M, like the surface of the earth, but general enough to include
barriers to transportation such as lakes and mountain ranges; the cost per ton
for transporting ore from any mine to factory is determined by the distance
measured between them in thi s space. Aside from industrial applications, the
solution to this problem should yield new understanding of existing patterns in
the economy, and may prove useful for infrastructure planning. Because of its
close relationship to several areas of pure mathematics, the research promises
to stimulate a fruitful exchange in two directions: powerful mathematics will be
brought to bear on problems from the real word, while concrete solutions to
those problems should provide new insight into the mathematics.