* 9622940
* Performance of Reinforced Concrete Bridge Piers During the  1995 Hyogoken-Nanbu Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2001
* P. Benson Shing, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John Scalzi
* 05/31/2001
* USD 260,015.00

The objective of this proposal is to evaluate the seismic vulnerability of a
bridge through analysis of the entire bridge structure. The data obtained in the
1995 Hyogoken-Nanbu earthquake provide a unique opportunity for researchers to
evaluate the performance of bridge structures under severe earthquake loads and
to advance the state-of-the-art analysis methods for reinforced concrete
bridges. In pursuit of this objective , a joint U.S.-Japan-Europe research
program is formulated. The research tasks are (1) development of viable analysis
techniques for assessing the seismic vulnerability of bridge structures; (2)
investigation of the cause of failure of a selected reinforced concrete bridge
in the Hyogoken-Nanbu earthquake; (3) evaluation of the performance of
reinforced concrete bridges which reflect the current and older designs in the
respective countries under the strong ground motions recorded in the Hyogoken-
Nanbu earthquake; and (4) comparison of bridge designs in the respective
countries. To this end, systematic analyses will be carried out at the local
pier level as well as at the system level for several bridge structures. The
study will be carried out in a complementary and yet independent manner by each
group. This study will result in a better understanding of the behavior of
reinforced concrete highway bridge systems under strong earthquake ground
motions, and will provide viable analysis methods which can be used to evaluate
the local as well as global performance of bridge structures. These analysis
tools can be used to evaluate the seismic vulnerability of bridge structures in
a rational and definitive manner, and, in the future, to evaluate the
efficiencies of various seismic retrofit techniques. The lessons learned from
the Hyogoken-Nanbu earthquake and the comparison of different design practices
will provide information that can be used to further improve design provisions
on bridges.