* 9622650
* Existence of Quasiconformal Maps and Strongly Uniform       Domains in Space, and Conformal Invariants of Domains and   Integrability of Conformal Maps in the Plane
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Shanshuang Yang, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 70,892.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9622650 PI: Yang This proposal is concerned with two
types of problems. One deals with the problems of characterizing domains (and/or
their boundaries) in spaces on which certain quasiconformal maps exist. Examples
include quasiconformal balls, quasiconformal reflection domains and fixed point
sets of periodic quasiconformal maps. The study of these problems will lead to
better understandings of the general problem regarding where exactly
quasiconformal maps fit as an intermediate class of maps lying between
homeomorphisms and diffeomorphisms, an interesting subject across several
branches of mathematics including analysis, topology and differential geometry.
The methods that will be employed include the usage of the newly introduced
concept of strong uniformity in both homotopy and homology categories. This
project will also involve research to explore more properties and applications
of strongly uniform domains. Another type of problems deals with some conformal
invariants of planar domains related to quasiconformal maps and the
integrability of derivatives of conformal maps of the unit disk. Existing
results indicate that there are close connections between these problems and the
theory of quasiconformal maps in the plane. It is Yang's intention to explore
more connections of this type. The study of these problems will shed new lights
on how quasiconformal mapping theory can be applied to classical complex
analysis. The major theme of this proposal is the investigation of the interplay
between the geometry and topology of geometric figures and the analysis of
various mappings living on those geometric figures. We study how the geometric
shapes of domains, curves, or surfaces affect the analytic properties of certain
functions defined on those objects and vise versa. This may lead to better
understandings of the geometric and analytic structures of objects such as
domains, curves, and surfaces that relate to the physical world.