* 9622781
* Adsorption of Surfactant Mixtures at Solid-Liquid           Interfaces:  A Study of Interactions and Dynamics Using     Spectroscopic, Electrokinetic, and Calorimetric Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1999
* USD 258,995.00

9622781 Somasundaran Surfactants find use in several commercial processes but
the inherent difficulty and excessive costs involved in preparing isomerically
pure surfactants has necessitated the utilization of surfactant mixtures.
Moreover, the performance of mixtures of surfactants is far superior to that of
the individual components which has resulted in the deliberate addition of
surfactant mixtures in many products such as detergents and cosmetics. The
effectiveness of the surfactant in a majority of the application s depends upon
the adsorption (or lack of it) as well as the microstructure of the adsorbed
layers. Much work has been done to understand the mechanisms involved in
determining adsorption of surfactants but very little of it has been with
mixtures of surfactants. The key to the successful design of reagent
combinations depends upon the understanding of the micro and nanostructural
features of surfactant structures formed in solution and at solid-liquid
interfaces coupled with the development of predictive models based upon the
properties of individual components. It is the goal of the proposed research to
investigate the interactions between surfactants of different characteristics
and the micro and nanostructures of the mixed adsorbed layers using a multi-
pronged approach combining classical tools of adsorption, electrokinetics,
wettability and microcalorimetry with modern spectroscopic techniques such
fluorescence, electron spin resonance (ESR), fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching (FRAP), and second harmonic generation (SHG). Fluorescence and
ESR spectroscopy will be used to determine the micropolarity, the microviscosity
and aggregation numbers of the adsorbed layers; FRAP to probe the dynamics
involved; SHG to probe the relative and absolute orientation of the molecules at
the interface. Effects of pH, surfactant structure, salinity, temperature and
perturbations in these parameters will be determined to assist in elucidating
the adsorption mechanisms and associated dynamics. In addition to the
surfactants such as linear alkyl aryl and xylene sulfonates, novel sugar based
environmentally friendly surfactants will be a focus of the study. It is
expected that the multi-pronged experimental and theoretical approach that has
been successfully used for single surfactants will help in developing predictive
useful models for adsorption of surfactant mixtures on solids. ***