* 9622218
* CRB: Faunal Attenuation: Predicting Spatial and Temporal    Dynamics of Refugia in the Lake Victoria Basin
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Leslie Kaufman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 125,000.00

The introduction of exotic species into new habitats has negative effects on
native species including predation on native species by introduced predators. In
Lake Victoria, Uganda, Africa an estimated 50% of the 400+ native species of
fishes have apparently disappeared in the last 15 years. One possible cause is
predation by the introduced Nile perch, Lates niloticus. Previous studies have
identified wetlands as important refuges protecting some fishes from Nile perch
predation. These refugia may have low oxygen levels and structural complexity
that protects adapted fishes by inhibiting perch dispersal into the wetlands.
The objectives of this proposal are to 1) develop a predictive model of fish
species richness and diversity for lagoon refugia; 2) examine the changes of
fish communities in lagoons through field sampling and paleolimnological
techniques; 3) apply predictions derived from small lagoon refugia to larger
satellite lakes; and 4) examine how physical structure and oxygen concentration
of wetlands affects lagoon colonization by Nile perch and prey species. The
identification and protection of refugia has become critical to the survival of
native fauna. This study will help identify characteristics of refugia that
harbor remnant populations and that limit or permit use of refugia. The problems
in the Lake Victoria Basin addressed by the principal investigators are relevant
to the conservation of fishes in many wetland regions and have broader
implications for the conservation of faunal remnants in many systems where taxa
survive in small isolated patches.