* 9622594
* Mathematical Sciences:  Holomorphic Mappings
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Sergey Pinchuk, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 71,975.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9622594 PI: Pinchuk The proposed research will be carried
out in three directions. The first is the study of the conjecture that in
complex n-space any proper holomorphic mapping between bounded domains with real
analytic boundaries extends to a proper holomorphic mapping between
neighborhoods of their closures. In dimension 1 this is a fundamental result
known as the Schwarz Reflection Principle. For n&gt;1 the conjecture has been
proved only in special cases. Pinchuk will use a geometric approach, which is
based on the technique of Segre varieties, and is a powerful new tool to study
various problems in domains with real analytic boundaries. The goal of the first
part of the proposal is to develop the geometric reflection principle for higher
dimensions and prove the conjecture above in general. The second direction is to
apply the technique of Segre varieties together with other geometric methods to
study rigidity phenomena of holomorphic mappings. Namely, Pinchuk plans to
describe domains with noncompact automorphism groups. He will also attack the
related problem that in rather general situations proper holomorphic self-
mappings are biholomorphic. The third direction is the investigation of the so
called Abhyankar Equations (AEs) with respect to the Jacobian Conjecture (JC).
The JC (in the complex case, which is the principal one) claims that any locally
inevitable (biholomorphic) polynomial mapping is globally inevitable. The JC is
one of the most intriguing problems in mathematics. It has been intensively
studied by many mathematicians (including very famous ones) since 1939. A number
of partial results as well as faulty proofs has been published. Most of the
experts believed and still believe that the JC is true. Therefore a recent
counterexample to the real version of the JC, which was constructed by Pinchuk
(using the Aes) came as a surprise. The JC has equivalent formulations in
different areas of mathematics. Among others, its resolution ( positive or
negative) will have implications for the finiteness of inversion formulas, for
the existence of global solutions of certain differential equations, and for
singularities of algebraic sets. The other problems of this proposal are
natural, important, and known as hard problems in several complex variables.
Their solution will became the essential part of the theory of holomorphic
mappings.