* 9622546
* Mathematical Sciences:  Topics in Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Lawrence Ein, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/1999
* USD 63,000.00

EIN Ein proposes to investigate the following and related problems in algebraic
geometry. (1) Linear systems on higher dimensional varieties. One of the basic
tools in investigating the geometry of an algebraic variety is to study the
properties of the linear systems on the variety. Ein (jointly with R.
Lazarsfeld) proved a conjecture of Fujita on the freeness of a large class of
adjoint linear systems on threefolds. They would like to apply the new
techniques developed in studying this conjecture to study singular divisors and
the geometry of the special subvarieties. In particular they plan to study the
singularities of the theta divisors on abelian varieties. They would also like
to extend their results on linear systems to higher dimensions and to study
questions on very ampleness. (2) Local positivity of ample line bundles and
Seshadri constants. The Seshadri constant is an important invariant that
measures the local positivity of an ample line bundle. Ein would like to work on
the conjecture that the Seshadri constant is greater or equal to one for a
general point x in our projective variety. (3) Syzygies of algebraic varieties.
Ein would like to investigate the relation between the geometry of the variety
and the syzygies of the coordinate ring of the variety while the variety is
embedded by an adjoint linear system. (4) Subvarieties od generic complete
intersections. Ein has proved a result that all the subvarieties of a generic
complete intersection of high degree are of general type. This result has
recently been improved by Voisin. Ein would like to extend the result to study
the deformations of subvarieties of a generic complete intersection while the
complete intersection variety is a Calabai-Yau manifold. These problems take on
new significance because of their relations to physics and mirror symmetry. This
is research in the field of algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry is one of the
oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one which has had a revolutionary
flowering in the past quarter-century. In the origin, it treated figures that
could be defined in the plne by the simplest equations, namesly polynomials.
Nowadays, the field makes use of methods not only from algebra, but from
analysis and topology, and conversely is finding applicaton in those fields as
well as in physics, theoretical computer science, and robotics.