* 9622875
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Hyperbolic     Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Hart Smith, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 66,824.00

ABSTRACT Smith 9622875 Smith will continue his research into the propagation of
waves in nonhomogeneous mediums with ``rough'' sound speeds. The aim is to
establish minimal differentiability assumptions on the metric determining the
sound speed under which certain bounds on the solutions, known as the Strichartz
estimates, hold. Under previous NSF funding, the investigator has shown that
these bounds hold if the second order derivatives of the metric coefficients are
bounded, and that this is the best possible condition of its sort that insures
the validity of the Strichartz estimates. The proposed research includes
replacing this condition by sharper, geometrically intrinsic ones. It is
anticipated that the optimal condition is that the metric posess one bounded
derivative, and in addition that the coefficients of the curvature tensor
(certain combinations of second order derivatives) be bounded. The investigator
is also continuing research into the development of function spaces adapted to
oscillatory integral and hyperbolic problems. Previous NSF funding supported the
development of a family of Hardy spaces adapted to fixed-time estimates for
solutions of the wave equation. The proposed research includes developing
similar spaces adapted to controlling time-averaged norms of solutions. The
study of waves travelling in media with rough sound speeds (that is, where the
speed may vary sharply from one point to another) is of both theoretical and
practical significance. The theoretical interest comes from nonlinear equations,
such as the Einstein equations for gravitation, in which the wave speed depends
on the solution under consideration. Since rough solutions arise naturally, one
needs to understand how waves travel in rough media to show that solutions
exist, and to understand their properties. Physics predicts that energy should
travel along geodesics, curves that represent the shortest path between points.
Our research is sh owing that this is true even for rough sound speeds, under
essentially the weakest assumptions that assure that geodesics exist and are
well defined. The practical significance is that our research yields a
mathematical construction for solving the wave equation, which is valid for
rough sound speeds and stable under perturbations of the medium. It is clear
that a computational algorithm based on such a construction will be inherently
more stable than one requiring more restrictive conditions on the media. Our
research would help establish that such algorithms are both stable and
convergent.