* 9622837
* Mathematical Sciences: Extremal Problems for Eigenvalues,   Heat Kernels and Energies
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Richard Laugesen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 63,000.00

Abstract Laugesen The research will attempt to establish the conjectures: (a)
that the trace of the heat kernel (under Dirichlet boundary conditions) of a
simply connected plane domain is minimal when the domain is a disk, given that
the domain has a fixed conformal mapping radius at the origin, and (b) that
acoustical standing waves attain their maximum displacement at the boundary. The
proposed treatment of these two problems is unified by the technique of
variation of a metric within a conformal class. Next, an open energy--
minimization problem for a Ginzburg--Landau energy functional will be
considered; here the solution ``ought'' to be a certain radial vector field, but
the difficulty is that current rearrangement methods for vectors are decidedly
inadequate. Note that the methods to be applied to all these problems are
mathematical, though every problem has physical meaning as well. Problems of
vibration and heat flow have been studied for thousands of years, since at least
the time of the ancient Greeks. Today, vibration and heat problems remain
challenging and important, as scientists grapple with new and old materials on
extreme scales and under extreme conditions. The history of 20th century science
shows, though, that progress on seemingly practical problems relies very often
on the methods and insights developed in basic research. This proposal addresses
several questions in the basic theory of heat flow and sound vibration for which
the "answers" seem intuitively obvious; these answers can even be confirmed by
computer in certain cases. The puzzle, and the challenge, is that no-one can
explain logically why these "answers" are correct. Finding such a logical
explanation of the answer is sure to profitably enhance our understanding of and
capabilities with problems of vibration and heat flow. To be a bit more
specific, the first problem in the proposal deals (roughly speaking) with
estimating how much heat remains in a region after the heat is allowed to
dissipat e for a certain period of time. The conjecture here is that a
particular disk loses its heat fastest. (This conjecture can also be re-stated
in terms of quantum mechanics.) The next problem concerns the location of the
loudest point in a sound wave, such as the road noise inside an automobile. The
conjecture is that the sound is loudest at the edge of the region, rather than
inside the car, say. The third problem considered by the proposal is a simply--
stated but still--unsolved problem arising from the theory of super-
conductivity, an area of immense practical possibility of which we have a sadly
incomplete theoretical understanding. Finally, to those who say that theoretical
mathematics is dead (or should be) in the age of the computer, one should
respond that theoretical mathematics consistently provides insight where
computers fear to tread. And what is more, theoretical mathematicians are often
cheaper to operate.