* 9622774
* Real Time Studies of the Evolution of Structural, Optical,  and Electronic Properties in Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Robert Collins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 255,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9622774 Collins Real time spectroscopic ellipsometry
(SE) and polarimetry, combined with microstructural analysis by direct
techniques will be applied to characterize the nucleation, coalescence, and
growth processes as well as the optical properties of thin films. The SE
techniques applied here are unique in their ability to determine the optical
properties and electronic structure with monolayer sensitivity as a continuous
function of thickness for films fabricated by methods employed widely in
industry, for example, plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition and magnetron
sputtering. The research is divided into two projects: (I) the preparation of
semiconductor films and the study of size effects in these films as they evolve
from clusters through the coalescence stage to continuous growth, and (ii) the
role of gas composition, substrate material, and substrate temperature on the
evolution of bonding and structure in diamond films. The materials systems
studied have a wide range of applications in thin film photovoltaic devices,
photon and electron emission devices, and optical and mechanical coatings. As a
result, synergistic relationships will be established between this program and
other programs with industry for the transfer of new instrument designs,
materials technologies, and human resources. %%% The growth of thin films under
vacuum from vapor sources will be studied as they are formed, atomic layer-by-
layer. Such studies will make use of novel, high-speed measurement techniques
that involve directing a polarized white light beam into the reactor, reflecting
it from the surface of the growing film, and detecting the change in
polarization upon reflection. These techniques provide the thickness of the film
with atomic layer sensitivity, the growth rate of the film, and its optical
properties, t he latter including the index of refraction and absorption
coefficient. The films to be studied include amorphous and crystalline
semiconductors, with applications in optical and electronic devices such as
solar cells and light-emitting diodes, and diamond with applications as optical,
mechanical, and electron-emitting coatings. The program has four goals: (i)
developing high sensitivity optical instrumentation, (ii) obtaining a better
understanding of how thin films grow, (iii) optimizing thin films for specific
applications based on this understanding, and (iv) establishing synergistic
relationships between this program and other programs with industry for the
transfer of new instrument designs, materials technologies, and human resources.
***