* 9622051
* Experimental and Analytical Comparison of Methods for DesignAgainst Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Raphael Haftka, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2000
* USD 157,500.00

9622051 Haftka This award provides funds for an investigation into the relative
merits of probability based design and fuzzy-set based design. The study will
use three means for probing the differences and similarities of the two
approaches. First, an examination of the underlying theories of probability
analysis and fuzzy-set analysis will seek to identify fundamental differences.
Second, numerical experiments will seek to provide insight into the different
design strategies embodied in the two approaches. Finally, laboratory
experiments will show how well designs obtained using the two approaches perform
when built. It is expected that the amount of information on uncertainties
available to the designer has a major effect on the utility of the two
approaches. Therefore the study will be conducted for different levels of
available information ranging from complete statistical knowledge to very vague
measures of the uncertainties. The study will be reviewed periodically by
experts in the two fields of probabilistic design and fuzzy-set design to help
assure quality control. If successful this study will lead to better
understanding of the differences and similarities between probabilistic design
and fuzzy-set design. Furthermore, it is expected that the study will identify
conditions under which one approach is more appropriate than the other, so as to
help designers select one method over the other depending on the amount of
knowledge they have on the uncertainties. Finally, it is expected that the study
will help diffuse the intense rivalry between proponents of the two methods. The
end result should be an improvement in the ability of designers to produce
designs that take explicitly into account uncertainty.