* 9622842
* A Reduced Basis Approach to the Design of Distributed       Parameter Controllers
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,09/29/1998
* Belinda Batten, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/29/1998
* USD 40,000.00

9622842 King This focus of this project is the development of a reduced basis
approach to controller design for distributed parameter systems described by
partial differential equations (PDEs). The first step in the framework involves
using distributed parameter control theory for PDE control problems to obtain an
explicit infinite dimensional control law. The controller is based on
compensator design so that state estimates are used (requiring only a small
number of state measurements) as opposed to full-state feedback, in which the
full distributed state must be known. The next step relies on obtaining integral
representations of feedback control operators in terms of feedback functional
gains. The use of the special spatial structure of these functional gains allows
for approximation schemes which result in low-order controllers. Moreover,
analysis of local dynamics motivated by such approximations will give insight
into sensor placement and design. This work provides a framework for practical
controller designs which are computationally efficient. Moreover, it provides
answers to questions regarding sensor design, specifically regarding types and
locations of sensors within a moving fluid. %%% This project will development a
practical framework for the control of complicated systems for which traditional
approaches either are limited in scope or are impractical. This framework
provides a computationally quick and efficient control design based on
fundamental mathematical concepts. One of the principal applications of this
research will be to the design and placement of control devices for the control
of high performance aircraft, through a better understanding of the interactions
of the aircraft with the surrounding fluid. ***