* 9622660
* Tenth Anniversary HTS Workshop on Physics, Materials and    Applications, Houston, Texas, March 12-16, 1996
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Paul C. W. Chu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 02/28/1997
* USD 7,500.00

9622660 Chu The Texas Center for Superconductivity at the University of Houston
(TCSUH) has organized a Workshop on the Physics, Materials and Applications of
High Temperature Superconductivity (HTS). The Workshop celebrating the 10th
anniversary of the discovery of HTS will be held on March 12 through 16, 1996,
in Houston, Texas. The present status of HTS will be reviewed, and the future of
the field will be contemplated so that the HTS science can be unraveled and the
technology developed. Leading scientists in the field will give plenary and
review talks. Invited and contributed talks on new and major findings and poster
session provide excellent training opportunity for graduate students and
postdocs. % % % The Texas Center for Superconductivity at the University of
Houston (TCSUH) has organized a Workshop on the Physics, Materials and
Applications of High Temperature Superconductivity (HTS). The Workshop
celebrating the 10th anniversary of the discovery of HTS will be held on March
12 through 16, 1996, in Houston, Texas. The present status of HTS will be
reviewed, and the future of the field will be contemplated so that the HTS
science can be unraveled and the technology developed. Leading scientists in the
field will give plenary and review talks. Invited and contributed talks on new
and major findings and poster session provide excellent training opportunity for
graduate students and postdocs. ***