* 9622302
* Dynamics of Compressible Vortex Rings and Circular Jets
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Fazle Hussain, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Foss
* 07/31/1999
* USD 250,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal Number: CTS-9622302 Principal Investigator: Virk/Hussain This
is a project to carry out numerical simulations of circular turbulent jets in
both the incompressible and compressible flow regimes. The aim is to study
vortical structures first in incompressible jets and then extend this to the
study of the role of compressibility in flow development. Vortex rings are the
canonical coherent structures in turbulent jets. Their transition and
interactions are the primary cause of entrainment and mixing in turbulent jets.
The issues of interest in this study are the vorticity topology during non-
linear evolution and transition, and the post transition structure. The complex
helical wave decomposition will be used to reveal the separation of vorticity
packets that lead to transition. A numerical data base will be developed that
will allow the study of transition mechanisms, controllability using inflow
perturbations, the dynamics of far field coherent structures and shock vortex
interactions. A finite-volume code will be developed to initiate systematic
studies of spatially evolving 3D jets. Low Mach number simulations of a single
frequency perturbation will be used to determine the vortex dynamics responsible
for the experimentally observed periodic/chaotic transitional flow regimes. The
results of this effort will be used to improve low-dimensional dynamic models
that will enable flow control. Axisymmetric simulations of supersonic jets will
be used to determine the effects of shock-cell structure on coherent structure
roll-up and interactions. This will be extended to the study of fully 3D,
spatially evolving, supersonic jets in terms of vortex dynamics to understand
the effects of shocks on coherent structure dynamics and their transition, as
well as the evolutionary dynamics of the far field coherent structures.
Compressible turbulent flows are technologically important. This study will
provide insight that will lead to computational models that will be c apable of
taking into account the effect of compressibility on flow instability and will
lay the foundations for the development of flow control methods.