* 9622749
* Mathematical Sciences:  Global Optimization for             Multidimensional Scaling
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,10/16/1998
* Michael Trosset, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 10/16/1998
* USD 59,527.00

9622749 Trosset Numerical algorithms for multidimensional scaling (MDS)
construct geometric configurations from dissimilarity data by attempting to
solve specific optimization problems. It has long been widely believed that most
MDS problems are plagued by the existence of local solutions that are not global
solutions, and considerable effort has been expended addressing this difficulty.
Recently, various researchers have proposed searching for global solutions by
such "off-the-shelf" global optimization methods as simulated annealing,
tunneling, and continuation. These methods are quite computationally expensive
and research by the principal investigator suggests that they may be largely
unnecessary. This research involves properly reformulating the structure of many
important MDS problems such that local searches, which invariably find global
solutions, can be exploited. This research concerns computational methods for
multidimensional scaling, a collection of statistical techniques for
mathematically constructing geometric configurations of objects from information
about the distances between those objects. For example, a chemist might want to
"construct" a molecule with certain interatomic distances, or a psychologist
might want to geometrically represent a set of stimuli using data about the
differences that human subjects perceived between pairs of stimuli. Such
problems pose formidable computational challenges. The focus of this research is
on developing more efficient methods for computing optimal solutions of these
problems.