* 9622771
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mammalian Distribution in the Late   Cretaceous and Earliest Paleocene Western Interior of North America: Testing Provinciality Through Time
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* William Clemens, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 05/31/1998
* USD 3,145.00

9622771 CLEMENS Floodplain and delta sediments of Late Cretaceous to earliest
Paleocene (Tertiary) age (72-60 Million Years Ago), laid down as the Western
Interior Seaway retreated across the North American continent, document an
extraordinary period of mammalian evolution. Mammals survived and rapidly
diversified across the Cretaceous-Tertiary (K/T) boundary (66 MYA); many other
groups of animals suffered mass extinctions at this boundary. Many questions in
the fields of evolutionary biology, paleoecology and biostratigraphy can be
addressed through an understanding of the patterns of mammalian distribution
during this time period. Recent studies of fossil mammals preserved in these
floodplain sediments indicate that during the Late Campanian (approximately 72
MYA) there were distinct northern and southern faunas. Did these faunas remain
distinct in the 12-million year period following? If not, in what respects did
they change? It has been difficult to identify basic patterns, partly because of
the large and scattered amount of geographic information, and partly because the
relationships among the animals in question are poorly understood. Newly
available computational tools will allow Anne Wiel, under the supervision of
William Clemens, to address these questions quantitatively for the first time.
The first stage of the research will address questions of the phylogenetic
relationships among the species of mammals identified in the fossil remains,
including those among species that have not previously been considered. New
hypotheses are to be incorporated in a database compiled from fossil site data
from throughout the Western Interior. Using a Geographic Information System
(GIS) to recognize spatial associations in this geographic, environmental, and
taxonomic data, the investigators will apply different types of analyses
commonly used to quantify faunal similarity or variation, and compare the
results. This project will benefit the scientific community in three ways: by
cre ating a database that will be made available to other researchers; by
comparing different measures of faunal similarity; by creating a robust,
testable, and accessible model of mammalian distribution across the K/T
boundary.