* 9622588
* Open-Architecture Integration for Agile Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Harry Cheng, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 09/30/2000
* USD 343,704.00

9622588 Cheng This award funds research on open architecture horizontal and
vertical system integration for agile manufacturing. A real-time open
architecture "plug and play" integration environment for agile manufacturing
will be developed. A set of device drivers for mechatronic components such as
actuators, force sensors, vision sensors, analog and digital input and output
will be developed. A set of system dependent modules for robot manipulators,
numerically controlled machines, and automatic assembly systems will also be
developed. Controllers and sensors of two commercial industrial robot
manipulators and one numerically controlled milling machine will be retrofitted
with open architecture using the device drivers and system dependent modules.
The robot manipulators and machine will be integrated under the new integration
paradigm to form an open architecture automatic manufacturing workcell. This
manufacturing workcell will be linked with other information systems such as
computer-aided design and the World Wide Web through the network. This
manufacturing workcell will be made adaptive so that it can automatically adjust
to changing work loads, conditions, and requirements by communication with other
information systems. This experimentally tested "plug and play" manufacturing
system and integration environment will be transferred for various applications
in industries through industrial partners. If successful, this project will
provide an improved understanding of fundamental problems underlying real-time
open architecture system integration. The new integration environment will be
vendor independent, computer platform independent, mechatronic component
independent, and manufacturing system independent, and will enable horizontal
integration of manufacturing systems across different vendor's product lines.
The system should make manufacturing data, such as the status of work in
progress and real-time machine performance, readily available throughout
organizations. This timely flow of information within and between enterprises
through vertical integration is critical to the agility of the manufacturing
enterprise. It could significantly reduce manufacturing costs and cycle time,
and enable cost-effective production of both large and small lot sizes and
customized products.