* 9622535
* Heat Kernal Analysis and Analytic Number Theory on Symmetric Spaces, Calabi-Yau Varieties and Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Jay Jorgenson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Sidney W. Graham
* 06/30/1997
* USD 28,600.00

This award supports research in the general area of spectral theory and number
theory, with particular interest in trace formulae, explicit formulae and prime
number theorems, spectral theory on degenerating Riemannian manifolds, and
various analytic and arithmetic aspects of Arakelov theory on Calabi-Yau
varieties. Jorgenson is continuing his collaboration with Serge Lang. They are
studying the heat kernel on symmetric spaces to provide further examples of
their general theory. Specific examples such as Hilbert modular and Picard
modular varieties will be studied deeply. Jorgenson is continuing resarch with
Andrey Todorov in the study of the spectral theory and arithmetic of Calabi-Yau
varieties. The long term goal of this study is the development of a theory of
arithmetic of Calabi-Yau varieties which would be similar to the existing theory
of arithmetic of elliptic curves. With Jozek Dodziuk, Jorgenson is studying the
spectral theory of degenerating families of finite volume Riemannian manifolds
which possess metrics that have constant negative sectional curvatures near the
developing singularities. Jorgenson is continuing ongoing research with Jonathon
Huntley in the study of Weyl's laws for the counting function of cuspidal
eigenvalues on quotients of symmetric spaces of arbitrary rank, with particular
emphasis on the symmetric spaces associated to GL(n,R). In collaboration with
Jurg Kramer, Jorgenson is continuing the investigation of the Arakelov theory of
Calabi-Yau varieties. This research falls into the general mathematical field of
Number Theory. Number theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole
numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of one
whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics and was
pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within the
last half century it has become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in
areas such as data tran smission and processing, and communication systems.