* 9622471
* Research Equipment Grant:  Instrumentation For Space-Time   Interferometry, and Imaging in Composite Materials and      Random Media
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Akira Ishimaru, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Magdy F. Iskander
* 08/31/1998
* USD 37,890.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9622471 Principal Investigator: Yasuo Kuga/University of
Washington Title: Research Equipment Grant: Instrumentation for Space-time
Interferometry and Imaging in Composite Materials and Random Media Abstract This
is a Research Equipment Grant for purchase of optical and microwave equipment
which will be used for development of experimental techniques and systems for
generalized space-time interferometry. This includes the time-frequency
correlation for pulse, spatial interference for angular and polarization
correlations, and coherent interference for backscattering. The PI's present
systems are inadequate for present and future needs because of limited signal to
noise ratio, unavailability of key components, and lack of modulation capability
in the optical systems. The requested equipment, a general purpose wideband
microwave amplifier, microwave components and an optical EO amplitude modulator,
will remove these restraints and will great enhance the PI's NSF sponsored
research effort in remote sensing. Especially the optical EO modulator is
essential for converting the present system for space-time interferometry.
Several projects will utilize the enhanced experimental capability: (i)
ultrawideband scattering by random media (ii) angular polarization correlations
and imaging of objects in random media (iii) enhanced backscattering and
resonant location and (iv) characterization of composite materials. The
equipment will also be used by several multidisciplinary research groups in
collaboration with the Electromagnetic and Remote Sensing Laboratory, which has
6 faculty members and more than 20 graduate students.