* 9622808
* Mathematical Sciences:  Discrete Groups and Quasiconformal  Mappings
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Frederick Gehring, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 47,861.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9622808 PI: Gehring This project addresses problems
concerning discrete groups of Mobius transformations, 3-manifolds and orbifolds,
quasiconformal mappings, and function theoretic properties of plane domains. For
example, the Gehring plans to continue a joint study with G. J. Martin of the
set of values which cannot be assumed by the trace of the commutator of pairs of
elements of a nonelementary discrete group. This study has already yielded a
great deal of information about the minimum possible volumes of 3-manifolds and
orbifolds and it should, in particular, allow one to prove that the orbifold
associated with the 3-5-3 hyperbolic tetrahedral group has minimum volume among
all 3-manifolds and orbifolds. The main tools for this study are: (1) complex
iteration to identify big filled in Julia sets E for a special family P of
polynomials, and (2) a covering argument using the family P and the filled in
Julia sets E to obtain large regions D of excluded values for the traces of the
commutators of pairs of elements. The Gehring hopes also to study further the
polynomial family P, an interesting collection of polynomials with one complex
parameter which arise naturally in the study of Mobius groups. Mathematics can
be viewed as consisting of three main fields - algebra, analysis, and geometry -
together with many other areas which are developments of the basic ideas in one
or more of these fields. Thus algebra is the field which has developed from
studying polynomial equations, analysis the field which has its roots in the
calculus, and geometry the field that has developed from the ideas of Euclid and
the Greeks. It is particularly interesting and satisfying for mathematicians
when ideas which belong to one of these fields can be used to solve problems in
another. This project concerns some problems which are situated at a crossroads
where all three of these fields meet. In particular, one problem is to determine
the smallest possible volume of certain g eometric objects using the theory of
complex iteration and Mandelbrot sets of analysis together with a polynomial
family which arose from algebra. Work in such a part of mathematics can be quite
fruitful since the solution of a crossroads problem usually has implications in
all of the fields concerned.