* 9622140
* Detection of Underground Obstacles by the SASW Test
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Ali Maher, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 05/31/2000
* USD 162,082.00

9622140 The objective of the proposed research program is to develop practical
procedures for detection of underground obstacles in the field by the Spectral-
Analysis-of-Surface-Waves (SASW) technique. Such a development is important for
two major reasons: 1) In urban areas where subsurface right-of-way is congested,
the ability to detect the position and characteristics of underground obstacles
or voids is important for maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation. 2) This
research will provide guidelines for minimization of the effects of underground
obstacles in SASW site characterization. Existing experimental and numerical
studies indicate that underground obstacles and soil heterogeneity have
significant effects on Rayleigh wave dispersion evaluated by the SASW test. This
research will encompass a refinement of the numerical model for obstacle
detection, verification of the developed procedures in detection of obstacles in
soil systems and below pavements, and integration of the procedures into
packages for an automated SASW test. The refinement involves optimization of the
procedure with respect to the number, spacing and placement of receivers, and
more accurate evaluation of some of the obstacle parameters. Verification and
implementation of the procedure will be done in the laboratory and in the field.
Test sites will be selected and prepared in cooperation with the New Jersey
Department of Transportation. ***