* 9622483
* Ozone Depletion and UV Inhibition of Photosynthesis in      Arctic Kelps:  Spectral and Temporal Dependence
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/1996,11/30/1999
* Patrick Neale, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 11/30/1999
* USD 489,710.00

Depletion of stratospheric ozone, particularly in the polar regions, is causing
increased concern over the effects of harmful UV radiation (mainly UVB, 280-320
nm). UVB is damaging to many biological processes, and in plants, specifically
targets photosynthesis. Large increases in the penetration of solar UVB in the
Southern Ocean during the austral spring from ozone depletion is known to have
significant effects on phytoplankton productivity. The phenomenon is less severe
in the Arctic, but ozone related increases in incident UVB have accelerated over
the last three years. This proposal addresses the question of the effects of
increased UVB on large benthic marine macroalgae (kelp) and the levels of UVB
that penetrates into the coastal water of the Arctic. Little is known about the
sensitivity of kelp photosynthesis to UVB. Assessment of UV effects (280-400 nm)
in an environmental context can be made by weighting the spectrum of UV
irradiance with a biological weighting function (BWF; similar to an action
spectrum). The investigators will measure detailed BWF's and the kinetics of UV
effects n photosynthesis of macroalgae in High Arctic, emphasizing the kelps,
Laminaria saccharina and L. solidungula, which are distributed throughout the
circumpolar Arctic. Both laboratory cultured plants and sporophytes collected
during two spring and one summer field season in the Canadian High Arctic
(Resolute, 79o30' N; 95oW) will be measured. Plants exposed to different natural
light environments during the nine-month ice covered period will be examined for
difference in their sensitivity to UV radiation; the importance of the nitrogen
status of the plants in recovery processes that counteract UV-induced damage
will also be investigated. The results will enable the first quantification of
potential UV exposure in kelp habitats and the biological effects of such
exposure in terms of kelp productivity in arctic coastal systems.