* 9622742
* Mathematical Sciences:  Algebra, Number Theory and          Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1997
* Benedict Gross, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sidney W. Graham
* 12/31/1997
* USD 80,500.00

9622742 Kazhdan This award provides funds for the investigations of David
Kazhdan and Benedict Gross in several areas of representation theory and number
theory. Kazhdan will continue his work on the discrete series for GL(n) and on
minimal representations over local fields. He is also addressing several
problems posed by Drinfield on quantization, and on generalizations of affine
Lie algebras. Gross is working on a construction of motives with Galois Group
G2, via an exceptional theta correspondence, and on a generalization of Serre's
conjectures on Galois representations to finite groups of Lie type. This
research falls into the fields of Algebraic Geometry and Number Theory.
Algebraic Geometry is one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one
which has had a revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century. In its
origin, it treated figures that could be defined in the plane by the simplest
equations, namely polynomials. Nowadays, the field makes use of methods not only
from algebra, but from analysis and topology, and conversely is finding
application in those fields as well as in physics, theoretical computer science,
and robotics. Number Theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole
numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of one
whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics and was
pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within the
last half century it has become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in
areas such as data transmission and processing, and communication systems.