* 9622496
* Nansen Arctic Drilling Program Workshop: Ten-Year Implementation Plan for Scientific Ocean Drilling in the Arctic Seas; St. Petersburg, Russia, October 14-15, 1996
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Ellen Kappel, Joint Oceanographic Institutions Inc
* Standard Grant
* Odile de la Beaujardiere
* 05/31/1997
* USD 26,800.00

Joint Oceanographic Institutions Incorporated (JOI) proposes to provide the U.S.
oceanographic community the opportunity to participate in the future planning of
the Nansen Arctic Drilling Program. The Nansen Arctic Drilling Program (NAD) is
a potentially significant international research effort designed to understand
the geological and oceanographic evolution of the Arctic, as well as elucidate
the contribution of the Arctic region to global change and its forcing
functions. This knowledge will help characterize the Arctic basin and its impact
on global processes. NAD is planning a workshop to produce a ten-year
"Implementation Plan" for scientific ocean drilling in the Arctic. The NAD
Implementation Plan will outline the strategy and steps necessary to achieve
NAD's scientific goals. Because of the difficult and costly nature of scientific
ocean drilling in the Arctic, the endeavor will require close multinational
cooperation and funding. The workshop's planning and organization will be guided
by the NAD Secretariat, which is funded by the eight NAD member countries and
housed at JOI. Specifically, this proposal seeks full support for the travel of
U.S. scientists, and two JOI staff to attend the workshop as well as partial
funding to cover the cost to JOI/ the NAD Secretariat to organize the workshop,
as well as to produce and print the resulting NAD Implementation Plan. The
travel expenses of the participating non-U.S. scientists (about 30) will be
covered by individual NAD member and observer countries. Funding for the rest of
the cost of the workshop itself will be sought from participating countries and
the balance will be covered by the NAD Secretariat.