* 9622555
* Mathematical Sciecnes: Boundary Variations and Analytic     Continuation in Electromagnetic and Acoustic Scattering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Fernando Reitich, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 44,483.00

9622555 Reitich This project deals with analytical and computational issues in
electromagnetic and acoustic scattering problems. It relates to a new method for
the solution of such problems, based on high-order boundary perturbation and
analytic continuation techniques, that was introduced by the principal
investigator in the context of diffraction gratings. There, the numerical
algorithms produced, in many cases, results with substantially improved accuracy
over that given by classical approaches. The proposed research concerns new
applications of the method in other challenging areas of current interest in
electromagnetics and acoustics and the further study and improvement of the
numerical properties of the resulting algorithms. Both the forward and inverse
scattering problems will be investigated for a variety of configurations,
including scattering by electrically large bounded bodies and in ocean
waveguides. In particular, the benchmark problems of electromagnetic scattering
by three-dimensional cubes and of sound propagation in oceans with rough
surfaces will be treated. Based on some preliminary studies, it is expected that
the performance of the method in these areas will be of a quality comparable to
the one it exhibited in prior implementations. %%% The ability to predict the
shape of the electromagnetic or acoustic field scattered as an incident wave
encounters an obstacle or interface has been long recognized as having major
implications in a great number of scientific and engineering disciplines.
Indeed, much of what we "see" --be it through visible light or x-rays, radio or
microwaves-- or "hear" reaches us through a complicated combination of phenomena
among which scattering is, in most cases, an essential element. As such, a
better understanding of how light and sound waves propagate and diffract has
led, in the last few decades, to substantial advances in a variety of fields;
these include communications, monitoring, s eismic profiling, tomography and
target detection, to name just but a few. An important role in these advances
was the one played by mathematical modeling and, with the advent of computers,
that of computational science. The present and future needs, however, demand the
development of more efficient, accurate and reliable algorithms to deal with
complex geometries and media. Indeed, the resolution of the scattering in such
situations (such as when dealing with human tissue or undersea topography) often
entails calculating a highly oscillatory field. When using most classical
algorithms these oscillations translate into high computational costs, as these
methods attempt to capture the variations of the field at each point in time and
space. Therefore, alternative approaches whose complexity does not correlate to
that of the field under study become very desirable. The present project relates
to one such approach, that was successfully developed by the principal
investigator in the context of micro-optical devices. The proposed research
concerns new applications of this novel method in other challenging areas of
current interest in electromagnetics and acoustics where it is expected to
provide a valuable computational tool. ***