* 9622158
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Advanced Computing and     Mapping Facilities for Inverse Electrocardiography Research
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Lorraine Olson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sohi Rastegar
* 08/31/1998
* USD 34,600.00

9622158 Throne Each year approximately 250,000 people succumb to potentially
lethal cardiac tachyarrhythmias (fast abnormal heart beats) in the United
States. Of these, only 10% survive to undergo further treatment. Treatment
options include drug therapy--which has numerous side effects and often does not
work--implantable devices--which treat only the symptoms and incur significant
initial and follow-up costs or surgical removal of the source of the arrhythmia.
Surgery is often the most effective treatment, in that it is a cure for
arrhythmia, but identifying the focal site is difficult and time-consuming.
Systematic methods for extrapolating electrical voltages measured on the body
surface to electrical voltages on the heart (the inverse problem of
electrocardiography) could greatly improve the ability to locate the focus of
the arrhythmia before surgery, lower the time in surgery and provide a low-cost,
noninvasive initial screening of those patients likely to succumb to these
arrhythmias. The Departments of Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering
and Internal Medicine (Section of Cardiology) at the University of Nebraska will
purchase an engineering workstation server and mapping equipment which will be
dedicated to support research in biomedical engineering. The equipment, which
expands the capabilities of existing facilities, will be used primarily for
research on inverse electrocardiography. The ability to solve the inverse
problem of electrocardiography accurately, which is the focus of the research,
directly implies the ability to noninvasively create an accurate picture of the
electrical activity of the heart. This picture, in turn, makes it possible to
more accurately diagnose and treat heart conduction-related illnesses. The
collaboration between theoretical engineering scientists and practicing medical
researchers/clinicians will allow the study of methods from numerical theories
through to eventual clinical trials, giving the abilit y to improve patient care
in the near future. ***