* 9622887
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometry of Flag Varieties and       Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Shrawan Kumar, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2000
* USD 90,000.00

Abstract Kumar 9622887 Kumar will continue work in the general area of lie
theory and geometry. The first project involves studying a certain complex which
arises from the parabolic analog of the BGG resolution for affine Kac-Moody Lie
algebras. Non-existence of certain irreducible components in the homology of
this complex will lead to an interesting geometric definition of the fusion
product for positive-level integrable representations of affine Kac-Moody
algebras. Also, this will lead to a proof of the explicit dimension formula of
Verlinde for arbitrary semisimple simply-connected groups (known so far for the
classical groups and G2). The second project involves proving a well known
problem on complete intersections of curves in the three dimensional projective
space, which translates into a problem about the affine flag variety associated
to SL(2). Let C be a smooth affine algebraic curve and G a semisimple group. The
third project is concerned with proving a weak homotopy equivalence between the
space Alg(C,G) of all the algebraic maps from C to G and the corresponding space
Cont(C,G) of all the continuous maps (from C to G). Since the rational homotopy
groups of Cont(C,G) are known, in particular, this equivalence would determine
the rational homotopy groups of Alg(C,G). Finally Kumar is writing lecture notes
for a course on "affine Kac-Moody groups, their flag varieties and
representation theory," which he intends to expand into a book covering the
basic theory. In several mathematical and physical phenomena (and similarly in
many biological and chemical processes), symmetry plays an important role. To
start with, the example of a sphere is illuminating. One basic property of any
sphere is that it is a perfectly symmetrical object, in other words any two
points on it "look" the same. This symmetry was exploited over a period of time
to derive some rather intricate properties of spheres. Similarly let us look at
another example coming from physics (more precisely from Einstein's Special
Theory of Relativity). Einstein derived his very fundamental equations from the
basic "invariance" postulate that "the laws of physics are the same in all
coordinate systems which move uniformly relative to one another" (together with
the invariance of the velocity of light). Various projects, which Kumar is
proposing to work on, have one common theme: Exploit the symmetry underlying the
problem at hand to find the solution of the problem. More precisely expressed,
Kumar is trying to use the "automorphism groups" to solve different mathematical
problems, which in turn will have important consequences in theoretical physics,
particularly Quantum Field Theory.