* 9622810
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Problems From           Nonlinear Dispersive Oscillations, Hele-Shaw and Stokes     Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Fei-Ran Tian, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1999
* USD 56,940.00

9622810 Tian The main themes on the project are I. Nonlinear Dispersive
Oscillations, II. Hele-Shaw Flows and III. Stokes Flows. In project I, the main
purpose is to analyze the generation and propagation of oscillations described
by the defocusing nonlinear Schrodinger equation as dispersion goes to zero.
Microscopically, the oscillations propagate according to the Whitham equations.
The proposed method is a construction of solutions of the Whitham equations via
a hodograph transform. Both projects II and III concern the motion of an
interface between a more viscous fluid and a less viscous fluid to be regarded
as invicid. The viscous fluid is governed by Darcy's law in the second project,
and by the Stokes equations in the last one. The emphases are on the types of
singularity formation in the presence of surface tension, Hele-Shaw and Stokes
flows in dimension 3. The proposed methods will be both analytical and
computational. %%% Nonlinear dispersive oscillations can be observed in
collisionless shocks in plasmas and optical shocks in optical fibers. What is
fascinating about this phenomenon is the phase transition between different
regions. The goal is to understand the phase transition from non-oscillatory to
oscillatory regions. Both Hele-Shaw and Stokes flows are flows in porous media.
It is well known that the interface will be unstable when a less viscous fluid
drives a more viscous fluid. This instability is responsible for water flooding
of oil wells, and is of obvious importance to oil reservoir engineering. The aim
is to understand this instability in detail. The principal investigator proposes
to use some new analytical and numerical techniques to study these problems. ***