* 9622134
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Reactive Ion Etcher and    Annealer
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* James Kolodzey, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9622134 Berger The Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of
Delaware propose the purchase Reactive Ion Etching and Rapid Thermal Annealing
equipment which will be dedicated to support research in engineering. The
equipment will be used for several research project including in particular: 1.
Optoelectronic device fabrication. 2. Si-Ge-C semiconductor alloy structures, 3.
VLSI circuit metallization, 4. Terahertz electronic circuits, 5. Micromachined
near-field scanning tips. These research projects are important because they are
considered by colleagues to be on the verge of technical breakthroughs which
will promote basic knowledge and build the national engineering infrastructure.
The Reactive Ion Etcher (RIE) is a "dry processing" instrument for the
fabrication of smaller devices with higher resolution than with the "wet
chemistry" (acids and solvents) that we presently use. The Rapid Thermal
Annealer (RTA) is a fast, controlled heater to alloy ohmic contacts and anneal
crystal damage (from prior process steps) quickly so that dopants and regions of
different composition will not have time to interdiffuse. Presently we use a
furnace tube with a slow response time which was modified from liquid phase
epitaxy equipment. This equipment is becoming an industry standard. For example,
recently IBM Corp. approached our Department with job openings for students
familiar with RIE instruments. Unfortunately, our students stand at a
disadvantage because we lack an RIE on-campus. These new instruments will give
us the capability to attract funding for research on advanced devices and
circuits, and allow use to train students on timely processing techniques. ***