* 9623559
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Molecular Systematics of the Family Drosophilidae
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* Margaret Kidwell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 04/30/1998
* USD 8,632.00

9623559 Kidwell This award will provide funds for materials and supplies as well
as travel funds to support both collecting in Costa Rica and study of specimens
at the American Museum of Natural History in New York. The support will enhance
the dissertation of Patrick M. O'Grady II who is a graduate student with Dr.
Margaret G. Kidwell at the University of Arizona. The student's dissertation
project involves phylogenetic analysis of molecular sequence data from two
independent genes (Adh and COII) to assess relationships among genera of flies
in the family Drosophilidae (Insecta: Diptera). The genus Drosophila has been
and is such a classic model system that a well-supported phylogeny of this group
will have broad utility to other researchers addressing questions of
reproductive biology, development, ecology, biogeography, genetic history, etc..
To date, hypothesized phylogenies for the family Drosophilidae have suggested
contradictory or incongruent patterns of relationships. This project hopes to
correct that situation and to use the two molecular data sets obtained to
address analytical issues such as quantifying levels of congruence among
competing hypotheses/phylogenies and whether combined evidence or separate
analyses are of greater utility. This award will provide support for a graduate
student pursuing studies of relationships among genera in the family of flies to
which the genus Drosophila belongs. These flies are well known experimental
animals for many areas of biology and understanding of their historical
relationships will be of value in many kinds of research. The project will also
investigate means of analyzing complex and sometimes conflicting molecular data.
Support for the training of graduate students in modern systematic and
population biology methodologies is important for maintaining the workforce of
scientists capable of addressing the questions and issues of biodiversity which
are of increasing global concern.