* 9623130
* Viral Diversity and Mortality of Phyto- and Bacterioplankton in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Farooq Azam, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/1998
* USD 148,230.00

Proposal No: OPP-9623130 Principal Investigator: Azam, Farooq ABSTRACT Viral
Diversity and Mortality of Phyto-and Bacterioplankton in the Arctic Ocean This
proposal requests funding to investigate the magnitude and variability of
bacteria and phytoplankton mortality due to viral attack in the Arctic Ocean.
Viral distribution, abundance and variations in composition and diversity of
viruses in the study area will also be investigated. In addition to the
examination of natural viral communities, samples will be screened for the
presence of sewage-derived bacterial viruses as an indicator of the penetration
of terrestrial biological pollutants into the Arctic Ocean. Collection, fixation
and concentration of sea water samples will be accomplished at sampling sites by
deployment from a U.S. Navy submarine. Subsequent analyses will be conducted in
the laboratory. Total counts of viruses and the frequency of viral infection in
phytoplankton and bacteria will be determined by electron microscopy on fixed
samples. To examine natural community diversity, concentrates of viruses will be
purified and subjected to pulsed-field gel electrophoresis to separate viral DNA
based on genome size. From the number, positions, and staining intensity of
different bands, the diversity, genome sizes, and abundance of viruses in each
sample will be estimated. Sewage derived viruses will be detected by
amplification of target DNA sequences using the polymerase chain reaction and by
plaque assay. Through coordination with other researchers, viral abundance, the
frequency of viral infections, and viral community diversity will be related to
hydrographic and biological variables in order to determine those which may be
important in regulating viral propagation.