* 9623025
* Mathematical Sciences:  Study of Nonlinear Waves in         Compressible Flows and Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Tai-Ping Liu, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 60,000.00

9623025 Liu We are interested in studying the behaviour of nonlinear waves for
quasilinear hyperbolic-parabolic partial differential equations. Physical
systems include the compressible Navier-Stokes and Euler euqations, MHD, and
nonlinear elasticity equations. We are also interested in the nonlinear waves
for the finite difference schemes for the computations for these systems. The
approach based on nonlinear superpositions and the Green functions for nonlinear
waves has proved effective in studying the nonlinear waves for PDE in one space
variable. For instance we show that shocks more or less compressive than the
classical gas dynamic shocks depend on the dissipative variable in sensitive
ways previously unsuspected. We intend to generalize and refine the approach to
numerical waves and also to PDE in more than one space variable. Preliminary
success in the study of dissipative schemes and nonlinear stability and
instability of 2-dimensional weak and strong shocks indicates that the approach
is suitable for more general studies. %%% Physical phenomena occur in gas flow,
solar wind, combustions, solid materials are often highly nonlinear.
Compression, expansion, shearing, bending of materials give rise to waves, whose
behaviour is made richer by the chemical reactions, electro-magnetic and other
effects that are also present. There are several different types of waves which
interact nonlinearly. The goal of the present proposal is to study these
noninear phenomena using mathematical technique recently introduced by the
proposer, which are able to detect the local as well as global effects of wave
interactions. Of importance to our project is the understanding of numerical
schemes for the computations of these problems. Our approach is beginning to
yield the intricate wave phenomena for the schemes which will help us to design
effective schemes for computing complex physical situations such as that of
combustions. ***