* 9623966
* Motion Recognition by Parts Using Affine-Invariant Spectral Signatures
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Jezekiel Ben-Arie, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jing Xiao
* 05/31/2000
* USD 215,000.00

The general objective of the research is to develop a new approach for
recognition of moving objects or parts as well as extracting and classifying
their trajectories. A prospective application of this research is recognition of
human gestures and motion of body parts, such as limbs, fingers, etc. The
approach is based on iconic recognition of image patches that correspond to
object surfaces that are roughly planar. Each surface is recognized separately
invariant to its 3D pose, employing affine invariant spectral signatures (AISS)
and multi-dimensional indexing in the frequency domain. The AISS are based on
novel Gaussian kernels with 2-dimensional modulation which are organized in
subsets of distinct orientations. A 2-level hierarchical indexing scheme is used
for pose-invariant recognition of flexible objects. The indexing scheme provides
pose information of each recognized object/part. Thus, full 3D motion (including
rotations) is directly available from processed image sequences. A novel method
is planned for motion recognition using multi-dimensional indexing of the 3D
trajectories of objects/parts. The 3D trajectories of body parts are segmented
into motion vectors and then a set of sequential indices is constructed using
ordered subsets of these motion vectors. These ordered subsets are then used to
vote for model