* 9623457
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Evolution and Functional Morphology of the Backbone in Early Synapsids
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1998
* James Hopson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 03/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

In order for compilers of fine-grain parallel architectures to be as effective
as possible, compiler writers must understand the interactions between the
phases of the compiler. These phases include instruction scheduling which
rearranges code in order to increase available fine-grain parallelism. In
addition, code transformations to increase memory performance are applied, such
as tiling and loop interchange to increase cache performance, prefetching to
prefetch values from memory in order to eliminate the memory latency, and scalar
replacement which changes array references to scalar references to decrease
memory accesses. The compiler also performs register allocation, which allocates
registers to values so as to minimize the number of memory accesses. The goal of
this proposed work is to investigate the interactions of these phases. This
effort is being undertaken along two directions. The first direction is to
continue previous work in cooperative register allocation and instruction
scheduling by (1) incorporating cooperative software pipelining and performing
the cooperative register allocation and scheduling optimizations over a single
framework, the program dependence graph, and (2) performing a thorough analysis
and experimental study of the effects of register assignment strategies on
scheduling to increase fine-grain parallelism. The second direction is to
investigate the interactions between code transformations improving memory
performance and other compiler phases. In particular, the proposed work will
investigate (1) the impact of scalar replacement and software prefetching on
instruction scheduling to increase fine-grain parallelism and on register
allocation (2) strategies for enabling communication between code
transformations to increase memory performance, register allocation, and
instruction scheduling. ***