* 9623831
* Confinement Effects at the Superfluid Transition of 4He
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1996,09/30/1999
* Francis Gasparini, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/1999
* USD 272,945.00

9623831 Gasparini Usually one deals with systems where the spatial dimension is
not a relevant variable in the thermodynamic behavior. That is, systems half as
large or twice as large behave identically when normalized by the mass. This is
not the case in situations where the spatial dimensions are made so small that
they become comparable to a relevant length of the system. In the case of a
second-order phase transition, one has a length scale which diverges as the
transition is approached. In this case, if one limits this divergence by an
imposed spatial boundary, one affects the behavior in a fundamental way. This
situation will be studied in the case of helium at the superfluid transition. To
do this work one must have a way of achieving uniform confinement. It has been
shown that two silicon wafers can be spaced in such a way as to achieve uniform
sub-micrometer confinement over large lateral dimensions. These structures can
be used for the proposed studies and have, as well, technological importance.
The bonding process, for instance, can be used to achieve large-scale silicon-
on-insulator structures.. %%% Present semiconductor technology has pushed the
integration of active electronics to very small dimensions. It is
technologically challenging and important to push these limits further, and
scientifically to ask the question whether the ever-smaller systems will behave
simply as smaller versions of the larger system. A similar question can be asked
in other circumstances where the influence of the smaller dimensions can be
effectively amplified. To perform such studies one has to make small structures
in a reliable way, and develop new measuring techniques. The structures which
will be made for this work will consist of two wafers of silicon bonded to each
other in such a way that a very small gap remains. In this gap a liquid will be
introduced and its properties as it undergoes a phase transformation will be
studied. The overall results of these s tudies will have technological
implications for the silicon-bonding process, and will lead to a better
understanding of the behavior of very small systems. ***