* 9623881
* Dissertation Research: Mechanics of Speciation in the Rock  Dwelling Cichlid Genus Melanochromis in Lake Malawi, Africa (Teleostei:Cichlidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Thomas Kocher, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 05/31/1998
* USD 8,000.00

9623881 KOCHER The fauna of cichlid fish (Pisces: Cichlidae) in Lake Malawi
(eastern Africa) represent a level of species diversity unparalleled in other
vertebrate lineages. Lake Malawi contains an estimated 500 distinct species,
most of which are found only in this lake. It is thought that this high level of
biodiversity has been generated during the relatively short time that Lake
Malawi has been in existence. Many researchers believe that the forces
responsible for generating this species richness are still operating today. One
model, the Dominey hypothesis, suggests that extreme philopatry (greatly reduced
migration between populations) and the development of distinct mate recognition
systems within each population, have resulted in the emergence and maintenance
of the many Lake Malawi cichlid species. Until now, tests of this hypothesis
have been difficult to design and implement. In this study, Jeffrey Markert,
under the direction of Thomas Kocher, will use detailed field sampling
techniques, laboratory mate-choice experiments, and molecular markers to
evaluate the geographic and behavioral components of the Dominey hypothesis. DNA
fingerprinting, combined with a fine scale survey of cichlid populations along
the eastern shore of Lake MalawiOs Nankumba Peninsula, will assess the extent of
philopatry in these populations; the prediction is that these fish hardly ever
Oleave homeO. DNA fingerprinting will also be combined with laboratory
experiments in which fish, raised in an enclosure that closely replicates
natural conditions, are permitted to choose mates from multiple populations; the
prediction is that the fish will prefer members of their own population. The
results of this study will test the ability of the Dominey hypothesis to model
species diversity in Lake Malawi cichlid fish. It will help assess whether the
Dominey hypothesis applies only to species diversity in Lake Malawi cichlid fish
or can be applied more generally.