* 9623220
* Mathematical Sciences:  Nonlinear Partial Differential      Equations and Statistical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Michael Kiessling, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 60,000.00

9623220 Kiessling A basic strategy in statistical mechanics of nonhomogeneous
systems is to construct an asymptotically exact nonlinear PDE problem with few
variables which approximates the original linear problem with its overwhelmingly
many variables. In the first part of the proposal we deal with two unsolved
problems of this kind, namely the microcanonical ensemble for: point vortices;
for classical gravitating hard particles. In both systems one has encountered
technical problems due to nonconcavity of the entropy. We propose a new strategy
that circumvents these problems by reinstalling concavity in a higher-
dimensional parameter space from which the original problem obtains by some kind
of projection. Progress in this area should significantly advance our
understanding of nonlinear PDE without convexity and their relation to
statistical mechanics. In the second part of the proposed project we deal
directly with properties of systems of nonlinear PDEs that are firmly
established in their relationship to statistical mechanics. Our main interest is
in the symmetry properties of solutions. We recently constructed sharp
isoperimetric estimates for two-dimensional elliptic PDE systems and compared
them to a priori identities of Rellich-Pohozaev type, thus firstly obtaining
conditions under which solutions are radially symmetric without requiring
uniqueness or minimizing properties. We want to continue this research and
optimize the conditions for two-dimensional elliptic systems such as Ginzburg-
Landau and Bennett equations, extend the technique to higher dimensions and
apply it to Thomas-Fermi models, finally extend the technique to parabolic
transport equations such as Landau-Boltzmann equations, which in particular
should yield a global existence result in time. %%% Long-lived vortices are an
ubiquitous feature in turbulent flows, with hurricanes in the Earth's weather
system and the great red spot in Jupiter's atmosphere being two promin ent
examples. Vortices also occur as structural defects in superfluids,
superconductors. Beside being of scientific interest, it is of pressing
technical and meteorological importance to understand precisely the conditions
under which such vortices do form. An integer part of the proposed project aims
at making a significant contribution to this endeavor. The mathematical
framework consists of certain systems of nonlinear partial differential
equations which are deeply rooted in the scientific discipline of statis- tical
mechanics. The techniques which shall be developed in the first part of the
proposed project will allow us to extract the relevant differential equations
from statistical mechanics under far more realistic conditions than treated so
far. In the second part, we shall further develop a recent technique of us that
yields qualitative and quantitative statements about the symmetry properties of
the solutions to the nonlinear equations. In favorable cases this reduces the
complexity of certain equations significantly. Beside vortices, we aim at
applying our techniques to the problem of controlling more realistic plasma
structures than previously treated, of the following categories: charged
particle beams, which are of preeminent interest in various branches of
technology development; stellar structures, which are of basic astrophysical
interest. Finally, we see the possibility of an extension of our techniques to a
dynamical set of transport equations for plasmas which have significance, in
particular, for peaceful thermonuclear energy research. ***