* 9623441
* Diffusion of Particles and Photons in Complex Fluids
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Arjun Yodh, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1999
* USD 263,350.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9623441 Yodh This experimental research project in
condensed matter physics will study particle dynamics in colloidal suspensions
and diffusing photon dynamics in highly scattering or turbid media. These
studies of colloids center around new ideas for the control of colloidal
particle motion. In particular, traps and templates for particles on substrates
will be created by carefully constructing free energy barriers. These free
energy barriers are brought about as a result of entropy effects in the
suspension. Photon transport investigations will center on the fundamental
properties of highly scattered light. In particular the research will study how
material anisotropy, and fluctuations are impressed upon photon electromagnetic
fields that diffuse through turbid media in a manner similar to heat flow. %%%
Careful study of light beams passing into highly scattering or turbid materials
has revealed a variety of interesting phenomena and applications. Light diffuses
through these substances in a manner similar to heat flow. As a result of our
increased knowledge about these processes diffusing light can now be used to
generate low resolution images of absorption or scattering variations within
human tissues and in other complex, opaque media. One goal of this proposal is
to develop an improved fundamental understanding of these processes, and to
further develop the instrumentation required to exploit these phenomena, so that
more diverse applications are possible. A secondary goal of this proposal is to
create new materials based on particle suspension that may be of use in the
topical field of photonics. ***