* 9623570
* CAREER:  Synthesis and Characterization of Metal/Silica     Multicomponent Classes by the Sol-Gel Process
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Albert Stiegman, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 04/30/2000
* USD 349,206.00

Abstract 9623570 Stiegman The two principal goals of this research are to
advance study of the chemical parameters that effect the synthesis and
processing of multicomponent glasses by the sol-gel process, and to fabricate
and characterize entirely new metal/silica multicomponent glasses. Three primary
activities will be conducted: 1. The synthesis of new metal/silica xerogels.
Several metal and metal-centered functional groups will be incorporated into the
silica xerogel matrix using the synthetic protocol established for the
oxovanadium materials. Central to this effort is the optimization of conditions
to insure homogeneity for each metal. The metals chosen for incorporation will
be based on their anticipated reactivity and on their position as part of a
series of systematically varying materials for the elucidation of structure-
property relationships. 2. Elucidation of the chemistry of the sol-gel process
under multicomponent conditions. This will involve determining the effects of
the metal on the kinetics and mechanism of gelation, the processes of aging,
drying and stabilization. This will provide a fundamental understanding of the
chemical processes that occur in the solgel process when many kinetically
different components are present. 3. Characterization of the properties and
reactivity of the new multicomponent glasses. The characterization of the hybrid
materials will entail two primary activities: (1) characterization of the
coordination geometry and electronic structure of the metal center as it is
found in the silica matrix; and (2) characterization of the physical and
morphological properties of the bulk xerogel. %%% Homogeneous multicomponent
glasses, comprised of differing ratios of metal and semimetal oxides, have
attracted considerable attention due to their diverse and potentially useful
properties and reactivities. Among the applications predicted for these
materials are as heterogeneous catalysts, chemical sensors and environmental
monitors, and optical and electronics components. While the sol-gel process has
been used successfully to prepare specific materials, problems have precluded
its general employment as a method for preparing homogeneous hybrid glasses.
These problems arise from the widely differing gelation kinetics of the various
constituents and by the many variables associated with aging and drying these
materials; all of which can lead to heterogeneity in the final product. The aim
of this work is to optimize the conditions needed to produce a homogeneous
glass, and provide a detailed and comprehensive picture of the formation and
properties of hybrid metal/silica glasses to contribute significantly to
bringing this class of materials into the sphere of real applications.