* 9623585
* CAREER: Theoretical and Practical Solutions for             Geometric Path Planning and Related Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Danny Chen, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 02/28/2001
* USD 200,000.00

9623585 Chen This project will study the design, analysis, and implementation of
algorithmic techniques for solving geometric shortest path problems, their
generalizations, and applications. Of interest are not only theoretically
efficient algorithms, but also practically efficient ones. The research has
three main interests: (a) Develop efficient algorithmic solutions for several
fundamental geometric shortest path problems that are still outstanding (e.g.,
geometric shortest path queries), (b) investigate new approaches to computing
approximate geometric shortest paths, and (c) design effective and practically
efficient paradigms for planning robotic shortest paths in the plane and in
higher dimensional spaces. Several general frameworks for processing exact and
approximate geometric shortest path queries will be investigated. These
frameworks offer the promise of achieving new efficient algorithmic techniques
and data structures for geometric shortest path queries and for other related
problems. Also, a paradigm is being studied for obtaining practical solutions to
planning shortest obstacle-avoiding paths for robot motion in planar and higher
dimensional environments. This paradigm is based on new data structures called
framed-quadtrees and framed-octrees, and has led to new practical robotic path
planning algorithms. In addition, algorithmic solutions for shortest paths and
their generalizations are applied to practical applications such as data
compression, computer vision, image processing, and VLSI design. New approaches
for solving application problems based on algorithms for shortest path problems
and their generalizations are studied. The possibility of finding new methods
for geometric shortest paths that yield efficient implementation performance on
existing Massively Parallel Processing (MPP) systems is also explored. The
research also includes an important experimental component. The education plan
is to develop a new environment for t eaching and experimenting with Massively
Parallel Processing (MPP) systems by utilizing the new EXECUBE-based MPP
architectures. The goal is to develop an inexpensive, but very robust, MPP
system for upper level undergraduate and entry level graduate students to study
and gain "hands on" experience with parallelism. The curriculum materials to be
developed include concise programming tutorials, lecture notes, sample programs,
and projects with sample solutions. This work could provide an integral part of
not just electives in parallelism, but virtually of all the upper level computer
science and engineering curriculum, and could even provide a basis to spill over
into other engineering and scientific disciplines. ***