* 9623599
* A Career Development Plan for Research and Education Based  on Joining of Intermetallic Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* William Gale, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* K. Linga (KL) Murty
* 06/30/2001
* USD 200,000.00

9623599 Gale This CAREER program focuses on research with closely linked
educational activities related to joining of intermetallic compounds to
conventional nickel-base superalloys. Transient liquid phase (TLP) bonding is
examined as a technique for bonding structural intermetallics since it is
tolerant of limited low temperature ductility and stable oxide formation often
exhibited by such alloy systems. The research aims to elucidate the mechanisms
controlling processing structure property relationships in nickel
aluminide/superalloy joints and thereby demonstrate routes for improved
microstructural control. The formulation of suitable process modeling tools are
a vital part of the research. A difficulty often encountered by students is
establishing interconnections in terms of shared and linked concepts between
different aspects of science. The educational part of the program develops an
educational module on intermetallic alloy to superalloy joining that illustrates
key aspects of materials science with appropriate emphasis on microstructural
development, materials processing, mechanical properties, kinetics and
thermodynamics. This module will include multimedia teaching resources and
inclass demonstrations. %%% The field of intermetallic compounds constitutes a
major research activity both within the US and worldwide. Suitable methodologies
are needed for initial fabrication and post service repair. The joining of
intermetallics to conventional materials, such as superalloys, is particularly
important as intermetallics are likely to be used locally within engineering
systems composed predominantly of such materials. ***