* 9623696
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Adaptive Radiation and Interspecific Gene Flow in High Andean Espeletiinae:  A Coalescent       Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1998
* Barbara Schaal, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 11/30/1998
* USD 13,200.00

9623696 Schaal Research funded by this award probes the workings of adaptive
radiation, one of the fundamental evolutionary processes that foster
biodiversity. Adaptive radiation is manifest in groups of species which, from
their origins in a single common ancestor, have experienced exceptional and
often rapid diversification. In plants, this phenomenon is most apparent within
high elevation tropical habitats. In the Andes mountains of northern South
America, the subtribe Espeletiinae (Asteraceae) has diversified into over 80
species and a spectacular array of morphological forms, making it a classic
example of adaptive radiation and an important model system for studying
evolution in plants. One of the many interesting characteristics of this group
is the high frequency with which several highly inter-fertile species of
Espeletiinae co-occur within the same habitats. This raises the main questions
addressed in this award: how often do such species hybridize, and what role has
hybridization played in the adaptive radiation of this group? The potential for
hybridization to spread adaptive genes from one species to another and even
result in the instant creation of new species makes these questions particularly
fascinating. With support from this award, genetic samples will be collected
from many individuals of these co-occurring species. Variation among these
individuals and species, detected by DNA sequencing, will be analyzed using the
statistically powerful framework provided by recent theoretical advances in
coalescent theory, making it possible to test for evidence of genetic exchange
among species. Results will provide answers to basic questions about the role of
hydridization, not just in the adaptive radiation of the Espeletiinae but it all
plants where hydridization may play an important role in evolution. Findings
will enhance our knowledge of tropical biodiversity and aid in conservation
strategies for endemic plant species.