* 9623227
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Origins and Evolution of Oxalis     Tuberosa, a Polyploid Domesticate
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Jeffrey Doyle, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 05/31/1999
* USD 10,000.00

9623227 DOYLE The tuber crop Oxalis tuberosa, or "oca", was domesticated in the
Andes region of South America long before Inca times. It has the potential for
widespread cultivation, but unlike the potato, another Andean native, oca is
still little known in the rest of the world. Oca is among the many crops, such
as potatoes, maize and wheat, that are polyploid, in this case with eight sets
of chromosomes (most plants and animals have two sets). The origins of oca can
be more accurately evaluated by identifying its closest relatives among wild
species of Oxalis, and by determining the origin of its eight sets of
chromosomes. The extra chromosome sets may have arisen during domestication,
either by duplication of those present in a single progenitor species or by
hybridization among two or more progenitors. In this study, Eve Emshwiller,
under the direction of Jeffrey Doyle, will use evidence from DNA sequences,
chromosome number, and the form and anatomy of the plants to determine the
phylogenetic relationships among oca and its wild relatives. In particular, the
researchers will determine if wild tuber-bearing Oxalis species, recently
discovered in Bolivia, represent the progenitor(s) of oca. Knowledge of the
distribution of genetic diversity in cultivated oca and its relatives will shed
light on the geographic origins and history of domestication. The results of the
study will provide information crucial for efforts to conserve the biodiversity
of the crop and its wild relatives, and will inform a related ethnobotanical
study that is investigating human influences on the genetic variability of the
crop.