* 9623315
* Raman Scattering and Electronic States of Nanoscale Group   4 Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Qi Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 195,000.00

9623315 Lannin The objectives of this work are to obtain basic information on
the phonon states of ordered and disordered semiconducting nanoscale systems
prepared and studied in ultrahigh vacuum. Basic studies of the phonons of group
IV materials will be performed by interference enhanced Raman scattering (IERS)
methods on ultrathin films of very small, 1-2nm, nanocrystallites and on
ultrathin films epitaxial layers grown on selected crystalline oxides. The
results will provide new information about the phonon states of very small
crystallites, without chemisorbed species, and ultrathin crystalline
semiconductor layers. For epitaxial layers the distinct surface geometry, such
as the role of surface dimers and dangling bonds on Raman scattering are of
interest. IERS will provide additional Information about interfacial bonding in
semiconductor/oxide interfaces. The influence of adsorbate atoms on the phonon
states of nanoscale systems will be studied. Raman scattering will be expanded
as a tool for the study of surface and near surface atom dynamics and structure.
Complementary specular, dipolar electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS)
research in Si, Ge and C nanoscale systems will provide information about
interband electronic transitions with decreasing size or film thickness, about
changes in the optical gap and subgap states, and the effects of chemisorbed
species. Changes in the vibrational states of near surface atoms in amorphous
diamond-like carbon materials prepared by pulsed laser deposition will be
studied by high resolution EELS. These in situ measurements of diamond-like
films will allow a means to increase 4-fold bonding in ultrathin and thin films.
%%% As the size of condensed matter systems is reduced in one or more dimensions
to nanoscale levels, surface and near surface atoms play an increasingly
important role in determining physical and chemical properties. Thus electrons
and phonon states, magnetic and optical properties are su bstantially influenced
when dimensions decrease to a scale of 1-2nm. In such systems finite size
quantum effects and the presence of new bonding geometries lead to very
substantial changes in physical properties. Both basic scientific knowledge and
potential technological applications of such small scale systems are thus of
considerable current interest. Different classes of nanoscale systems will be
studied to obtain information on the effects of finite size and near surface
atoms on both the vibrational states and electronic interband transitions. These
studies will involve the use and extension of new and developing experimental
methods for studies of both ordered and disordered nanoscale systems.
Improvements in bilayer interference enhanced Raman scattering (IERS) methods
for ultrathin films in the form of nanocrystalline island particles and
epitaxial layers will enhance Raman scattering as a surface science tool for
ultrathin semiconductors and their interfaces. In addition, reflection electron
energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) will be utilized for new interband electronic
state studies of nanocrystalline, amorphous and epitaxial ultrathin films. These
studies of ordered and disordered nanoscale semiconductors will employ ultrathin
films deposited and studied in situ in a specialized uhv system. ***