* 9623627
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Biochemical and Neuromuscular Basis of Prey Capture Behavior in Flatfishes
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* George Lauder, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 03/31/1997
* USD 7,500.00

9623627 Lauder Natural selection is believed to maintain symmetry in vertebrate
jaws because any deviation from symmetry would negatively affect the ability to
acquire food. Yet, as adults, flatfish have morphologically asymmetrical jaws
and might exhibit asymmetrical prey capture. This project will determine if and
how functional asymmetry is produced in two flatfish species using high-speed
video analysis, morphological description, electromyography, and three-
dimensional modeling of jaw mechanisms. Preliminary results indicate that one
flatfish species produces asymmetrical gape and bending of the jaws out of the
midline during prey capture. However, another species does not experience jaw
bending or asymmetrical gape. This project will focus on modifying current two-
dimensional models to produce three- dimensional models which can accurately
predict functional asymmetry. Models generated will be used in the future to
predict prey capture behavior in other flatfishes and applied to symmetrical
fishes to gain a better understanding of the three-dimensional nature of prey
capture mechanisms. This project will add to our understanding of morphological
diversity, and related diversity in the capture of prey, that can exist in an
important group of organisms.