* 9623813
* The Incorporation of Quantum Effects in the Simulation of   Proton Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Sharon Hammes-Schiffer, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 11/30/2000
* USD 294,625.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting Professor
Hammes-Schiffer at the University of Notre Dame as part of the CAREER program
for young scientists. The objective of this research is to develop and apply new
methods for simulating dynamical processes involving multiple proton transfer
reactions. In order to simulate proton transfer reactions, methods that
incorporate the quantum mechanical behavior of the hydrogen atoms being
transferred must be developed. In surface-hopping methods such as molecular
dynamics with quantum transitions (MDQT), trajectories split into branches that
are each assigned to a particular proton quantum state, so branching processes
(i.e. processes involving multiple channels or pathways) are described
accurately. The direct extension of MDQT to processes involving multiple proton
transfer steps, however, is not computationally feasible. The proposed new
method, MC-MDQT, combines MDQT with a multiconfigurational (MC) self-consistent-
field approach and will describe branching processes properly as well as allow
the quantum mechanical treatment of multiple hydrogen atoms. This method will be
applied to two classes of systems. The first is proton transport along linear
chains of hydrogen-bonded water molecules. This is an important process because
the rapid transport of protons over large distances in biologically important
systems such as bacteriorhodopsin and photosynthetic reaction centers is thought
to occur along such chains. The second class of systems that will be studied is
hydrogen transfer in enzymes such as alcohol dehydrogenase, which plays a vital
role in glycolysis. Kinetic isotope effect experiments indicate that hydrogen
tunneling is significant in a variety of enzyme reactions. The goal of these
applications is to elucidate the underlying physical principles of proton
transfer reactions and to clarify the detailed mechanisms of these biologically
important reactions. The educational objectives of this Carreer grant are to
promote the wider use of computer simulations in the areas of organic chemistry
and biochemistry. A course in computer simulations has already been designed. An
outgrowth of this project is the creation of a computer lab workbook, as well as
a textbook which will facilitate the development of such courses at other
universities. A general proton transfer reaction involves the passing of a
hydrogen atom nucleus from a donor to an acceptor. Experiments have shown that
the hydrogen atom can tunnel through an energy barrier required for such a
reaction. This research will focus on methods that incorporate quantum
mechanical behavior, such as tunneling in order to simulate proton transfer
reactions. The educational objectives of this Carreer grant are to promote the
wider use of computer simulations in the areas of organic chemistry and
biochemistry. A course in computer simulations has already been designed. The
course consists of three parts: The lectures convey the fundamental concepts for
computer simulation; Computer labs provide hands on experience with molecular
modeling, while independent research motivates sutdents to pursue future
projects. An outgrowth of this project is the creation of a computer lab
workbook, as well as a textbook which will facilitate the development of such
courses at other universities.