* 9623458
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Restoration of Upland White Cedar in Northeastern Minnesota
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Peter Reich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 05/31/1998
* USD 9,500.00

REICH DEB-9623458 White cedar forests were once common in the western Great
Lakes region. Widespread logging and fire in the early 20th century reduced old-
growth white cedar forests to a few small stands surrounded by younger forest.
White cedar forests in upland areas, such as the North Shore of Lake Superior,
are especially rare. For several decades, white cedar reproduction in remaining
patches has been scarce. As older trees die, there are no younger trees to
replace them. The North Shore White Cedar Restoration Project will identify the
most serious problems faced by white cedar. The proposed study will identify
barriers to regeneration in old-growth cedar forests on the North Shore of Lake
Superior and enable the development of a recovery plan for this rare plant
community. Factors leading to unsuccessful cedar reproduction may include
browsing by white-tailed deer, poor growth conditions, and seed dispersal
limitations. If reproduction continues to be unsuccessful, these forests may
disappear within our lifetime, and thus this represents a biodiversity concern
at several levels. The white cedar forest as an ecosystem type represents a part
of our natural heritage; moreover, there may be plants and animals particularly
associated with cedar forests whose distribution and abundance may be restricted
due to the shrinkage of this habitat type.