* 9623801
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Spatial Scale and Population         Persistence:  Insights from a Plant-Herbivore-Parasitoid    System
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Steven Frank, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 08/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

962301 Frank This research focuses on how populations persist in nature. This
goal is pursued in two ways: (1) Investigations of dynamics within local
populations to identify factors that may stabilize population fluctuations, and
(2) investigations on a broader spatial scale to determine whether interactions
among local populations can bring about regional persistence. This study system
consists of the harlequin bug (Murgantia histrionica), a herbivore on bladderpod
(Isomeris arborea), and two parasitoids that attack bug eggs. Patchy
distribution of the host plant clearly delineates the units on which local and
regional dynamics will be investigated. On the local scale, parasitoid exclusion
experiments will be conducted to determine whether the presence of two
asynchronously acting parasitoids leads to host population stability. On the
regional scale, host and parasitoid dispersal will be manipulated in
experimental archipelagoes to determine whether dispersal among local
populations leads to regional stability. Dispersal manipulations will be
complemented by examination of distance and density-dependent effects of
dispersal, and by empirical and theoretical explorations of how interactions
among dispersal and environmental heterogeneity influence asynchrony among local
populations. The results of this study will be important for several reasons.
First, there is much current interest in the dynamics of subdivided populations
that are interconnected by dispersal because of the practical implications for
habitat fragmentation and conservation. Second, the choice of study system
allows investigations of how habitat patchiness influences the interactions
among species and the community-level processes that affect extinctions. Multi-
species interactions in a spatially subdivided setting can also provide insights
into biological control of insect pests. Understanding how complex species
interactions persist in subdivided habitats is perhaps the most important issue
for the science of con servation biology.