* 9623495
* Dissertation Research:  Systematics of Spigelia             (Loganiaceae):  Tropical/Temperate Relationships and the    Origin of a Temperate Disjunction
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Billie Turner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1998
* USD 9,930.00

9623495 Turner Graduate student Katherine Gould, with direction from advisers
Billie Turner and Robert Jansen at University of Texas, is studying the American
plant genus Spigelia of the Loganiaceae family, which has an estimated 50
species distributed in North, Central, and South America. Samples are being
drawn from herbarium collections and from field expeditions in Mexico and
elsewhere, to provide materials for both intensive morphological studies and for
molecular analyses of nuclear DNA variation and chloroplast DNA restriction-
enzyme variation. The goals are to assess morphological features that will
provide reliable characters for distinguishing the species in the genus, and to
infer a phylogeny of sections within the genus with the two molecular data sets,
testing for concordance between them and integrating them in a combined-DNA
database. One major test will focus on the three native species in the U.S. and
assess whether these comprise a single evolutionary unit (a clade) or represent
separate speciations into the north temperate zone. A subsidiary test will
assess relationships between spigelias on opposite sides of the Mississippi
River, in Texas and in Florida. %%% Modern taxonomic studies of plants combine
morphological studies with newer molecular analyses. The morphological studies
evaluate variation in vegetative and reproductive characters within and among
populations in order to designate reliable features for identification and
assess species status. Molecular (DNA) data allow measurement of mutational
differences between species and the inference of phylogenetic (genealogical)
relationships among them. With this phylogeny as guide, the geographical
distributions of the species can be analyzed to detect migration pathways
through time, and to determine whether single or multiple invasions have
occurred. ***