* 9623790
* GEM:  A Survey of Simultaneous Pc 3 Micropulsations and     High Latitude Impulsive Events for the GEM Boundary Layer   Campaign
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Edgar Bering, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 06/30/2000
* USD 150,000.00

This project will undertake analysis of data to increase our understanding of
the possible signatures of magnetopause and magnetospheric boundary layer
processes that are observed in the ionosphere and on the ground. The study will
focus specifically on a search for simultaneous observations of two different
geomagnetic perturbation phenomena whose possible sources may be either the
magnetopause or the upstream solar wind. The phenomena that will be studied are
Pc 3 micropulsations and high latitude magnetic impulse events known as
traveling convection vortices (TCVs). Pc 3 micropulsations are quasi-periodic
pertubations of the Earth's magnetic field with periods between 10 and 45
seconds. One sources of these pulsations is believed to be the upstream
solarwind. High latitude magnetic impulse events are large amplitude (100nt),
often monopolar pulsations of the geomagnetic field with periods of 10 - 20
minute duration. Interest in these pulsations was stimulated by the hypothesis
that they consituted the ionospheric signature of sporatic reconnection --
though this speculation has become very controversial. Recent work suggests that
these may occur on closed field lines. The possible connection between Pc 3 and
TCVs has not been undertaken. There have, however, been some observations to
indicate that Pc 3 events can occur simultaneously with TCV events and propagate
with the same horizontal speed. This suggests that they may occur on the same
field lines and share a common source. A detailed study is needed to develop a
conclusive determination of a possible relationship between the two phenomena.
This will be accomplished using data from the MACCS magnetometer array in
northern Canada.