* 9623487
* Dissertation Research: Maintenance of Geographic Variation  in Cooperative Behavior
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1999
* Steven Rissing, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 05/31/1999
* USD 9,938.00

9623487 Rissing Though species are often thought of as groups of organisms with
similar traits, adaptation to local habitats can cause populations to vary in a
wide variety of traits. Whether such variation can be maintained depends on the
amount of migration between populations and the results of interactions between
alternative forms in areas where populations contact one another, or hybrid
zones. Research funded by this award addresses the maintenance of a behavioral
hybrid zone for the desert seed-harvester ant, Messor pergandei. Seed harvester
ants are keystone species, playing an important role in maintaining plant
species diversity in desert systems. Queens of M. pergandei start colonies in
two distinct ways. In the eastern half of the species' range, queens form groups
and cooperate in nest construction. In the western half, queens are aggressive
toward one another and dig solitary nests. This behavior switches over a 14
kilometer hybrid zone, within which both behaviors occur. To determine how this
zone is maintained, the effects of queen density, hybridization and dispersal on
colony founding rates and queen survival will be tested in controlled laboratory
experiments. In addition, the importance of behavioral variation in determining
rates of migration of genes between regions will be assessed in nature by
documenting changes in frequencies of neutral genes across the hybrid zone.
These two lines of evidence should give one of the first views of both the
adaptive significance of behavioral diversity and its role in maintaining hybrid
zones. Hybrid zones are continually in flux as new ones are established and
existing ones eliminated by processes by environmental change. Rates of
disappearance for hybrid zones however, have been exacerbated due to human
disturbances. To understand the effects of human activity on population
diversity, it is crucial to investigate the forces that act to maintain
diversity in naturally occurring hybrid zones. The research funded in thi s
award contributes to this goal.