* 9623496
* Dissertation Research:  Biogeography and                    Phylogeny of Malesherbiaceae
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Daniel Crawford, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1998
* USD 7,960.00

9623496 Crawford Graduate student Karla Gengler, with direction from adviser
Daniel Crawford at Ohio State University, is studying the South American plant
family Malesherbiaceae, with an emphasis on obtaining new DNA sequence data from
all the species in the family in order to infer phylogenetic relationships. This
small family is endemic to the Pacific coastal desert region of South America,
and occurs in two areas separated by the Atacama Desert in northern Chile. It
will serve as a starting point for the study of biogeography and speciation
patterns of aridland plants and animals of this region. The current taxonomic
classification is based on morphological characters, most of which have not been
evaluated for variability and reliability. Re-evaluation of these and addition
of new molecular evidence from nuclear ribosomal gene sequencing will provide
data for robust inferences of phylogenetic (genealogical) relationship among the
species and with related groups. Field work in Peru will augment collections
already made in Chile and those from herbarium holdings. In turn, the phylogeny
will provide a necessary background for studies of biogeography (migration
routes, centers of origin and of diversification) and of speciation patterns.
%%% The Pacific coastal desert of South America contains a variety of arid
habitats that are presumed to have developed since the Paleocene as the Andes
mountains rose and the cold Humboldt Current formed to the west. Pleistocene
glaciations are thought to have further affected plant distributions in this
region. In order to establish patterns of plant species movements through time,
robust phylogenies of many groups must be established. This project promises one
of these, for the small family Malesher`iaceae. ***