* 9623810
* Achieving Selectivity in a Chemical Reaction Process Using  Reactant Orientation via Electric Fields
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Wei Kong, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 04/30/2000
* USD 369,500.00

Wei Kong of Oregon State University has been awarded a CAREER grant in the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to investigate ways of orienting
chemical reactants to achieve reaction selectivity. The goal is the ability to
selectively cleave a designated chemical bond with minimum effects from
competitive pathways. Using supersonic molecular beams and moderate electric
fields, orientation of polar reactants has been observed. The oriented chemical
bond will then be selectively dissociated by a linearly polarized laser.
Depending on the direction of the transition dipole moment of the oriented
molecules and the polarization direction of the laser, one reaction coordinate
will be preferentially excited, resulting in selective cleavage of a chemical
bond. Prof. Kong's educational plans include development of a new course on
chemical reaction dynamics emphasizing a `case studies` approach, and the
teaching of an existing quantum chemistry course from a historical perspective.
Selectivity in a multiple-path reaction is one of the most fascinating questions
in chemical kinetics and reaction dynamics, and achieving selectivity has been a
major driving force in many scientific endeavors. With selectivity, different
reaction pathways can be isolated and investigated in detail. This ability will
not only allow a deeper understanding of each reaction path, but also enable
investigations of systems that would otherwise be too complicated to tackle.