* 9623187
* Mathematical Sciences:  Hypergeometric Functions, Zeta      and Gamma Values in Finite Characteristic
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Dinesh Thakur, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 07/31/1999
* USD 42,291.00

Thakur 9623187 The investigator will explore analogies between Number Theory and
Geometry. The hypergeometric function is one of the most important special
functions in mathematics and mathematical physics. Many of the functions that
arise in various branches of mathematics and physics-Bessel, Legendre, and
Jacobi functions, and many interesting orthogonal polynomials-are special cases
of the hypergeometric function. Similarly, the q-hypergeometric functions arise
in the study of mathematical physics. The investigator has introduced an
analogue for function fields, and he will develop their theory and applications.
A classical problem in Number Theory is to understand the nature of the values
of the Riemann zeta-function. Euler showed that the values at even integers s
are rational multiples of powers of pi. For odd s, the only known result is that
the zeta-function is irrational at s=3. Carlitz considered an analogue of the
zeta-function by taking a sum over monic polynomials with coefficients in finite
fields, and established an analogue of Euler's result. In the joint work with
Anderson, the PI showed that for any positiveminteger s, the values are
logarithms of algebraic numbers, and are therefore transcendental. It was also
shown that the analogue of Euler's result for odd s does not hold in this case.
The proposer plans to generalize thismresult to general function fields. The
order of vanishing of zeta functions gives important arithmetic information. The
PI plans to complete new partial results that he has obtained about these
orders. Also, the PI plans to workmout the relations of special values with the
cyclotomic theory, in light of recent work of Anderson. The special values of
the classical gamma function have also been extensively studied. The PI
introduced a new gamma function for function fields. He has established special
values results for its interpolations at finite primes for general function
fields and for interpolati on at the infinite prime only for the rational
function field. He plans to settle the remaining case. This research falls into
the general mathematical field of Number Theory. Number theory has its
historical roots in the study of the whole numbers, addressing such questions as
those dealing with the divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among
the oldest branches of mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely
aesthetic reasons. However, within the last half century it has become an
indispensable tool in diverse applications in areas such as data transmission
and processing, and communication systems.