* 9623395
* Monolayer Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Oscar Vilches, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 285,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9623395 Vilches This project is concerned with the
study of surface and interface phenomena in H2, HD, D2, 3He, and 4He. A search
for a liquid phase of H2 below 5.7K, the lowest triple point on record, will be
conducted. Should a liquid phase be observed down to 2K or so, superfluid
properties are expected. A careful survey of freezing and possible phase
separation in H2-D2 film mixtures (and comparison studies with 3He-4He mixtures)
will be done. Measurements of the frost heave pressure of H2 condensed inside
micropores, where a surface melted layer of H2 should respond to a temperature
gradient along the sample by sustaining a very large pressure gradient, will be
performed. Neutron and X-ray scattering measurements on the various hydrogen
isotopes will measure structure and transport properties. Graduate and
undergraduate students are involved in all aspects of the project. %%% This
project will explore, using different conditions and techniques, the possible
existence of liquid hydrogen films to very low temperatures. Films of hydrogen
formed on special solid substrates and hydrogen frozen inside porous materials
may yield liquid films which will have unusual new fluid flow, heat transport,
and/or pressure gradient properties. The technical side of the project will
measure liquid and solid properties through thermal, pressure gradient, neutron,
and X-ray experiments on the stable molecules of hydrogen, deuterium, and
deuterium hydride, and their mixtures. Comparison experiments will be done using
helium isotopes which are known to be fluid. Graduate and undergraduate students
are involved in all aspects of this project. ***