* 9623889
* Electrostatic Charging Effects in Perovskite Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Xiaoxing Xi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/2000
* USD 165,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9623889 Xi This project studies carrier doping effects
on the insulator- metal transition and the electronic and magnetic properties of
perovskite oxides which exhibit strong electron-electron correlations. The
technique used is electrostatic charging, in which the carrier density is
changed electrically in a field- effect transistor-like structure without
introducing disorder, lattice distortion or a structural phase transition. One
objective of the project is to induce superconductivity in high temperature
superconducting cuprate samples which are originally not superconducting and
study the carrier density dependence of the insulator-super-conductor phase
transition and transport properties in this process. A long-term goal of this
project is to establish electrostatic charging as an important tool in the
research of doping effects in perovskite oxide systems with strong electron-
electron correlations. %%% Metal oxides are a class of materials with a wide
variety of novel properties such as high temperature superconductivity and
colossal magneto-resistivity. Electron charge carrier doping in these materials,
in which electrons interact strongly with each other, is the key to the
understanding of these properties. However, the usual approach of chemical
doping is always accompanied by disorder and sometimes structural phase
transitions. This project studies the doping effects using a different approach,
i.e. the electrostatic charging, which changes the carrier density electrically
without introducing other effects. One objective of the project is to transform
a nonsuperconducting cuprate sample into a superconductor by adding charge
carriers into it. The long-term goal is to establish electrostatic charging as
an important tool in the research of metal oxides with strong el ectron-electron
correlations, which is potentially of great scientific and technological
significance for advanced superconducting and magnetoresistive electronic
devices. ***