* 9623928
* Dissertation Research:  The Effect of Agregation on the     Coexistence of Insects Living in Rotting Fruits
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* William Morris, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 04/30/1998
* USD 6,130.00

9623928 Morris Patchy and ephemeral resources such as rotting fruit are used by
many species. Individuals that live in the same patch often compete very
strongly, yet competitors may coexist regionally. Insects that live in rotting
fruit frequently have highly aggregated intraspecific distributions, which may
prevent competitive exclusion and maintain high species diversity. An aggregated
distribution increases the frequency of intraspecific competition and leaves
empty patches that may be colonized by other species. However the effect of
aggregation has not been tested in the field, and may be swamped by other
mechanisms. Pilot studies have found many species of insects with larvae that
live in the rotting fruit of the tree Apeiba membranacae, and have aggregated
distributions. These insects can be aggregated at three nested spatial scales:
individual fruit, whole trees, and forest fragments. This research will
experimentally test the importance of aggregation for coexistence in this system
by documenting spatial patterns, measuring the strength and structure of
competition, manipulating distributions of larvae, and investigating the
interaction between predation and aggregation. This research will provide one of
the first field tests of the importance of aggregation in promoting species
coexistence in patchy and ephemeral resources. This research will also extend
the existing theoretical models of coexistence due to aggregation to include
multiple spatial scales.