* 9623077
* Mathematical Sciences: Positron Emission Tomography:        Modelling, Analysis and Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Murali Rao, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9623077 Mair The proposers investigate a refinement of the Shepp-Vardi
probabilistic model for positron emission tomography (PET), and the
corresponding expectation-maximization maximum-likelihood (EM-ML) reconstruction
algorithm. This model replaces the usual finite linear system with an integral
equation in which the unknown is a Borel measure. The research includes an
analysis of the convergence properties of this algorithm, numerical methods of
implementation by spline and wavelet bases, and an analysis of the smoothing
effects of these bases. The convergence results provide mathematical reasons in
terms of the regularity properties of Borel measures, for the seeming divergence
of the numerical implementations of the finite dimensional EM-ML algorithm.
Also, since the EM-ML algorithm has been recently extended to linear integral
equations in which the kernel and the unknown function are nonnegative, these
results provide important insight into the open problem of convergence of this
algorithm. In addition, the research introduces, analyzes, and develops novel
algorithms for dealing with data errors due to accidental coincidences and
attenuation. The proposers also investigate the mathematical properties of the
probability functions which link the emissions to the detector geometry in both
PET and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). Preliminary work for
SPECT links these functions to the classical Poisson kernel. This study is
important for developing accurate, efficient, fast, alternatives to the EM-ML
reconstruction algorithm. %%% The mathematical realization of many problems in
science, engineering, and medicine, give rise to inverse problems which are ill-
posed in the sense of Hadamard, and in which positivity plays an important role.
This proposal deals mainly with the particular example of such a problem
occuring in the nuclear imaging procedure of PET. In this procedure, a patient
is given a radiopharmaceutical which is absorbed disprop ortionately by various
regions of the organ of interest and emits positrons according to the amount
absorbed. These emissions are collected by PET scanners which surround the
region of interest and then used in reconstruction algorithms which generate
images containing important information about the metabolism of an organ or
region of interest. This information is extremely useful for blood flow and
metabolic activity studies. For instance, it is a valuable tool in the diagnosis
of tumors, in determining their rates of growth; in psychological studies for
mapping activation areas of the brain to cognitive tasks, in determining the
effects of various drugs on the brain, and in quantitative measures of the
health of the human heart. The proposers develop a refined mathematical model
for the PET process and introduce novel mathematical and numerical methods for
the reconstruction of PET images. These reconstruction algorithms are
sufficiently flexible to deal with significant errors in the PET data, caused by
anatomical obstructions which prevent some of the emitted photons from being
registered in the appropriate detector. An important component of this work is
the development and evaluation of efficient, reliable, accurate algorithms for
reconstructing PET images. Although primarily directed to PET studies, the
results obtained in this reserach are also applicable to other medical and
engineering problems, such as those which occur in liver biopsies,
nondestructive evaluation of manufactured items, and the restoration of blurred
images from outer space. ***