* 9623450
* Career:  Silicon Etching:  Gas-Surface Dynamics and Profile Evolution
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Konstantinos Giapis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9623450 This project addresses the importance of inelastic and
reactive scattering in the etching of semiconductors. Experiments are proposed
with a recently invented hypersonic neutral beam of fluorine atoms with
translational energies in the 3-25 eV regime for fundamental studies of the gas-
surface dynamics occurring during steady-state etching of silicon and etching
studies of submicron features in silicon in order to understand how neutral
beams etch. The effort is based on recent results from profile evolution
modeling and experiments with flourine atom beams with translational energies
between 3 and 18 eV. Anisotropic etching of silicon at room temperature with
fluorine chemistry (no sidewall deposition) is demonstrated as a proof of the
capabilities of such beams. This has been possible because of direct reactions
occurring at the high translational energies employed. Collision-induced
desorption (CID) has been implicated as the mechanism responsible for the
increased desorption rate of fluorinated silicon moieties from the SiFx layer at
the higher energies. Rapid removal of the SiF3 product in the CID mode enables
rapid fluorination of the exposed surface, which increases fluorine utilization
and, in turn, results in a reduction of the thermally desorbing unreacted
fluorine-atom flux. Reduction of scattered fluorine to the sidewalls
dramatically improves anisotropy. Fundamental measurements of the energy and
flux of unreacted F atoms and reaction products (SixFy) leaving the SiFx layer
during etching are made. Moreover, similar measurements are performed on the
silicon dioxide surface. Silicon dioxide is ubiquitous on today's wafers (e.g.,
as a hard mask, gate oxide, etc.) and scattering on its surface will also affect
profile evolution. Besides improving fundamental understanding of gas-surface
dynamics, these measurements provide for a description of the physics and
chemistry of the interaction, which is incorporated into a Monte Carlo simulator
of profile evolution. Preliminary calculations based on detailed scattering
experiments on SiFx are shown to capture profile peculiarities such as the so-
called "microtrenching", that is, the appearance of grooves at the bottom of
etched features. The model is improved to describe pattern-dependent etching,
three-dimensional effects, and the roughness appearing on etched surfaces. By
including microstructure charging and ion deflection effects, the applicability
of the profile simulator is enhanced, enabling its combination with plasma
reactor models (developed by others) for designing the etch tools for the next
generation of ultrahigh-density semiconductor devices. Etching experiments are
also performed to support the model and verify predictions of profile
peculiarities. Understanding the origin of predicted and observed deviations
from the ideal anisotropic profile is expected to enable control over the final
profile. Electrical damage studies on gate oxides of MOS devices are done as a
demonstration of the potential of the technique. Finally, upon perfection of the
technique, fabrication of quantum-confined and photonic bandgap structures is
attempted. In order to integrate research with education in chemical
engineering, the relation between classical chemical engineering concepts and
modern electronic material processing techniques is exposed. As an example,
special topics are offered in the undergraduate thermodynamics class, such as
equilibrium in plasmas and surface thermodynamics, which are not traditionally
covered. An introductory plasma experiment is planned for the undergraduate
laboratory with hands-on experience in diagnostics. Extended research projects
are also offered to undergraduates in the P.I.'s laboratory to enhance their
appreciation of experimental science. At the graduate level, in addition to a
course on electronic materials processing, plans are made to offer a new course
on beam modification of surfaces, which is based on results and understanding
obtained from this proposed research. ***