* 9623285
* Mathematical Sciences:  K Theory and Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Jeffrey Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 71,950.00

DMS-9623285 Jeffrey S. Fox University of Colorado The project consists of three
problems related to harmonic analysis and K-theory. The first problem is
concerned with studying the structure of the representation ring defined by
Kasparov for the general linear group over a local field. We are developing a
method of "induction" from the representation ring of a maximal parabolic to the
representation ring of the full group. The main issue in this problem is an
analytic one, involving the construction of an appropriate operator between
G-representations that almost commutes , in the sense of Kasparov, with the
G-action. The second problem concerns the explicit computation of multiplicity's
of irreducible representations of compact groups in the kernel and cokernel of
transversally elliptic differential operators. The third problem is to study the
explicit decomposition of the quasi-regular representation for an algebraic
solvable Lie group. The main focus is to apply the fairly new results of
Anoussis on orbital integrals for solvable Lie groups in conjunction with the
Selberg trace formula. The overall focus of this project is to use symmetry to
study several complicated systems. The notion of symmetry pervades the sciences
and while it is difficult to give a precise mathematical definition ( but such a
definition does exist), we see symmetry every day. The "squareness" of a square
or the "roundness" of a circle are two examples of symmetry. The reason symmetry
is such an important idea is that it is systems that possess intrinsic symmetry
that scientists can analyze. The symmetry of a problem provides us with powerful
tools for developing effective means of computation. As an example, one of the
problems that this proposal is concerned with is finding effective means of
calculating, very explicitly, the "G- indices" of certain differential
operators: we are counting certain types of solutions of a problem where
symmetry is present. This leads to the development of a type of Feynma n diagram
that incorporates both the differential operator as well as the underlying
symmetries. Feynman diagram techniques have proved to be very important both in
academic science as well as applied science in industry. For example, the
General Motors Research lab outside of Detroit has mathematicians that
specialize in Feynman diagram techniques, which are used to solve the
mathematics behind very practical problems.