* 9623426
* Dissertation Research:  Molecular Phylogeny of the Endemic  Rodents of Madagascar
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Priscilla Tucker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 05/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9623426 TUCKER The primary goal of studies in systematic biology is to
understand the processes that give rise to the diversity of life. Reconstructing
the historical (OphylogeneticO) relationships among organisms is the first step
in studying the patterns of diversity and elucidating the processes that give
rise to this diversity. This project investigates the phylogenetic relationships
among an exceptionally diverse group of mammals, the native rodents of
Madagascar (the nesomyine rodents; subfamily Nesomyinae), and explores the
relationships among these rodents and rodents native to mainland Africa. The
seven genera and 14 species of Nesomyinae are exceedingly diverse
morphologically and ecologically; the only "character" serving to unite the
group is their common distribution on Madagascar. There is some uncertainty
whether the nesomyines are a result of a single adaptive radiation or of
multiple migrations to the island. If the nesomyine rodents are in fact the
result of one migration event, it is certainly one of the most spectacular
mammalian radiations on earth. An organism's phylogenetic history is written in
its DNA. This study, by Sharon Jansa under the direction of Priscilla Tucker,
therefore will use DNA sequence data to uncover the relationships among
nesomyine rodents. Data will be obtained from two genes: the maternally
inherited cytochrome b gene and the biparentally inherited zona pellucida 3
gene. The combination of maternally inherited and biparentally inherited gene
sequence data is likely to accurately reflect the history of the organisms and
not simply the history of the genes. This study is significant in that it is the
first to use a molecular data set to investigate the phylogeny of the nesomyine
rodents. The knowledge of relationships obtained from this study will provide a
framework for examining the ecological and morphological specializations among
this diverse group of mammals. This may be the only opportunity to study this
unique fauna, whi ch is rapidly disappearing due to continuing deforestation and
encroachment of human-introduced species.