* 9623528
* Dissertation Research:  The Ecological Genetics of Plant    Tolerance in Relation to Mammalian Herbivory in Ipomopsis   Aggregata (Polemoniaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Joy Bergelson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 05/31/1998
* USD 5,640.00

9623528 Bergelson The environmental impact of grazing can be dramatic,
influencing both biotic and abiotic components of ecosystems. Many studies have
documented loss of biodiversity, decreases in plant population size, invasion of
exotic weeds, and degraded water quality due to livestock grazing on public
lands. Most of these impacts are due to the direct effect of herbivory on native
plants. The research funded by this award addresses the ecological and genetic
factors regulating the impact of grazing on native plants. In particular,
experiments will address the environmental and genetic controls on plant
resistance to herbivory. Plant resistance will be analyzed in its two component
aspects: defense, decreasing the frequency of attack and tolerance, allowing
regrowth and compensation for lost tissue (tolerance). This research will
utilize experimentally manipulations to investigate ecological factors which
influence the impact of grazing on plants along with modern quantitative
genetics approaches to mechanistically investigate how plants cope with and
deter browsing. Findings should contribute to our knowledge of how grazing
regimes might be altered to reduce their damaging effects. The results will have
direct implications for our understanding of the effects of browsing on native
plants and may provide insight into novel approaches for pest management in
agricultural systems.