* 9623261
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Problems of Solid          Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Stuart Antman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9623261 Antman The PI proposes to treat a variety of dynamical and steady-state
nonlinear problems for rods, shells, and three-dimensional solid bodies. The
bodies are composed of nonlinearly elastic, viscoelastic, plastic, viscoplastic,
or magnetoelastic materials. He also intends to treat fluid-solid interactions.
In each case, properly invariant, geometrically exact theories encompassing
general nonlinear constitutive equations are to be used. The goals of these
studies are to discover new nonlinear effects, determine thresholds in
constitutive equations separating qualitatively different responses, examine
important kinds of instabilities, contribute to the theory of shocks and
dissipative mechanisms in solids, and develop new methods of nonlinear analysis
and of effective computation for problems of solid mechanics. %%% The
investigator proposes to study the behavior of various solids undergoing large
dynamic deformations, including cases in which the solid is interacting with a
fluid, as happens in airplanes and ships. By applying modern mathematical
methods to theories of deformable solids formulated with great generality and
precision, he intends to treat problems for large families of materials at one
time. One aim of this work is to determine unexpected instabilities, which can
adversely alter the response of structures used in technological applications.
He also proposes to contribute to the theory of material behavior, to the
development of methods for the control of material behavior (by using smart
materials involving electromagnetic effects, for example), and to the
development of new mathematical and computational methods capable of handling
these difficult and important applications. ***