* 9623224
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Cooperative Reproduction
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Stephen Emlen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 04/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract Proposal # 9623224 PI: S. T. Emlen & P.M. Buston In 1859, Charles
Darwin put forward one of the most profound ideas in the history of science; the
idea of evolution by natural selection. Since Darwin, it has become widely
accepted that natural selection should favor individuals that behave in ways
that maximize their total number of surviving offspring. In this context
cooperative breeding is an evolutionary paradox because it refers to social
systems where individuals forego their own reproduction and assist others in the
care of young. The proposed research will test the robustness of current theory
concerning the evolution of cooperative breeding by investigating its
applicability to the marine environment for the first time. The research
proposed will investigate the breeding system of the Clown anemonefish
Amphiprion percula in Madang Lagoon, Papua New Guinea. At this site, groups
composed of a breeding pair and 0 - 6 juveniles defend anemones as reproductive
territories. Three questions will be investigated: 1) do juveniles at the
anemone increase the number of offspring of the breeders? Preliminary data, from
a 1995 pilot study, suggests that juveniles do indeed increase the number of
offspring of the breeding pair. 2) how do the juveniles increase the number of
offspring of the breeders? 3) what are the evolutionary costs and benefits of
the breeding system to the juveniles? The project will combine year round field
observations, experimental manipulations, and molecular analysis of kin
relationships. The anemonefishes offer a unique opportunity to expand our
knowledge of behavioral plasticity in animal societies. Athorough understanding
of the breeding system within the studied population will facilitate comparisons
with other populations of A. percula which have different mating systems, as
well as with other anemonefishes which live throughout the tropical and sub-
tropical Ind opacific. The research will be of interest to behavioral and
evolutionary biologists, as well as tropical fish hobbyists because the
anemonefishes are some of the most popular salt water aquarium fish.