* 9623313
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Evolution of Mangrove Seed          Physiology
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Elizabeth Kellogg, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 05/31/1997
* USD 9,659.00

Proposal: 9623313 PI: Kellogg and Farnsworth A comprehensive understanding of
mechanisms of seed drying and dormancy is critical to developing appropriate
storage, planting, and germination protocols for farms, arboreta, botanical
gardens, and seed conservation banks. The evolution of desiccation-intolerance,
and its developmental manifestations, vivipary and recalcitrance, will be
studied in seeds of four phylogenetically independent mangrove lineages. Embryos
of dormant (orthodox) seeds normally lose water prior to entering metabolic
quiescence; by contrast, "recalcitrant" seeds that are intolerant of desiccation
show no dormancy, and some sprout viviparously on the parent plant. While rare
among upland angiosperms, this phenomenon appears frequently among coastal
mangroves, rice, and wet- forest trees, with important implications for
agriculture and seed conservation. We hypothesize that desiccation- intolerance
results from one of three alternative evolutionary modifications that are not
mutually exclusive: (1) decreased levels of the plant hormone abscisic acid,
ABA, during embryogenesis (which controls both osmotic adjustment of the whole
plant to flooding, and dormancy in orthodox seeds); (2) differential levels of
dehydrin proteins, carbohydrate reserves, or other hormones in recalcitrant
seeds; (3) altered anatomy of the seed coat, maternal transfer tissues, or
embryo/endosperm relationship that may free the embryo from influences of
physical or biochemical germination inhibitors. To test among these hypotheses,
we will examine the hormonal, physiological, and anatomical bases of
desiccation-intolerance that are shared among four viviparous mangrove families,
in a study of seeds through development and germination. Seeds of viviparous
species will be compared with seeds of closely related, non- viviparous taxa to
determine whether similar, functionall y significant changes in seed structure
and physiology have arisen consistently in this pattern of parallel evolution.
This integrated approach will elucidate the nature of this evolutionary
convergence at several biological levels; clarify relationships between anatomy,
hormonal physiology, proteins and sugar metabolism during development of
viviparous and orthodox seeds; and provide some of the first documentation of
the role of hormones in the evolution of plant life histories. These comparative
data on multiple, interacting factors controlling seed dormancy and
recalcitrance can usefully inform strategies for plant conservation,
propagation, and agriculture.