* 9623280
* Mathematical Sciences: Boundaries of K-Types and            Restriction of Cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Mark Sepanski, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1999
* USD 59,000.00

Abstract Sepanski Let G be a real reductive Lie group with K a maximally compact
subgroup. Write g and k for the complexified Lie algebras, respectively, and let
X be a (g, K) module. The objective of the investigator's research is to
determine a non-combinatorial description for the set of K-types of X first in
the case where X is a discrete series representation and second in the case
where X is a cohomologically induced module. This will be accomplished in three
steps: 1) make precise the notion of an "edge" of the set of K-types; 2)
identify the K-types that lie on an edge using cohomological methods; and 3) use
the convex hull of the edge K-types to describe the entire set of K-types. The
investigator's methods are based on a conjecture of D. Vogan concerning a
certain restriction map of cohomology. If q=l+u is a theta-stable parabolic with
Levi component l, Vogan's conjecture states that the image of the restriction
map from u cohomology to u intersect k cohomology parameterizes the K-types
lying on edges that are not contained in a Weyl chamber wall of K. The ideas
associated to this conjecture provide the main techniques for approaching the
proposed objective. From a global point of view, this project is motived by the
existence of symmetry in the world. This symmetry manifests itself in a variety
of forms such as the lattice structure of certain crystals in chemistry, the
behavior of subatomic particles in high energy physics, or the equations
describing fluid flow in engineering. In all these diverse applications, one of
the mathematical tools that is particularly powerful is known as representation
theory. In a broad sense, representation theory is the study of all possible
symmetries of a given system. The hope is to classify all symmetries and to
provide detailed information about each one. While great strides have been made
towards this goal, many difficult problems remain. An important technique used
to study these remaining problems is to examine somethin g known as the K-types
of a representation. In a broad sense, the set of K-types is a slight
simplification of a complicated representation to something that is more
manageable. It turns out that the set of K-types is a very effective way to both
construct representations and to deduce special properties of representations.
The investigator's research aims to provide a geometrical description of the set
of K-types that would make a more detailed analysis of representations possible.