* 9623404
* Dissertation Research:  Microsatellite Analysis of Mating   System, Selection and Brood Reduction in the Pipefish       Syngnathus Typhle
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* John Avise, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 05/31/1998
* USD 6,920.00

9623404 Avise The research funded in this award represents a merging of the
fields of behavior and molecular genetics. The study takes advantage of a unique
opportunity to test theory on the evolution of behavioral differences between
the sexes. Research will be carried out on Syngnathus typhle, the broad-nosed
pipefish. Male pipefishes and seahorses carry developing young on their bodies,
often in a fully enclosed pouch, and provide nutrients, aeration and protection
for the developing young. This male "pregnancy" results in a reversal of the
usual sex roles, wherein females compete for access to mates and males tend to
be choosier. By using DNA fingerprinting techniques, field experiments will
determine how often males in natural environments receive eggs from multiple
females and will test whether females in nature mate with multiple males. These
findings will place behavioral experiments performed in the laboratory into a
broader evolutionary context. Second, breeding experiments in the laboratory
will test whether population sex ratio influences competition among females for
mates. Third, manipulations will be conducted to test for competition among eggs
from different mothers when carried by the same male. Findings from this
research will advance the understanding of the evolution of behavior and provide
important information for fisheries biologists working to conserve biodiversity
in this enigmatic and diverse group of fishes.