* 9623536
* Dynamical Properties of Frustrated Molecular Solids at Low  Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Neil Sullivan, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9623536 Sullivan This project will investigate the dynamical properties of
frustrated quench-disordered systems at low temperatures. These studies will
focus on determining the important low-energy collective excitations in
prototypical orientation glasses (orthoand para-dihydrogen and dinitrogen-argon
solid mixtures), and the behavior of quantum quadrupoles in reduced geometries -
two dimensional arrays and surface-melted quantum latticed fluids. The proposed
experiments involve several different NMR and thermodynamic measurements to
determine the nature of the lowfrequency thermal relaxation and the effect of
lattice geometry on the ordering of classical and quantum rotors in
orientational glasses. New experiments will also probe quantum exchange in
multilayers of dihydrogen and in helium-3 films physisorbed on square-lattice
substrates for which the combined effects of frustration and disorder are
predicted to lead to nuclear spin glass phases. The project is of fundamental
character but the results may provide insights into the properties of glasses
which are widely employed in technical and commercial applications. %%% This
project will investigate the dynamical properties of frustrated, quench-
disordered systems at low temperatures. These studies will focus on determining
the important low-energy collective excitations in prototypical orientation
glasses (orthoand para-dihydrogen and dinitrogen-argon solid mixtures), and the
behavior of quantum quadrupoles in reduced geometries - two dimensional arrays
and surface-melted quantum latticed fluids. The proposed experiments involve
several different NMR and thermodynamic measurements to determine the nature of
the lowfrequency thermal relaxation and the effect of lattice geometry on the
ordering of classical and quantum rotors in orientational glasses. New
experiments will also probe quantum exchange in multilayers of dihydrogen and in
helium-3 films physisorbed on square-lattice substrates for which the combined
effects of frustration and disorder are predicted to lead to nuclear spin glass
phases. The project is of fundamental character but the results may provide
insights into the properties of glasses which are widely employed in technical
and commercial applications. ***