* 9623907
* CAREER:  Development of a New Program in Integrated Analog  Systems Design at Northeastern University
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Lisa McIlrath, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2000
* USD 210,000.00

The focus of this Career Development plan is the development of a new broad-
based program in the design of integrated analog systems at Northeastern
University. The research component of this plan involves the development of
analog processing circuits to be used in integrated circuits containing arrays
of sensors or display elements. The main focus of this research is on
applications related to electronic imaging. The two main thrusts are; (1) to
develop high quality imaging arrays with CMOS technology and (2) to devise
focal-plane computational imagers for extracting useful information from the
image data. The functions performed by the focal plane processors, which include
temporal and spatial differencing and spatial filtering, will have applications
in fields ranging from image compression and enhancement to machine vision
problems such as tracking and inspection. The educational component of this plan
addresses the need to interest and train more engineers in the field of analog
design. The major initiatives of this plan include developing an extended analog
design project for second and third year undergraduates; incorporating more
undergraduates into on-going research; creating a seminar series bringing
outside speakers on campus to increase students' awareness of the importance of
analog design in real world systems; and developing an advanced graduate course
in analog systems aimed both at our graduate research students as well as at
engineers in industry who need to deepen their understanding of design
principles and techniques.