* 9623127
* DISSERATION RESEARCH:  The Effects of Habitat Variability on Host Plant-Herbivore
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Michael Bowers, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 05/31/1998
* USD 8,780.00

BOWERS DEB-9623127 Most studies examining population dynamics in a spatial
context assume that the size, quality, and number of habitat patches within a
landscape do not vary over time. Such an assumption may be biologically
unrealistic. In many cases habitat patches are biological units, such as host
plants, which may change in size or number over similar time frames as the
populations residing within these patches. This research will investigate the
effects of changes in the size and number of habitat patches on the abundance
and dynamics of an insect herbivore, the red milkweed beetle, Tetraopes
tetraophthalmus, and its host plant common milkweed, Asclepias syriaca. Of
particular interest is the degree to which herbivory by the beetles is
responsible for variation in milkweed patch size and number. Field observations
will examine year to year changes in the number and size of milkweed patches as
well as beetle abundance. Controlled experiments will be used to examine the
effects of herbivory by adult and larval beetles on milkweed growth and sexual
reproduction. Simulation modelling will be used to synthesize the results from
the observations and experiments and investigate the long-term consequences of
habitat variability for insect herbivores and their host-plants. Knowledge
gained from this research will extend our understanding of the effects of
spatial processes, and aid in conservation situations where habitat change is a
factor.