* 9623255
* Metal-Rich Halides as Precursors for Solution Cluster       Chemistry and the Exploitation of Ionic Liquids as          Solvent
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Timothy Hughbanks, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 04/30/2000
* USD 322,000.00

Dr. Timothy Hughbanks, Department of Chemistry, Texas A &amp; M University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for an investigation of the solution chemistry of polymers
and clusters containing metal-metal bonds and of ionic liquids as media for the
crystallization of cluster based compounds. Group 3, 4, and lanthanide clusters,
which are known to exist in the solid state, will be extracted into solution
using an imidizolium/aluminum trichloride mixture, which is liquid at room
temperature. The solution medium will permit these clusters to be characterized
as molecular species and to be manipulated in a more controlled, rational
fashion than is possible with purely solid state phases. The project will
initially concentrate on a series of zirconium based systems and will develop
these as precursors to extended clusters and polymers. As the project
progresses, a systematic investigation will be carried out on the use of ionic
liquids as solvents for the preparation and crystallization of a variety of
cluster compounds. This project aims at devising a new method of preparing and
manipulating polymers composed of metal atoms. While such metal species are
known to exist in the solid state, the syntheses are not simple and it is often
impossible to use these cluster and polymeric substances as, for example,
starting materials for more complex polymers or clusters. A new 'ionic' solvent
system has been devised and this will be used to dissolve the materials from the
solid. By obtaining them in solution, it will be possible to both characterize
them and utilize them to reproducibly form new, presently unknown materials.