* 9623314
* Mathematical Sciences:  Homological Methods in the          Deformation Theory of Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1999
* Gabriel Nagy, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/1999
* USD 45,600.00

DMS-9623314 PI: Nagy Kansas State University Nagy will investigate rigidity
phenomena in C*-algebraic deformation quantization. In order to address such
problems, Nagy plans to use and develop homological techniques adequate for the
classification of certain classes of C*-algebras. One motivation of this
research is the recent worldwide interest in the promising new theory of quantum
groups which links together several branches of mathematics and is closely
related to mathematical physics. Another motivation and inspiration for this
project is the development in the K-theory of C*-algebras in connection with
non-commutative geometry. The area of mathematics for this project has its basis
in the theory of algebras of operators on Hilbert spaces. The study of operator
algebras was initiated in the 1930's by John von Neumann in order to provide a
mathematical framework for quantum mechanics. Due to a broad range of
applications, operator algebras are presently one of the most dynamic fields in
mathematics. For example, the remarkable interactions of operator algebras with
knot theory, discovered by Vaughan Jones in the 1980's, lead to interesting
applications to the study of the DNA molecules. Due to their fundamental role in
non-commutative geometry, in quantum probability theory, and in conformal
quantum field theory, operator algebras have become increasingly important in
physics.