* 9623925
* Dissertation Research:  Late-Acting Self-Incompatibility and Post-Pollination Selection in Milkweeds (Asclepias:        Asclepiadaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Robert Wyatt, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 05/31/1999
* USD 4,612.00

9623925 Wyatt Most flowering plants are hermaphroditic, producing both male and
female reproductive organs. Consequently, self-pollination as well as cross-
pollination is possible. Self-pollinated flowers often are less likely to set
seed than cross-pollinated flowers. Mechanisms responsible for the loss of seed
production include the action of genetic self-incompatibility systems and the
effects of early-acting inbreeding depression. Distinguishing between these two
causes of sterility is challenging, especially for species that exhibit either
late-acting self-incompatibility or post- pollination selection of outcrossed
offspring over selfed ones. The research funded by this award resolves these
different mechanisms in two species of milkweeds (Asclepias), using experimental
crosses. First, experiments will test whether self sterility results from either
the abortion of selfed embryos due to early-acting inbreeding depression or the
rejection of selfed zygotes based on late-acting self-incompatibility. If late-
acting self-incompatibility is implicated, its genetic basis will be determined.
Second, the role of post-pollination selection in causing non random mating in a
self-fertile milkweed will be resolved. These studies will help to clarify the
importance of inbreeding depression and self-incompatibility in mating system
evolution. Because inbreeding depression is a problem in both applied
agricultural systems and endangered plant populations, understanding mechanisms
that alleviate inbreeding can inform efforts for crop improvement and native
plant conservation.