* 9623767
* SBIR Phase II:  Manufacture of Metal/Metal Oxide Powders    by Spray Pyrolysis
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/1997,03/31/1999
* James Caruso, Nanochem Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 03/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

DMI-9623767 Chandler This Small Business Innovation Research, Phase II project
builds on the successful results obtained in the synthesis of high-value
precious metal/metal oxide composite powders (Ag, Pd. Au, Pt) by spray pyrolysis
carried out in Phase I. Powders containing precious metals are used extensively
in the electronics industry for manufacture of circuit boards and capacitors.
Current methods of powder synthesis cannot adequately control the size
distribution of the powders, nor give controlled phase and elemental composition
and in the case of Palladium provide useful oxidation resistance. The Phase I
feasibility study has demonstrated that Pd and Pd/metal oxide composite powders
produced by spray pyrolysis have enhanced properties over commercially available
powders made by existing techniques. Pd-containing powders have been prepared
with better control over size, size distribution and crystallinity which also
results in the added value of improved oxidation resistance. The Phase II effort
is aimed at determining whether the added value imparted to these powders can be
maintained at higher production scales. This will be achieved by the design,
construction, testing and refinement of a works prototype spray pyrolysis
reactor capable of producing sufficient (kg) quantities of these powders to be
incorporated into pastes and tested in electronic components such as multi-layer
ceramic capacitors, MLCCs. This requires the development of a novel aerosol
generation and classification system and powder collection unit as part of Phase
II research. The powders produced by this research will have applications in the
electronics industry as the base powder used in making screen printed circuit
boards and as the metallization of MLCCs. Successful completion of Phase II
research will result in a strong advantage over traditional metal powders in the
MLCC market due to better oxidation resistance and a cost reduction from inert
filler material.