* 9623067
* Mathematical Sciences:  The Probabilistic Method
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Joel Spencer, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 05/31/1999
* USD 116,977.00

Spencer The Probabilistic Method has been developed intensively and become one
of the most powerful and widely used tools applied in Combinatorics. In this
methodology, as developed by Paul Erdos, one proves the existence of a
combinatorial object by showing that a suitably defined random object has the
desired properties with positive probability. Closely aligned is the study of
Random Graphs and other Random Structures. Also closely aligned is the analysis
of Randomized Algorithms in Computer Science. A particular set of problems in
this investigation involve radom greedy algorithms, which combine all of these
elements. Asymptotic packing is a problem of current interest. Given a family of
objects, one wants a disjoint subfamily, a packing, taking up as much space as
possible. Results over the past decade have given general conditions such that
almost all of the space can be covered. This project considers bounds on the
amount of space not covered. Recent years have seen the use of more subtle
probability methods in this area. Martingales have long been a powerful tool for
probabilists, but now we are seeing how to use them to give strong bounds on
discrete problems. The Lovasz Local Lemma and probability inequalities of Jason
and Talagrand are used to good effect. Random algorithms are analyzed via birth
processes and differential equations. The percolation of the random graph when
average degree is near one is analagous to bond percolation in the plane near
critical probability. For random graphs, the appropriate reparameterization is
known. For bond percolation on the n by n grid, an analogous result is in sight.
The random graph percolation also corresponds to a birth process with the
expected family size near one. This gives new insight into the random graph
model and led to a surprising connection between enumeration of graphs and a
conditional form of Brownian motion. This research is in the general area of
Combinatorics. One of the goals of Combinat orics is to find efficient methods
to study how discrete collections of objects can be arranged. The behavior of
discrete systems is extremely important to modern communications. For example,
the design of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and
the design of algorithms in computer science deal with discrete sets of objects,
and this makes use of combinatorial research.