* 9623838
* Dissertation Research:  The Fate of Novel Genetic Mutation  at a Single Locus Under Selection in Escherichia coli
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Margaret Riley, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 05/31/1998
* USD 9,000.00

9623838 Riley A central assumption in the study of how mutation affects
organisms is that the majority of mutations are harmful. This asqumption has
never been experimentally tested. The goal of the research funded by this award
is to test this assumption by determining the fate of novel genetic variation.
Despite our current knowledge of the molecular biological processes which create
mutation, little information is known about how or how much of the introduced
variation is maintained in nature once a trait produced by the mutation is
subjected to natural selection. To address this issue, Wagner and Riley will
assess the effects of many different mutations on the viability and growth of
bacteria, which are organisms that allow testing the effects of many kinds of
mutations in a short period of time. A technique called random mutagenesis will
be used to create many different mutated copies of a single gene in a bacterium,
and the fraction of mutations that are beneficial, harmful, or have no effect
will be determined. The exact chemical nature of the mutations from each of
these three classes will be probed, to reveal whether there are particular types
of mutations that are associated with benefit or harm to the organism. Using
this information, it may then be possible for biologists to incorporate
mutations of positive effect into beneficial organisms or harmful mutations into
pest genotypes. Results may also facilitate the engineering of bacteria to
perform certain functions, many of which may be useful in industrial processes.