* 9623221
* CAREER:  Spectroscopic Studies of Magnetically Driven Phase Transitions in Organic & Inorganic Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1996,09/30/2001
* Janice Musfeldt, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 09/30/2001
* USD 413,200.00

Abstract 9623221 Musfeldt This five-year proposal is concerned with gaining
further information on magnetically driven phase transitions in low-dimensional
organic and inorganic solids and expanding materials chemistry coursework at the
State University of New York. In general, the low-temperature spectroscopic
response of several prototypical compounds in an external magnetic field will be
investigated. These compounds are well-known to display spin-density wave and
spin-Peierls type phase transitions, and many other interesting physical
properties. In each case, the Principal investigator and graduate students will:
1. completely characterize the optical constants of these systems using low-
temperature polarized infrared and optical spectroscopies in the vicinity of the
phase transition, 2. evaluate optical constants and fundamental materials
parameters, such as correlation parameters and electron-molecular vibrational
coupling constants, and 3. initiate magnetic field studies to probe interactions
between the spin-density wave condensate (spin-density-wave type) or the lattice
dynamics (spin-Peierls-type) and the spin system. At the completion of each set
of experiments, the analysis will focus on spectral properties which shed light
on the phase transition mechanisms and the changing nature of charge transport
through the transition. Energy dissipation mechanisms will receive particular
attention. Chemical structure/property considerations, a perspective which comes
naturally to chemists, will also play a central role in the analysis. %%% The
subject of magnetically driven phase transitions in organic molecular solids has
received a great deal of attention in recent years. Despite extensive study, the
conditions which govern metal - insulator transitions in low-dimensional solids
are a subject of increasing controversy. Therefore, the time has come to re-
examine this traditional set of materials with a new set of goals, priorities
and tools. The overall goal of this research is to establish a broad program
devoted to investigations of magnetically driven phase transitions in low-
dimensional solids. Four specific projects are proposed that are of immediate
interest to the organic and inorganic materials chemistry community. These
projects will allow the Principal investigator and others to evaluate the most
promising paths for further investigations in the area of magnetic materials.