* 9623386
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Phylogenetic Implications of        Hybridization in the Phlox pilosa Complex (Polemoniaceae):  Diploid Hybrid Origin of Taxa
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Robert Jansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 05/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9623386 JANSEN This award will provide funds for materials and supplies as well
as travel funds for detailed population studies in the southeastern United
States. The support will enhance the dissertation of Carolyn Ferguson who is a
graduate student with Dr. Robert Jansen at University of Texas, Austin. The
student's dissertation project involves phylogenetic analysis of molecular
sequence data for taxa in the Phlox pilosa species complex. This group of plants
is of particular interest because it has been suggested that some of the taxa
are of hybrid origin at the diploid level, a speciation mechanism that is
presumed to be rare and bears further investigation. Data will be obtained for
chloroplast restriction site analysis and nuclear ITS sequencing and
incongruities in the resultant phylogenies should illuminate the question of
diploid hybrid origins. In addition, molecular markers will be utilized in
detailed population level studies for a case study of putative Phlox diploid
hybridization in the southeastern United States. This award will provide support
for a graduate student pursuing studies of relationships among plants in a
species complex including taxa believed to be of diploid hybrid origin. Careful
population level analysis will document this interesting and believed rare
mechanism for the origin of species. Support for the training of graduate
students in modern systematic and population biology methodologies is important
for maintaining the workforce of scientists capable of addressing the questions
and issues of biodiversity which are of increasing global concern.