* 9623231
* Mathematical Sciences:  Hankel Operators and Their          Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Vladimir Peller, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 109,400.00

9623231 PELLER V.V. Peller is going to continue to study superoptimal
approximation by analytic operator functions. Such approximations minimize not
only the supremum of the norms but also the suprema of all further singular
values. In particular V.V. Peller is going to study the dependence of the
Mcmillan degree of the superoptimal approximant on the Mcmillam degree of the
initial function. It is not known whether the Mcmillan degree can jump. Another
open problem is whether the operator of superoptimal approximation preserves the
Wiener algebra. V.V. Peller is also going to study the indices in the so-called
thematic factorizations in the Nehari-Takagi problem and other problem on
superoptimal approximation. V.V. Peller is also going to continue his work in
prediction theory. One of the most important unsolved problems is to
characterize in terms of the spectral densities the completely regular vectorial
stationary Gaussian processes. V.V. Peller is going to apply Hankel operators in
different domains of analysis, prediction theory and control theory. It has
become clear that Hankel operators play a significant role in applications. In
particular they play a decisive role in H-infinity control theory. V.V. Peller
used Hankel operators to study superoptimal approximations by analytic matrix
functions. In his joint work with N.J. Young it was shown that under very
natural assumptions such an approximation is unique and can be found
constructively. Further development of the theory was given by V.V. Peller and
in joint papers of V.V. Peller with S.R. Treil. Superoptimal approximations play
a very important role in control theory. There are still many open problems
about superoptimal approximations which are very important in applications. V.V.
Peller is going to continue to work on them. Another domain of applications of
Hankel operators is prediction theory. V.V. Peller obtained many strong results
(partly in a joint work with Khrushchev) in this field. The re are still many
open problems in this field. V.V. Peller hopes to progress using vectorial
Hankel operators.