* 9624378
* CAREER:  Improving the Access-Execute Balance in High       Performance Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Lizy John, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 07/31/1999
* USD 110,000.00

Program behavior studies reveal that most current high performance processors
spend more time computing addresses and accessing data than performing the
functional operations required by application programs. This research consists
of investigating issues in the design of a balanced multiple issues architecture
that improves the access-execute balance, maximized the decoupling between the
various functional units, exploits higher concurrency and achieves higher
performance. The techniques used to alleviate access- execute imbalance include
(I) executing multiple access tasks in parallel, (ii) providing architectural
support for complex access primitives, and (iii) providing application- specific
access primitives. Also performed will be investigations on improving
concurrency between access and execute processes. Concurrency between access and
execution has been exploited by queues in many decoupled access- execute
architectures, but data dependent control dependencies often prohibit
prefetching of data to queues. This research will investigate techniques to
facilitate anticipatory loading to queues even in presence of data dependent
control dependencies. The research will build on the PI's previous studies on
accessexecute decoupling and other schemes to improve the performance of memory
accessing. The PI is incorporating innovative techniques such as active
learning, and cooperative learning into the classroom. She wants to emphasize
design, design automation, and experimental aspects in her courses. As part of
curriculum improvement, a new graduate course on Advanced Computer architecture
and an undergraduate course and laboratory on Digital Design using FPGAs are
being developed. The PI also plans to participate in outreach activities for
high-school students and special programs for women and minorities. The overall
objective is to stimulate efficient learning at graduate, undergraduate and pre-
college levels of education. ***