* 9624493
* CAREER:  Advanced Integrated Circuit Metallization:         Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2002
* Terry Alford, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2002
* USD 266,968.00

9624493 Alford This CAREER research project addresses metallization and contact
formation in silicon-based systems with the objective to create new fundamental
knowledge in the science and engineering of interconnect materials systems and
processes for future integrated circuit technologies. Interconnect materials
systems to be studied include conductors, adhesion promoting layers and barrier
layers. The research concentrates on metal conductor materials (silver and its
alloys), but a substantial aspect of this investigation is the integrated
systems approach to multilevel metallization that seeks greater understanding
for addressing long term future solutions (lower resistivity Ag alloys) and more
near term solutions (Cu alloys). %%% This research project will extend the
investigator's preliminary advances in Cu metallization materials science and
processing to integrate critical aspects of basic research advances with two
Educational Innovations, Outreach to K-12, and a collaborative Community College
activity with the Maricopa Community College District which includes courses
televised to local industry. In addition to the educational outreach activities,
an important feature of the program is the general integration of research and
education through the training of graduate students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. The proposed basic investigations of
metallization and contact formation are expected to contribute fundamental
materials science knowledge of technological relevance to advanced
microelectronic devices and circuits. The knowledge and understanding gained
from this research project is expected to contribute in a general way to
improving the performance of advanced devices and circuits used in computing,
information processing, and telecommunications by providing a fundamental
understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials with
greater reliability and performance. ***