* 9624778
* Fermi-Liquid and Nonfermi-Liquid Properties in Weakly       Hybridized 4f Intermetallic Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Ward Beyermann, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 04/30/2000
* USD 254,664.00

9624778 Beyermann This project is an experimental investigation of predictions
of theories based on an antiferromagneticaly coupled spin-spin interaction
between the electrons. The project is divided into three parts. The first part
deals with the low-temperature thermodynamic and transport properties in
prasedymium systems where the lowest crystal electric-field level of the
localized 4f electrons has only quadrupolar, rather than magnetic, internal
degrees of freedom. The evolution of the correlated-electron ground state in
weakly hybridizing prasedymium intermetallic compounds is studied in the second
part. The last part seeks to determine how the renormalized ground state at low
temperatures changes under the influence of an applied magnetic field large
enough to suppress the magnetic Kondo interaction. This part of the research
will be conducted at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory using pulsed
magnetic fields up to 50 T. The results are expected to provide an important
understanding of the correlations associated with the low-temperature
hybridization of magnetic and quadrupolar states with the conduction electrons.
%%% The PI investigates the magnetic and electrical properties of rare earth-
intermetallic systems with unusual ground states. Correlated electron behavior
in praseodymium-intermetallic compounds will be studied. Praseodymium is
uniquely positioned to act as a logical intermediary between the strongly
hybridizing cerium and the purely trivalent heavier rare earths. The observation
of this behavior in certain systems with unique crystal-electric-field ground
states would indicate a new interaction between the 4f orbitals and the
conduction electrons. Applied magnetic fields also significantly effect these
ground states, the low-temperature properties will be investigated using pulsed
fields that are large enough to greatly modify the correlated behavior. This
project is a collaboration between three investigators at three different
institutions. Sample preparation and basic characterization will be performed at
Ames Laboratory. Once suitable compounds are made, they will be sent to UC
Riverside for low field magnetic and electrical measurements down to ~50 mK and
to the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Los Alamos for high-field
measurements up to 50 T. ***