* 9624634
* CAREER:  The Development and Application of Hybrid          Computations for Interfacial Problems in Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Peter Thompson, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9624634 Thompson This is a CAREER grant which integrates research and education
activities. The research component is aimed at understanding how microscopic
structural and dynamic effects at solid/fluid interfaces impact macroscopic
fluid flows. Of particular interest are flows involving the spreading of fluid
on a solid substrate. Such flows are ubiquitous in nature and are encountered in
many important manufacturing processes. Examples include coating, fabrication of
metal/ceramic composites and containment of molten alloys. To model these
systems a new computational method will be developed. The method will link a
molecular dynamics simulation in the vicinity of the solid interface with a
continuum model on larger length scales. By using a molecular dynamics
simulation near the solid, the detailed flow can be modeled without imposing
phenomenological boundary conditions. By using a continuum description such as
the Navier-Stokes equations away from the solid, the flow at experimental length
scales can be resolved. This discrete-continuum hybrid computation in and of
itself represents an important advance in simulational techniques. Integrated
with this research is a teaching program that includes the development of a
multidisciplinary curriculum on computer simulation of systems at the
molecular/particle level. Interesting results from research in molecular
hydrodynamics and computational materials science will be integrated into the
undergraduate curriculum in fluids and thermodynamics. %%% This is a CAREER
grant which integrates research and education activities. The research component
is aimed at understanding how microscopic structural and dynamic effects at
solid/fluid interfaces impact macroscopic fluid flows. Of particular interest
are flows involving the spreading of fluid on a solid substrate. Such flows are
ubiquitous in nature and are encountered in many important manufacturing
processes. Examples include coating, fabrication of metal/ceramic composites and
containment of molten alloys. To model these systems a new computational method
will be developed. Integrated with this research is a teaching program that
includes the development of a multidisciplinary curriculum on computer
simulation of systems at the molecular/particle level. Interesting results from
research in molecular hydrodynamics and computational materials science will be
integrated into the undergraduate curriculum in fluids and thermodynamics. ***