* 9624373
* Dissertation Research:  The Rocky Mountains as Part         of a Regional Model of Paleoindian Adaptations in the       Western United States.
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1996,08/31/1998
* C. Vance Haynes, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 11,418.00

Under the direction of Dr. C. Vance Haynes MS Bonnie Pitblado will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. Working with already excavated archaeological
materials she will study lithic artifacts from the U.S. Plains, Rocky Mountains
and Great Basin. She will focus on the Paleoindian period - from approximately
10,000 to 7,500 BP. - and conduct a detailed analysis of projectile points from
Colorado and Utah since these two states together span the three geographic
zones. She will also conduct a broad scale analysis of all lithic materials from
nine sites, three from each of the areas. Through examination of raw material
origin, manufacturing process and form of completed objects she hopes to
determine the relationships between these three areas. A great deal of
excavation has been conducted in both the Great Basin and the Plains and the
archaeology of these areas during the Paleoindian period is fairly well
understood. Much less however is known about the Rocky Mountains. Some
archaeologists believe that this environmentally difficult area was inhabited
year round and that separate groups of people developed a distinctive adaptation
to this region. Others believe that cultures at a Paleoindian level of
technology were unable to meet such a challenge. MS Pitblado will address this
question through her analysis. This research is significant for a number of
reasons. First it will provide information of great interest to archaeologists
and help to illuminate a little understood period of U.S. prehistory. Secondly,
it will shed new light on human-environment interactions and the basic ability
of populations to adapt at simple levels of technology. Third, the work has the
potential to make a significant contribution to archaeological methodology since
it will further the development and application of techniques for the analysis
of lithic materials. Finally this grant will assist in the training of a
promising young archaeologist.