* 9624681
* Lambda Calculus
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Richard Statman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2000
* USD 110,470.00

Lambda Calculus is both a mathematical theory of functions and a model of
computation. As such it is part of the interface of applied logic and
theoretical computer science. As a theory, simply typed Lambda Calculus is part
of Church's theory of functions of higher type. Higher type theorem proving
reduces questions of validity of sentences to unification and conversion, which
are purely equational questions of Lambda Calculus. Lambda Calculus also enters
implicitly into the proof theory of type theory via the well known Curry-Howard
isomorphism. As a formal model of computation Lambda Calculus contributes to
understanding of higher-type and type-free programming constructs. Denotational
semantics reduces questions of program synthesis and correctness to finding and
verifying solutions to certain combinatory functional equations. Lambda Calculus
also enters explicitly into the syntactic foundations of applicative programming
languages as a paradigm of sequential computation. In short, Lambda Calculus
enters both explicitly and implicitly into the theory of highertype theorem
proving and the theory of programming languages. Lambda Calculus is the study of
certain computation rules, programs, or algorithms. This research singles out
those rules whose execution depends only on the fact that some of the data are
themselves computation rules of the same sort. It is not immediately obvious
that there are any non-trivial examples of such rules. The rich deep structure
of the Lambda Calculus had to be diacovered by Church, Bernays, Curry, Kleene,
and those who followed them. The research focuses on the deep structure of pure
Lambda Calculus with at most algebraic types, to address a number of open
questions in Lambda Calculus. These include: (1) Is it decidable whether a given
finite set of proper combinators forms a basis? (2) Is there a recursive one-
step Church Rosser strategy? (3) Is there a uniform universal generator? (4) Is
the word problem for all proper com binators of order &lt; 3 decidable? (5) Is
the matching problem for the pure simply typed lambda calculus decidable? ***