* 9624029
* High Pressure Magneto-Optical Studies of Novel Localized    States in Compound Semiconductors and their Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Bernard Weinstein, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/2000
* USD 401,800.00

9624029 Weinstein The program investigates the effect of high hydrostatic
pressure on the energy and competition of shallow (hydrogenic) and deep impurity
states in III-V semiconductors and heterostructures, as well as on the possible
occurrence and properties of stable excitonic states in these systems. The work
will involve far infrared (FIR) magneto-spectroscopy and near infrared/visible
optical experiments carried out using a unique diamondanvil apparatus that
achieves in-situ tuning of pressure, temperature and magnetic field over the
ranges 0150 kbar, 2300K and 0-17T. The approach will permit direct comparison of
spectroscopic results recorded over a wide range of energies from the FIR to the
visible on the same samples under the same conditions, which has not heretofore
been possible. Such studies should yield (1) a much clearer picture of the
competition between shallow and deep (both stable and metastable) impurity
states in semiconductors for many different substitutional species, (2) should
help establish the carrier density dependence of many-body effects in doped
aluminumgallium arsenide/gallium-arsenide quantum well structures, and (3)
should enable the exploration of conditions and properties for possible stable
excitonic ground states in indium-arsenide/aluminium- gallium-antimony systems.
%%% The program investigates the effect of high hydrostatic pressure on the
energy and competition of shallow (hydrogenic) and deep impurity states in III-V
semiconductors and hererostructures, as well as on the possible occurrence and
properties of stable excitonic states in these systems. The work will involve
far infrared (FIR) magneto- spectroscopy and near infrared/visible optical
experiments carried out using a unique diamond-anvil apparatus that achieves in-
situ tuning of pressure, temperature and magneti c field over the ranges 0- 150
kbar, 2-300K and 0-17T. The approach will permit direct comparison of
spectroscopic results recorded over a wide range of energies from te far-infra-
red to the visible. The experiments will be conducted on the same samples under
the same conditions, which has not heretofore been possible. Such studies should
yield: (1) a much clearer picture of the competition between shallow and deep
(both stable and metastable) impurity states in semiconductors for many
different substitutional species, (2) should help establish the carrier density
dependence of many-body effects in doped aluminum- gallium-arsenide quantum well
structures, and (3) should enable the exploration of conditions and properties
for possible stable excitionic ground states in indium-arsenide/aluminium-
gallium- antimony systems.***