* 9624488
* CAREER: Mass Transfer Modeling of Volatile Organic Emissions from Building Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2002
* John Little, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 06/30/2002
* USD 310,000.00

9624488 Little This is an award to support research to be conducted by this
investigator on factors that influence the quality of indoor air as affected by
building materials that are the potential source of volatile organic compounds
of pollutional significance. The investigator plans on developing fundamentally-
based, mass-transfer models for three generic classes of building materials and
evaluate procedures that can be used to evaluate the quality of the parameters
that can be used in those models. Methods he plans to use include screening
measurements for sample selection, formulation of mechanistic mass-transfer
models, solutions involving analytical and numerical methods, dynamic
microbalance experiments to determine diffusion and partition coefficients and
limited, large-scale chamber validation procedures for the models devised during
his research. The research proposed is expected to provide a sound theoretical
foundation for the characterization of a wide range of building materials as
sources of volatile organic carbon compounds. The models that are an expected
product of this research may prove to be especially useful in reducing the
number of costly and time- consuming studies of materials conducted in test-
chambers. The proposal leading to this award was submitted in response to NSF
95- 118, Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program Guidelines for
Submission of Proposals. As such, it not only addressed the proposed research
but related the investigator's career development plan to the current state of
knowledge in the field and of the potential impact work supported under this
award would result in educational innovation and effective teaching in the
investigator's discipline.