* 9624612
* CAREER:  Plasma Chemical Vapor Deposition of Amorphous      Silicon Thin Films near Room Temperature Using Inert Ion    Enhanced Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Gregory Parsons, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2001
* USD 310,000.00

Abstract - Parsons - 9624612 Large area electronic systems, including active
matrix liquid crystal displays, image sensors, and photovoltaic cells utilize
active semiconducting layers that must currently be formed at temperatures
exceeding 300(C. Substrates which make up the device platform are limited,
therefore, to materials such as fused silica, glass, or metals which are stable
at these temperatures and can withstand temperature cycling. New chemical
processes that will allow for high quality semiconducting layers to be formed at
lower temperatures will lead to new options for device platform materials,
leading to a new generation of light weight and flexible large area electronic
devices. When conventional methods to form amorphous silicon thin films are
attempted at very low temperature, a porous structure commonly results, leading
to significant postdeposition oxidation and a high charge trap state density
which limits its use as an active semiconductor. Novel approaches for film
synthesis have been identified that result in dense, non-porous materials near
room temperature, and some of these materials show a reduction in charge trap
density after 'activation' by a low temperature (150(C) anneal. In addition,
preliminary results indicate that an ion-enhanced hydrogen desorption process in
plasma activated chemical vapor deposition, which has previously not been
documented, may be critical for achieving high film density. The objectives of
this study include the description and analysis of these plasma activated
deposition processes. The results will lead to new low temperature copabilities
in silicon thin film materials and devised, and extend understanding of low
temperature surface chemistry in plasma activated materials synthesis and
plasma/surface interactions. Undergraduate and graduate education in the area of
electronic materials will be advanced by projects in: 1) the development of an
upper level course in electronic materials; 2) a new electronic materials option
in the undergraduate chemical engineering curriculum; and 3) an emphasis on
cooperative learning and learning styles in the classroom. These will offer
students and opportunity to broaden their education scope, and help prepare them
for employment or graduate studies in an area where there is a growing need for
engineers.