* 9624486
* CAREER:  Electromagnetic Simulation, Modeling and           Characterization of Complex Composite Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Keith Whites, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James Momoh
* 07/31/2001
* USD 224,900.00

9624486 Whites There are a number of common, themes shared between the two major
components (research and education) of this project. Both involve
electromagnetics (EM), materials characterization and the use of computer
modeling and visualization. In summary, the research components of this project
is directed at producing the first known rigorous model to accurately predict
the effective constitutive parameters (ECPs) for physically realistic composite
materials and effective media. The goals of the education component are to
integrate interactive computer tools into the study of introductory EM and to
integrate modern materials modeling techniques (analytical and experimental)
into a senior-level course in properties of materials. It is envisioned that
this research effort will produce the first model to accurately predict the ECPs
for physically realistic composite and effective materials. Effective media
predict the ECPs for physically realistic composite and effective materials.
Effective media modeling impacts a broad spectrum of disciples including such
diverse areas as geophysics, remote, sensing, EM shielding, planetary surface
composition, electrophotography and thin-film solar filters. The knowledge of
the ECPs for composite and effective materials and their frequency dependence
are absolutely critical in EM design work. Without this knowledge, any type of
EM analysis is not possible since one would be forced to model the scattering by
all of the particulates which is certainly impractical. Current methods for
macroscopic characterization are limited to simplifying assumptions such as
spherical inclusions with sparse distributions in cubic arrays. This new model
will provide a numerical environment in which scientist and engineers could
fabricate, design and evaluate various mixtures of particles to form new
composite materials or analyze effective media. All of this would be done using
accurate numerical analysis and would obviate the for traditional "cut-and-dry"
methods. The Reason this proposed model does not have the same intrinsic
limitations as all other is that a numerically "exact" scattering solution from
the basis of the model. The complexities inherent in a physically realistic
effective materials model are all accounted for within the numerical solution.
This computationally-based effective media modeling is a new approach and would
not have be feasible a few years ago because of the tremendous computational
resources that will be required. For the educational component, the first
principle goal is to increase the effectiveness of introductory EM courses
through the use of interactive computer visualization tools. Because such an
introductory course forms the foundation for all other EM courses, it is
imperative that students develop an intuitive appreciation for the basic of this
field. As is often the case, students enter such a course with negative
preconceived impressions of EM. The use of interactive computer visualization
can help students overcome some of the difficulties in such a course. The tools
to be developed in this effort are designed to help the students understand the
basic concepts in EM, rather than more advanced topics as is the case with other
currently available EM visualization tools. It is envisioned that these tools
will be directly integrated into a textbook. The second principle educational
goal is to revise and update a senior elective properties of materials course.
This revision will encompass an integration of modern materials analysis
(classical and quantum) as will as experimental methods into the course. Many of
the topics of effective media theory used in research component of this project
will pertain directly to this course since, as mentioned previously, composite
materials are in such wide-spread use today. Furthermore, the introduction of
experimental techniques will expose the students to modern instrumentation and
will reinforce the classroom instruction. ***