* 9624846
* CAREER:  Improving the Design of Interactive Software
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2001
* David Redmiles, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 05/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

For many years, the poor design of interactive systems has been attributed to
insufficient communication between developers and end users. Usability practices
from the field of human-computer interaction are not currently integrated into
the theory and practice of software engineering. This research project pursues
three objectives: 1) developing a model of software development as a process of
on-going communication; 2) providing support for this model through active
mechanisms in software tools; and 3) improving the accessibility and acceptance
of usability methods by software practitioners. In general, the objectives
reflect a process and philosophy of human-centered software development. Active
support is being investigated through a mechanism called expectation agents.
Expectation agents are software mechanisms that monitor the usage of prototype
systems and detect mismatches between actual usage and developers' design
assumptions or expectations. Such breakdowns are opportunities for communication
which make explicit the expectations of both developers and end users.
Expectation agents serve as a test vehicle for supporting on-going communication
in software development, for adapting usability practices to software practice,
and for reinforcing developers' understanding of human-computer interaction.
This research proceeds along three dimensions: theoretical, technical, and
empirical. The research is developing a model of ongoing communication in
software development, refining models of the software processes involved in
developing interactive systems, and improving understanding of usability methods
for workplace settings. In the technical dimension, the research provides new
algorithms and representations for capturing and communicating design intent and
active mechanisms such as expectation agents to operate over design intent.
These mechanisms involve both formal and semi-formal representations. The
empirical component includes a critical analysi s of the approach as a means of
gathering usability information and supporting communication in systems
development. This CAREER research project also addresses the software
engineering curriculum. First, the work seeks to improve the curricula for
educating software engineers in the methods of human-computer interaction.
Second, adoption of systematic practice is aided by tools and methods. The
research project seeks to meet this need by adapting and, where possible,
automating usability methods for software engineering. ***