* 9624002
* Electronic Properties of Amorphous Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* J.   David Cohen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9624002 Cohen This project involves research into the
fundamental properties of defects in amorphous semiconductors. First, studies
will be carried out to further verify and understand the novel type of deep
defect relaxation in hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) that has been
suggested by capacitance transient measurements in the previous phase of this
research. These experimental studies will focus on (1) observing relaxation
through its effect on the optical spectra associated with deep defects in
a-Si:H, and (2) comparing modulated photocurrent spectra (which also indicate a
defect relaxation effect) with electron spin resonance data to identify the deep
defect sub-bands responsible. Second, the project will investigate the deep
defect properties of a novel form of carbon containing a predominance of
tetrahedral bonding (ta-C). This material has recently been made with
sufficiently good semiconducting properties to be amenable to our junction
capacitance methods. The disclosed deep defect properties are likely to be
fundamentally different than those of the tetrahedral amorphous semiconductors
based on Si and Ge. %%% Amorphous or "glassy" materials represent a true
frontier area to test our understanding of solid state physics. One increasingly
important class of such materials are amorphous semiconductors such as
hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H). This latter material is finding
important technological applications in photovoltaics and in thin film
transistor arrays used to drive liquid crystal displays (flat panel TV).
However, the theoretical understanding of a-Si:H is still in its infancy. This
experimental research is directed at understanding the basic electronic
properties of defects in such materials. These defects currently limit their
future technological exploitation. Of partic ular interest are newly discovered
aspects of the defect behavior in a-Si:H which suggests a glassy aspect to the
electronic structure itself. In addition, preliminary studies of the electronic
properties of a relatively new type of amorphous semiconductor, tetrahedral
amorphous carbon (the amorphous counterpart of crystalline diamond) will be
initiated. ***