* 9624603
* The Quantum Physics of Nanostructure Single-Electron        Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Mark Tuominen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 150,000.00

9624603 Tuominen This experimental research project is designed to help advance
the science and technology of nanostructure single-electron devices. The first
research objective of this project is to utilize single-electron device
techniques to explore and understand several key issues in mesoscopic
superconductivity: even-odd electron number physics, the physics of macroscopic
quantum variables, and coherent charge transport through superconducting-normal
metal interfaces. The second objective is to investigate -- and precisely
control -- the quantum interaction `etween single-electron devices and their
electromagnetic environment by utilizing the powerful techniques of cavity
quantum electrodynamics. The 60 nanometer-scale devices used in this work will
be fabricated using electron-beam lithography, thin-film metallization, and
microelectronics clean room techniques. An ultrahigh vacuum thin-film deposition
system will be constructed to provide a major advancement in the nanostructure
device fabrication technology. Measurements will be performed at cryogenic
temperatures (10 mK to 10 K) using lownoise electronic transport measurement
instrumentation. The overall goal of these research activities is to establish a
strong scientific foundation for single-electron device physics, and help it
progress toward what may become the ultimate level in electronics technology.
%%% The objective of this experimental research project is to advance the
science and technology of single-electron devices. These recently developed
devices are nanometer scale structures in which electrical charge can be
controlled electron-by-electron. In the first part of this project, single-
electron techniques will be used to explore superconductivity in ultrasmall
devices. In another part, the interaction between single-electron devices and
their electromagnetic environment will be investigated and c ontrolled by
utilizing a powerful, new technique called cavity quantum electrodynamics. The
nanostructure devices used in this work will be fabricated using electron-beam
lithography, thinfilm metallization, and microelectronics clean room techniques.
Collectively, these research activities will help single-electron device physics
progress toward what may become the ultimate level in electronics technology.
***