* 9624222
* CAREER:  Supporting Workflow, Long Duration and Nested      Transaction Models in a Multilevel Secure Database          Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Vijayalakshmi Atluri, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 11/30/2000
* USD 214,337.00

The area of transaction processing in multilevel secure (MLS) database
management systems (DBMSs) has substantially progressed in the past few years.
Despite this activity, research in this area has been limited to traditional
transaction concepts. Moreover, even for traditional transaction models,
existing solutions for secure transaction processing are not completely
satisfactory. This research (1) investigates the impact of multilevel security
constraints on transaction processing in advanced database applications, and (2)
examines whether the properties of the advanced transaction models, in
particular nested transaction models, can be utilized to solve the secure
concurrency control problems in traditional databases. It develops multilevel
secure workflow and multilevel secure long duration transaction models, and the
necessary extensions to the nested model required by MLS DBMSs. The results of
this project enable incorporating multilevel security in advanced database
applications such as process modeling, engineering design and long-running
activities, and provide efficient secure transaction processing protocols for
conventional database applications. Besides MLS databases, the results of this
work are directly useful in other non-secure database environments such as
hierarchically decomposed databases. The education plan includes development of
three new courses at undergraduate and graduate level and student involvement in
this research.