* 9624363
* CAREER:  A Concept Exploration System for Configuring       Complex Systems with Quality Considerations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1996,08/10/1998
* Wei Chen, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/10/1998
* USD 210,000.00

9624363 Chen This Career Award provides support for research on developing a
design system, called the Concept Exploration System (CES), for configuring
complex systems at the early stages of design. The CES can be used to quickly
evaluate the design concepts and determine the top-level design specifications
for those systems that require a large investment of resources, have long life
cycles, have small production runs and are generally made-to-order. Examples of
such systems are aircraft, automobiles, launch vehicles, ships, and electric
power generation plants. The foundation of this research is the development of
the Robust Concept Exploration Method which is an integrated design process that
allows for decision making with quality consideration. The key feature of this
method is to integrate the robust design techniques, Suh's design axioms, and
the Response Surface Methodology within the framework of the Compromise Decision
Support Problem (a mathematical construct for formulating multi-objective design
problems involving tradeoffs). Educational focal points are to (1) orchestrate
learning from a systems perspective in the undergraduate design education, (2)
introduce quality engineering concepts and statistical methods in the graduate
design curricula, and (3) encourage undergraduate student involvement with the
research programs. Because of growing costs and globalization of the
marketplace, improvements in productivity require a reliable design in the
shortest possible time. In general, most design automation techniques have
concentrated on relatively later design phases but little has been done to
provide assistance in the early stages of design. The development of this
research will provide a prototypical tool that can be used by designers to do
better in this area of design and ultimately enhance the competitiveness of
American industry. Successful implementation of the research is expected to
affect the science and technology base in providing the capability of handling
design problems with a magnitude of complexity, reducing the risks of using
uncertain information, facilitating continuous improvement, and assisting
Concurrent Engineering and Multidisciplinary Optimization.