* 9624089
* Joint Density-Based Methods of Applied Nonstationary        Signal Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Patrick Loughlin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 11/30/2000
* USD 205,000.00

While the Fourier transform is an indispensable tool in signal processing and
linear time-invariant (LTI) systems analysis, as well as a staple of the
electrical engineering education, many natural and man-made processes are not
time-invariant but rather exhibit frequencies that change over time (e.g., FM
communication systems, the Doppler effect, speech and other biomedical signals).
The conventional short-time, or "quasi-stationary," extensions of LTI concepts
for studying such processes is often inadequate; for example, depending upon the
short-time analysis interval length selected, dramatically different results can
be obtained for the same process, particularly when the signal contains both
transients and harmonics. Accordingly, there is a need, both in engineering
practice and pedagogy, for the development of new methods for time- varying (or
nonstationary) signal processing. This research involves the development and
application of a general method of nonstationary signal processing that
surmounts the limitations of methods based on the extension of LTI concepts to
time-varying situations. The principle objectives of this research are to: (1)
develop new joint density-based methods for nonstationary signal processing
(e.g., scale); (2) apply these new methods to challenging, practical problems in
biomedical signal analysis and machine health monitoring (which fall under the
biotechnology and manufacturing Federal Strategic Areas); and, (3) develop a
general educational framework for nonstationary signal processing based on the
new methods, via new instructional laboratory courses and research opportunities
for college undergraduate and graduate students.