* 9624230
* CAREER: Analysis and Design of Hierarchical                 Source Routing &amp; Embedded ATM Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Gustavo de Veciana, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Taieb Ben Znati
* 06/30/2001
* USD 209,943.00

This research addresses two related problems in the design and management in
integrated high-speed communication networks. The first problem is to analyze
and develop the tools required to support and operate hierarchical source
routing algorithms currently under consideration for private and future public
ATM networks. This approach to routing aims to simplify the operation of large-
scale networks by introducing hierarchical structure and attempts to ensure
Quality of Service (QoS), prior to transmitting connection requests, via source
routing. Using a combination of stochastic modeling and optimization techniques
the principle investigator will study various approaches to estimating, and
periodically advertising available capacity, as well as to hierarchically
aggregating state information. The second problem to be investigated concerns
the design of performance oriented embedded (virtual) networks on an ATM
backbone. For specific types of services, such as interactive video, the PI will
explore various architectures and complementary management schemes which meet
overall performance requirements and maximize throughput/revenue. This work will
be extended to address, services requiring heterogeneous resource bundles such
as on-line services, distributed computing, and database applications requiring
consistent high-levels of performance and for which the use of a dedicated
virtual network is justified.