* 9624392
* CPMSA:  "Comprehensive Partnerships for Minority Student    Achievement (CPMSA) Project"
* EHR,ESR
* 10/01/1996,11/30/2001
* Jerome Clark, Board of Education of Prince George's County
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 11/30/2001
* USD 3,668,979.00

Project As A Component Of A Comprehensive Plan: The Comprehensive Partnerships
for Minority Student Achievement (CPMSA) Project has been designed to complement
the extensive reform efforts in place throughout the school district and state.
It reflects the objectives of federal and state Goals 2000 initiatives. Through
a new restructuring plan within the school system that encompasses "clusters" of
school communities, direct services will be provided that reflect the needs of
each community and include parents and school improvement teams as part of the
decision-making process. A Structure Designed To Deliver Excellence: The new
Superintendent of Schools, Dr. Jerome Clark, has implemented a restructuring
plan that affects how the school system operates across every department and
division. The new organization, "Communities Committed to Children," provides
the infrastructure for a natural pipeline for students in science and
mathematics K-12, with a goal of significantly increasing the number of African
American students graduating from the school district prepared to pursue careers
or advanced studies in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET).
Communities Committed to Children consists of 20 school communities or clusters
that take ownership for the schooling of thousands of students enrolled in a
feeder pattern of elementary, middle, and high schools. Each cluster is directed
by a Chief Educational Administrator (CEA) who is responsible for ensuring the
quality of programming, K-12. Each cluster also includes a designated school, or
Oasis Site, which provides instructional and support services after school hours
and during weekends to students, parents, and the general community. It is
within this framework, a framework designed for success, that the components of
the Comprehensive Partnerships for Minority Student Achievement (CPMSA) proposal
would be implemented. A Program Designed To Achieve Excellence: Communities
Committed to Children works to achieve its goals of increasing the number of
students from underrepresented populations who leave the school district
prepared to pursue careers or advanced studies in SMET courses. A number of
coordinated, comprehensive, and innovative strategies and partnerships are
offered through this CPMSA project to attain this goal. Extent Of Need For The
Project: The Board of Education of Prince George's County is a multiculturally
diverse school system in Maryland, located east of Washington, D.C., and serves
120,000 students. This large school system mirrors many of its urban
counterparts in racial gender, and ethnic composition, as well as size. A number
of initiatives have been implemented, and while the performance gap in the
school system between African American and Caucasian students has been narrowed
dramatically it has not been eliminated. The diversity of the school system
reinforces the need for attention to systemwide reform by: (1) increasing
numbers of students in science and math classes, (2) increasing student academic
performance, (3) improving career and technical education training
opportunities, and (4) enhancing staff development. This project strives to
improve learning and teaching by providing a framework for educational reform
and accountability. It promotes research, consensus building, and systemic
changes needed to ensure equitable educational opportunities for all students,
especially students who are economically disadvantaged, limited English
proficient, and/or multiculturally diverse. ***