* 9624456
* CAREER:  Nucleation and Assembly of Epitaxial Nanostructures on Silicon
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2002
* Mohan Krishnamurthy, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2002
* USD 185,000.00

9624456 Krishnamurthy This CAREER research project addresses fundamental issues
in the control of nucleation and ordering processes, and the use of
morphological transitions during strained layer epitaxial growth to create
quantum-nanostructures. A novel scheme for obtaining spatially periodic Ge
nanostructures on Si, by strain-induced preferential nucleation is propo sed.
Periodic strain fields provided by surface ripples in conjunction with coherent
islanding are suggested for producing a self-assembled array of nanostructures.
The experiments will be guided by a quantitative model describing how
preferential nucleation depends on strain and growth kinetics. Structures will
be grown by molecular beam epitax y and characterized by electron microscopy and
scanning probe microscopy. %%% Along with the basic research, this project
incorporates an activity for structuring an Electronic Materials Processing and
Design course sequence for undergraduate seniors involving the formation of
interdisciplinary teams of students working on group projects of current
research or industrial relevance. Student teams will be advised by faculty, a
graduate student and an industrial collaborator. This offers a team-approach to
research problem-solving, enhances the understanding of the interdisciplinary
nature of electronic materials research, and offers research leadership training
to students. A laboratory- intensive course sequence emphasizing atomic scale
materials processing and chara cterization will also be introduced. The proposed
basic investigations of nanostructures are expected to contribute fundamental
materials science knowledge of technological relevance to advanced
microelectronic devices and circuits. The knowledge and understanding gained
from this research project is expected to contribute in a general way to im pro
vin g the per for man ce of adv anc ed dev ice s and cir cui ts use d in com put
ing , inf orm ati on pro ces sin g, and tel eco mmu nic ati ons by pro vid ing a
fun dam ent al und ers tan din g and a bas is for des ign ing and pro duc ing
imp rov ed mat eri als wit h new pro per tie s and fun cti ona lit y. *** _