* 9624757
* CAREER: Designing an End-To-End Architecture for            Distributed Multimedia Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Harrick Vin, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 03/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

The main objectives of the proposed research are: (1) to develop an integrated
multimedia computing environment that supports efficient mechanisms for storage,
transmission, and presentation of information in multiple forms (e.g., video,
audio, images, text, and numeric data); and (2) to utilize it to develop
innovative methods for delivering education. To achieve these objectives, the
proposed research promises to develop an end-to-end architecture consisting of:
(i) a multimedia file system that supports efficient means for storage and
retrieval of multi-resolution multimedia objects, (ii) network algorithms and
protocols for efficient transmission of multimedia objects over networks, and
(iii) processor scheduling mechanisms as well as transport and higher layer
protocols that support efficient processing and streaming of data at the end-
station. The end-to-end system architecture thus created will form the basis
for: (a) creating a digital repository of educational material containing video-
lectures, notes, presentation slides, simulation packages, animation, images,
etc., on several inter-disciplinary topics, and (b) providing efficient methods
for organizing and browsing through the information space. In addition to being
a realistic testbed for evaluating the end-to-end system architecture, this
digital library prototype will provide an excellent environment for evaluating
the effectiveness of various methods of distance learning and self-paced
education. The findings of this research will significantly impact the design of
large-scale digital libraries and distance learning tools of the future. ***