* 9624268
* Career Program:  Molecular Design of Surface Modified       Vesicles and Liposomes:  A Theoretical Study
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2001
* Igal Szleifer, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2001
* USD 285,000.00

9624268 Szleifer Vesicles and liposomes are aggregates formed by spherically
closed bilayers of amphiphilic molecules. The ability of the lipsome to dissolve
large quantities of molecules in their core and its solubility in aqueous
environments makes them ideal systems for drug delivery. In recent years it was
found that grafting polymers to the surface of the liposomes increases the
longevity of these aggregates in the blood stream. Furthermore, by chemically
modifying the grafted polymer free end-group with molecules that have large
affinities to specific cell receptors, the liposomes can be used for targeted
delivery. Despite the importance of polymer-modified liposomes as premier drug
carriers, there is no systematic understanding of the factors that govern their
stability, longevity, and ability to target specific cells. A systematic
theoretical study of the behavior of liposomes and vesicles modified by grafted
polymer chairs will be performed. The single-chain mean-field theory will be
used to study the behavior of the chain molecules (surfactants and polymers)
that comprise the aggregates. This approach provides accurate conformational and
thermodynamic information as compared with experimental measurements. The aim of
the work is to systematically study the conditions under which modified
aggregates can achieve longevity, thermodynamic stability and specific
targeting. The work consists of finding the compositions of surfactants ( or
lipids), cholesterol and polymer that will form stable vesicles within a range
of size that is optimal for drug delivery. The ability of the grafted chains to
prevent protein adsorption on the surface of the vesicles will be studied.
Specific polymer chains that combine the ability to prevent protein adsorption
with conformational properties that enhance targeting of the carrier to specific
cells. The microscopic understanding of the behavior of polymer modified
vesicles that will be achieved should able the development of new types of ag
gregates for use as reagents that can be used in separation processes, such as
protein separation and solubilization of small hydrophobic molecules in aqueous
media. Theoretical studies will be carried out in close collaboration with three
experimental groups that are investigating: 1) the use of end-functionalized
polymer-modified liposomes for targeted drug delivery, 2) vesicle-membrane
fusion induced by chemical modification of the vesicle and 3) protein adsorption
on polymer-modified surfaces. The teaching plan is divided into two parts. One
describes the approach to be taken in formal classroom teaching. The other
presents the different projects that go beyond the formal teaching requirements.
In the former, the basic idea is to provide the students with the links between
physical processes, mathematical tools and experimental measurements.
Understanding this relationship enables students to quickly grasp new concepts
based on previously learned subjects. The informal activities that will be
undertaken include special topic discussions, lectures and research for
undergraduate students interested in specific applications of the general field
of physical chemistry. These activities will be confined to select small groups
of students; the aim being to provide the personalized attention that is not
generally available in large formal classes. Furthermore, the teaching plan also
includes special topic research projects for undergraduate and graduate
students. ***