* 9624968
* CAREER: Human-Virtual Environment Interaction:              Development of a New Area of Study Within Interactive       Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2002
* Kay Stanney, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2002
* USD 342,876.00

The goal of this research project is to develop a set of Virtual Environment
Readaptation Mechanisms (VERM) that facilitate user recovery to normative
conditions after exposure to a virtual environment (VE). While considerable work
is being done to characterize motion sickness and identify the potential
maladaptive aftereffects from human-virtual environments, there are currently
few efforts focusing on the actions to be taken when post-exposure aftereffects
are identified. This research focuses on demonstrating the feasibility of
developing provocative activities conducive to visual and visuomotor
recalibration of known post-exposure disturbances, including ataxia (i.e.,
postural instability), vestibulo-ocular reflex gain/phase changes, and degraded
eye-hand coordination. The approach consists of testing the effectiveness of
three post-exposure readaptation mechanisms (locomotion activities, visual
tracking tasks, and peg-in-hole tasks) to facilitate user readaptation under
varying degrees of exposure duration, user initiated control, and visual scene
complexity. The results of this research will provide an understanding of post-
exposure readaptation, as well as provide mechanisms that facilitate a timely
recovery from VE exposure. The VERM have possible application by VE system
developers in specifying post-exposure protocols that verify when the
aftereffects from VE exposure have dissipated, thereby maintaining the safety of
users and minimizing the liability of developers.