* 9625131
* Diversity and Metabolic Capabilities of Arctic              Bacterioplankton Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1997
* James Hollibaugh, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Odile de la Beaujardiere
* 04/30/1997
* USD 90,260.00

The proposed study is to investigate the distribution of key properties -
abundance, community composition and community metabolic capabilities - of
bacterioplankton communities in the Arctic Ocean. In conjunction with data
collected during April on the SCICEX 95 cruise, the seasonal and spatial
variation of these properties will be studied. The patterns of spatial and
temporal variation of these properties will be examined and related to sources
of organic matter fueling heterotrophic production. The investigation will be
conducted using samples collected from a submarine dedicated to Arctic
oceanography and analyzed in the laboratory after the cruise. Community
composition will be analyzed using a method developed in the investigation's
laboratory based on separating partial sequences of the 16S rRNA gene. Community
metabolic capabilities will be assessed by the ability of bacteria to grow
heterotrophically on a battery of 95 different sole C sources. Bacterioplankton
abundance will be determined by epifluorescence microscopy. We will analyze
water samples chemically to determine the concentrations amino acids,
carbohydrates and dissolved organic carbon, and conduct bioassays using native
bacteria to determine directly the proportion of dissolved organic carbon that
they can metabolize.