* 9625945
* Conference: International Conference on Organic Nonlinear   Optics III (Marco Island, Florida, December 16-20, 1996)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Mark Kuzyk, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 07/31/1997
* USD 5,400.00

9625945 Kuzyk This proposal seeks partial funding for an international
conference on the topic of organic nonlinear optics with meeting headquarters on
Marco Island, Florida. Travel funds are requested to support U.S. invited
speakers and students. The purpose of the meeting is to bring together top
researchers - whose expertise spans material design, material characterization,
device fabrication, and integrated device architectures - to the captive setting
of a small island to discuss and assess progress in the field. This upcoming
conference is motivated by 3 previous NSF-supported conferences that were held
in Pullman, Washington in the summer of 1992; in Val Thorens, France in the
Winter of 1994 (ICONO'1); and in Kusatsu, Japan in the Summer of 1995(ICONO'2).
This proposed meeting would be the fourth in the series of meetings that are
held every 18 months. The demand for such a meeting was evidenced by full-
capacity attendance at both ICONO'1 and ICONO'2. The strategy is to hold this
meeting in those countries that are active in organic nonlinear optics. At the
ICONO'1 meeting, U.S. and other non-European attendees had the opportunity to
learn about a large array of European research activities that are normally not
represented at U.S. conferences. Similarly, at ICONO'2, Pacific Rim research was
show-cased. NSF supported students attended both conferences. The aim of this
meeting is to bring together this group of internationally distinguished
researchers to a forum in the United States that encourages discussion and
interactions. ***