* 9625856
* Acquisition of Rheometer and Laser for in situ Optical      Measurements of Flow-Induced Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* L. Gary Leal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1998
* USD 103,322.00

9625856 Pine Over the past ten years, University of California, Santa Barbara
has become one of the premier centers for research on complex liquids and has
made fundamental advances in the understanding of polymer solutions, colloidal
suspensions, surfactant systems, and biomaterials. Research on these systems is
highly interdisciplinary with participants from several departments including
Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Materials, Chemistry, Physics, and
Biology. The study of the flow behavior of these systems has been a central and
consistent focus, with many innovations being developed at UCSB. %%% This award
is for the acquisition of a commercial fluids rheometer and an argon ion laser
in order to develop a high performance measurement system capable of making
simultaneous rheological and optical measurements. The instrument will be used
to study the relationship between flow and structure in complex fluids. The
rheometer is capable of making dynamic, transient, and steady state measurements
of shear and normal stresses in macromolecular solutions and suspensions. To
this rheometer, we will add the capability of performing several optical
measurements including small and large angle light scattering, microscopy, and
flow birefringence. The optical measurements will provide crucial information
about structural changes which accompany rheological changes of the fluid under
study. By simultaneously performing both rheological and structural
measurements, this instrument will significantly advance the state-of-the-art
and provide a unique and powerful tool for understanding the flow and processing
of complex fluids. ***