* 9625585
* X-Ray Diffraction Studies of Quasicrystals and Other        Crystalline Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,10/31/2000
* Roberto Colella, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/2000
* USD 240,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9625585 Colella Various x-ray diffraction experiments
will be carried out on the icosahedral phase of Al-Pd-Mn. Since this alloy can
be made into a quasicrystal with a high quality lattice structure, dynamical
diffraction is feasible. The basic question still remains, "Where are the
atoms?" and twelve years after the discovery of quasicrystals this question has
not been fully answered. Experiments at Purdue and at the synchrotron light
sources, NSLS and CHESS, will include quantitative studies of anomalous
transmission (the Borrman effect), standing waves, and the use of circularly
polarized x-rays. The basic issue of the centrosymmetry will be examined. An
experiment will be carried out to determine the space group of the benzil
molecular crystal that can be found in two enantiomorphic space groups and
correlate optical activity with structure. %%% Various x-ray diffraction
techniques, including experiments at the National Synchrotron Light Source and
the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source, will be used to investigate the
atomic arrangements in quasicrystals. These are new materials that do not
exhibit long range periodicity as do most other solid substances. Their high
strength, low density, low surface friction, and good oxidation resistance make
them ideal for surface coatings. A company in France has set up a production
line for using quasicrystalline coatings in frying pans instead of Teflon.
Applications are envisaged for ball bearings, Some quasicrystals have
exceptional qualities for hydrogen storage. ***