* 9625459
* Mathematical Sciences: q-Orthogonal Polynomials and         Special Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Mourad Ismail, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 81,241.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9625459 PI: Ismail Ismail plans to investigate certain
indeterminate moment problems and multivariate analogues of the Askey-Wilson
operators and polynomials. The Askey-Wilson operators act very nicely on theta
functions, so it is expected that the multivariate operators (the Dunkl
operators) will act nicely on higher dimensional theta functions. He also plan
to study integral operators whose kernels are Poisson and related kernels of
q-orthogonal polynomials, their adjoints, spectral properties, inversion
formulas as well as transform properties. In addition, Ismail will spend some
time on the management of the Askey-Bateman Project. This project of this
proposal concerns theoretical and computational problems involving areas of
mathematics called orthogonal polynomials and special functions. It has
potential applications to random matrix models for conduction and insulation in
solid state physics, as was demonstrated in earlier published research of Ismail
in collaboration with physicists from the University of Florida and Imperial
College of London. It also deals with asymptotics and bulk scaling techniques
which approximate efficiently complex systems by picking up the bulk
contribution of the states of the system with knowing the explicit solution.
This is particularly useful because in many cases one cannot write down the
solution explicitly. Ismail's work deals with one and several variables so it
corresponds to systems with one or several components. He also plan to
investigate inversion problems of integral transforms, which tell us the input
needed to reach any specific output.