* 9625047
* CAREER: Modeling the Structure of Metal Ion Surface         Complexes in Multicomponent Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Lynn Katz, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Clesceri
* 06/30/1998
* USD 120,000.00

9625047 Katz This is an award to support research to be conducted by this
investigator on factors that influence the movement and fate of metal ion
contaminants of surface and groundwaters. The research she will conduct
addresses environmental problems associated with energy and raw material
production and past management practices that require reliable quantitative
prediction of the effect these potential contaminants have on water resources.
Her research was previously supported under a Research Initiation Award, NSF
Grant No. BCS 92-10869. The expected results of this research include
formulation and evaluation of predictive models for contaminant transport that
can be used in engineering design of systems to prevent, reduce or eliminate the
pollutional effect metal ions have on water resources. The proposal leading to
this award was submitted in response to NSF 95-118, Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program Guidelines for Submission of Proposals. As such, it
not only addressed the proposed research but related the investigator's career
development plan to the current state of knowledge in the field and of the
potential impact work supported under this award would result in educational
innovation to the current state of knowledge on effective teaching and learning
in the investigator's discipline.