* 9625741
* Mathematical Sciences:  Reaction-Diffusion Models for       Mathematical Ecology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* George Cosner, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

Cosner 9625741 The investigators study mathematical models for the dynamics of
spatially distributed biological populations. The main goal of the research is
to provide a better theoretical understanding of how the spatial aspects of an
environment such as size, shape, and geographic variability can affect
populations or communities inhabiting the environment. The underlying motivation
is to address questions about such topics as the optimal design for nature
reserves or the likely ecological effects of modifying environments or
introducing new species into them. The investigators construct and analyze
mathematical models for the interactions between spatially distributed
populations and their environment and/or other populations. Most of the models
involve partial differential equations, primarily reaction-diffusion equations
and systems, often with explicit spatial dependence in the coefficients. Some of
the models are based on specific biological situations, and others are designed
to answer more general questions about spatial effects. These two aspects of the
research overlap to some extent. For example, the investigators study a model of
interactions between aphids and ladybird beetles that involves multiple spatial
scales. The modeling techniques are designed to treat that specific system but
are also relevant to other problems involving multiple scales. A primary goal of
the mathematical analysis is determining whether models predict extinction or
persistence for the populations they describe. To address that issue the
investigators extend and apply the notion of uniform persistence from the theory
of dynamical systems and search for alternative approaches to the analysis of
persistence. Other important components of the mathematical methodology are
nonlinear analysis (especially bifurcation theory and related topics), maximum
principles and comparison methods, and the spectral theory of elliptic
operators. A secondary research goal is to obtain new mathematical results that
are useful in the context of applications. The investigators study ways of using
mathematics to understand ecological problems. The problems mostly involve
spatial aspects of the environment; for example, how to design the most
effective type of buffer zones for nature reserves, or how to predict the likely
effects of the fragmentation of natural habitats on the populations that inhabit
them. The problems also involve interactions between different biological
species, for example predators and prey. The methodology is to express the
essential features of a biological system in terms of equations and then to
perform a mathematical analysis of the equations to determine what they predict.
The analysis often requires the development of new mathematical results, which
may be of use to other investigators. A typical goal of the analysis is to
determine the effects of various environmental and biological factors on the
persistence or extinction of populations. A reason for using mathematical models
is that in situations involving endangered species, genetically engineered
organisms, or large scale environmental change, it is often impossible to do
experiments but crucial to have some idea of what to expect. Some of the models
are directly motivated by problems in refuge design or pest control. Others are
motivated by basic scientific questions about the effects of the spatial aspects
of environments on populations, but even those may eventually prove to be
relevant to issues raised in the contexts of environmental protection and the
biological effects of global change.