* 9625693
* Experimental Evaluation of Robust Controllers in Buildings  with Added Hysteretic Passive Damping
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Barry Goodno, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/1999
* USD 250,000.00

This project conducts studies of using a hybrid combination of passive damping
and robust active control to provide enhanced levels of energy dissipation in
buildings in seismic environments. A significant feature of this program is the
use of state-of-the-art methods for designing robust controllers that are
capable of handling the unstructured uncertainty in both the model for the plane
(the controlled structure and in the disturbance (the earthquake). The robust
hybrid control proposal offers considerable promise because the attractive
features of both passive and robust active control are combined such that
passive energy dissipation can be used to handle small disturbances and also
reduce design requirements for active systems. The focus of the research is a
series of experimental tests, and supporting analytical studies, on a 1/4 scale
six story test building structure located at NCEER, SUNY Buffalo. The research
effort will be made to develop a robust control system for the test structure;
combine the active system with an optimal passive damping system based on
special hysteretic damping connectors developed and tested in prior research;
design a test program based on experience gained from previous laboratory small-
scale tests; install passive and active devices on the six story structure and
carry out a series of shake table tests; and evaluate results, compare measured
and predicted response, and assess implications. This research project will be
one of the first efforts to actually test promising active control systems at
near full-scale and in practical situations.. It is expected to provide new
insight into the implementation of hybrid control systems in actual building
structures.