* 9625668
* CISE Postdoctoral Program: Postdoctoral Research Associate  in Computational Science &amp; Engineering Science: High        Performance Computing for Remote Sensing Applications
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Larry Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 02/28/1998
* USD 46,200.00

9625668 Davis, Larry University of Maryland, College Park CISE Postdoctoral
Program: Postdoctoral Research Associate in Computational Science &amp;
Engineering Science: High Performance Computing for Remote Sensing Applications
This award supports CES associate David Bader. The main objective of the
proposed training and research plan is to develop innovative computational
methods and software for applying high performance computing to fundamental
problems arising in the analysis of remotely sensed image data. This work will
be conducted at the University of Maryland Institute for Advanced Computer
Studies (UMIACS) in close cooperation with Professor Davis (Computer Science),
Goward (Geography), Ja'Ja' (Electrical Engineering), and Townshend (Geography),
who are pursuing a number of closely related efforts. The application to be
developed is a high performance system for estimating net primary production
(NPP) using the production efficiency model (PEM) developed at the University of
Maryland. The overall aim is to build a family of software modules that make use
of a variety of algorithms to carry out geometric correction of images, to
eliminate signals from extraneous sources (e.g. atmospheric correction), to
sample spatially and temporally, and to generate derived geophysical properties.
The modules will be constructed using proven portable and practical high
performance programming languages and libraries. Our applications development
will be conducted on two high performance computing platforms at UMIACS; a
16-node IBM SP-2 and a Digital Alpha cluster consisting of 40 Alpha processors
networked via a Digital ATM Gigaswitch. The Maryland facility has approximately
300GB of online disk storage and a multi-terabyte tertiary storage system. ***