* 9625867
* Development of an Ellipsometric Microscope for Measuring    Liquid Surface Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1996,11/30/1998
* Bruce Law, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 11/30/1998
* USD 97,800.00

Law 9625867 The structure of droplets or the texture of films at liquid surfaces
are indicative of the underlying surface interaction forces, line tension and
surface elasticity. The understanding of surface interactions is important in
many physical, chemical, and biological processes. For example, surface
interactions control the phase diagram of Langmuir films which are frequently
used as model systems for biological membranes, surface interactions also
control the spreading properties of a liquid droplet which is important in the
understanding of lubrication, similarly surface interactions influence the
orientation of liquid crystal molecules which are used in many modern optical
devices. There are therefore many scientific and technologically important
reasons for studying the structure of droplets and the texture of films at
liquid surfaces. With this award, we will develop an improved ellipsometric
microscope to study liquid surface structure. It overcomes various technical
difficulties associated with a previous ellipsometric microscope design which
could only study thin films or droplets on solid surfaces. For isotropic films
or droplets at liquid surfaces the improved ellipsometric microscope can
determine the film thickness as a function of position with ~0.1 nm thickness
resolution and ~1 um spatial resolution, while for anisotropic films of known
thickness and composition at a liquid surface the ellipsometric microscope can
determine the variation in film anisotropy with ~l um spatial resolution. This
instrument will be used to study the nucleation and growth of wetting droplets
as they coalesce to a uniform wetting film. The instrument will also be used to
study topological defects in freely suspended liquid crystal films of known
thickness. The unbinding of disclinations and dislocations is believed to play
an important role in the 2-D melting process of freely suspended liquid crystal
films. %%% As far as we are aware this will be th e first instrument of its kind
which can determine the absolute tilt angle of anisotropic films with micrometer
spatial resolution (provided the film thickness is known). This instrument
should therefore prove of general use in many other situations of interest to
the scientific and industrial community. For example, it could be used to study
tilt angle transitions and defects in Langmuir films. It could also be used in
monitoring the quality control of anisotropic films in an industrial or research
setting, for example, it can quantify the uniformity of hightemperature
superconducting films or Langmuir-Blodgett layers. ***