* 9625030
* CAREER: Computer Modeling of Bone
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Tony Keaveny, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 02/28/2001
* USD 349,925.00

9625030 Keaveny The goal is to develop a comprehensive program in orthopaedic
biomechanics at UC Berkeley by integrating research with teaching at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. Developments from the proposed computatinal
research will be incorporated into an existing undergraduate class in
biomechanics by way of introducing a laboratory-based computer project. Other
teaching objectives include: development of a new graduate course in
computational biomechanics; introduction of research seminars for undergraduates
and graduates to assist in career choices; inclusion of undergraduates and
graduates in the proposed research; expansion of research and teaching
collaboration between the Departments of Mechanical Engineering at UC Berkeley
and Orthopaedic Surgery at UCSF; and development of short videos of experimental
procedures and a CD ROM-based textbook for the undergraduate biomechanics class.
The major research goal is to develop a computational framework for the study of
the biomechanics of trabecular bone and to use this framework to address a
number of fundamental issues on the mechanical behavior of this complex
biological tissue. These issues are concerned primarily with the relationships
between the mechanical behavior of tissue at the microstructural level vs. the
mechanical properties at the whole specimen level. Specifically, relationships
between locations of maximum stress and strain within the specimen vs.
trabecular porosity and architecture will be investigated as well as the failure
modes that accompany these trends. The sensitivity of these trends to anatomic
site, damage, bone loss, variations in tissue properties, and loading modes such
as tension, compression, shear, off-axis, and multi- axis will also be
determined. In collaboration with researchers from Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, capabilities will be developed to perform three- dimensional "high-
resolution" finite element models of 40 trabecular bone spe cimens, using
massively parallel computation on models with up to 100 million elements. The
modeling technique will be prospectively validated against experimental data for
an additional 40 specimens of trabecular bone taken from a range of anatomic
sites. Finite element parameter studies will then be performed to address the
specific research objectives. Results from this project will be relevant to
biological form-function relations in trabecular bone, aging, diseasae, trauma,
drug development, and artificial bone substitutes. The computational
developments will also improve the ability to perform stress analyses on any
geometrically complex structure, even beyond the realm of bioengineering. ***