* 9625202
* CAREER: General Support for Dynamic Reconfiguration
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2001
* Elizabeth White, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 04/30/2001
* USD 200,038.00

In recent years, there has been a great deal of attention in the software
engineering community on the development of techniques and tools that provide
support for the design and implementation of applications to be distributed
across networks of workstations. Some of this focus has been on support for
initial development and configuration of applications while other research has
focused on techniques to support these types of applications at run-time. One
novel aspect of workstation environments is that the number of processors
available for use tends to grow and shrink over time. This aspect has caused
increased interest in dynamic reconfiguration techniques that allow applications
to adapt to their changing environment. Much of the current research in dynamic
reconfiguration has focused on reconfiguration environments and heterogeneous
process migration. This research is developing techniques for supporting dynamic
structural and implementation changes. The work has three parts: 1) studying
general approaches to implementing dynamic structural and implementation changes
to applications, including those changes that require process participation, 2)
determining what aspects of this task can be automated, and 3) building tools to
support dynamic structural and implementation changes. The most promising
approach is one that enables mapping the old global state of an application to a
new global state based on the structural changes to be made. This CAREER project
includes teaching initiatives geared towards introducing undergraduate students
to issues in the design and implementation of distributed applications. The goal
is to improve training in an area where many students get inadequate preparation
for industry positions that require knowledge in this domain. ***