* 9625426
* Spectroscopy of High Energy Vibrational States
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* John Muenter, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 07/31/2000
* USD 370,200.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports John S. Muenter of the
University of Rochester as he continues his investigations into the structure
and dynamics of highly vibrationally excited states of small and medium-sized
molecules. He will populate the excited state using Ti:sapphire laser
excitation, then probe the prepared state in the radiofrequency, microwave or
infrared region using molecular beam electric resonance spectroscopy. By
examining a variety of molecules with varying densities of states, he can
characterize the high energy vibrational state as intramolecular vibrational
relaxation begins to occur. The goals are to determine (a) the contributions of
various vibrational modes, including dark states, to the excited state
wavefunctions, and the (b) equilibrium structure and (c) dipole moment of the
excited state. This knowledge of high energy molecular states will provide
important foundation material for a wide variety of kinetics and dynamics
experiments. High energy states serve as precursors to a broad range of chemical
reactions. These experiments are designed to provide information to maximize the
productivity of many kinetics and dynamics experiments. In addition, data
obtained here will provide exacting tests of theoretical potential energy
surfaces, and the knowledge of high energy states gained here will allow the
construction of more accurate potential surfaces in the future. Finally, the
techniques developed for this work can be applied to many other experiments in
physical chemistry.