* 9625628
* RUI:  San Jose State/IBM Almaden Center Integrated Research and Education Program
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2002
* Joseph Pesek, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 05/31/2002
* USD 1,190,000.00

This Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program as a Grant Opportunities for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) activity, combines intellectual and physical
resources of San Jose State University (SJSU) and the IBM Almaden Research
Center (IBM/ARC) to offer undergraduate students, graduate students, and high
school chemistry teachers an integrated research and education program that
focusses on the analytical and surface chemistry of materials. During the tenure
of this thirty-six month standard grant, Professors Pesek and Scharberg and nine
of their SJSU colleagues in the Departments of Chemistry, Physics, and Materials
Engineering will join with twenty-two of their counterparts at IBM/ARC to
jointly mentor a total of twenty-two undergraduates, graduate students, small
college faculty, and high school chemistry teachers as they pursue fundamental
and applied research projects in materials chemistry. Each of the participants
will spend time working in laboratories both at SJSU and IBM/ARC, thereby
enabling them to gain a perspective on academic as well as industrial research,
and how industrial- academic cooperation can benefit the two organizations. This
academic-industrial integrated research and education program builds upon the
pioneering work of these organizations that was supported under NSF grant
CHE-9300131. Participants in this cooperative research activity will gain an
enhanced appreciation of basic and applied scientific research which should
encourage the students to pursue more advanced degrees, the small college
faculty to initiate or more actively pursue projects at their home institutions
and thereby share the excitement of research and discovery with their students,
and the high school teachers to motivate more of their own students to consider
science as a career.