* 9625830
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Continuation Methods in       Nonlinear Elasticity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Timothy Healey, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 21,320.00

6/3/96 Dear Dr. Hariharan: Our Department Financial Assistant is now working up
a new budget in accordance with your recommendations from today. She will mail
it out sometime tomorrow for your non-official approval, before we sign it, etc.
Is a Text format OK for this, or would it be better to fax it to you? I am
prepared to make a best effort attempt to meet the original scope of the work,
given the reduced budget. Here is the abstract that you requested: *************
DMS-9625830: Global Continuation Methods in Nonlinear Elasticity P.I.:
T.J.Healey Abstract. We plan to carry out research in global nonlinear analysis
of partial differential equations of nonlinear elasticity. A major thrust of the
proposed work will be focused on problems involving phase change (weak solutions
and loss of ellipticity). The analysis of such models at a very general level is
fundamental to the understanding of martensitic transformations and shape-memory
effects, which are observed in many advanced engineering alloys. Some
interesting problems of classical nonlinear elasticity will also be considered.
The work has two major goals: (i) To obtain new qualitative results and detect
new phenomena - of both mathematical and physical significance; (ii) To obtain
new global-continuation (existence) results in problems of 2 and 3-dimensional
elasticity - including problems involving phase transformations. In classical
problems (rubber elasticity), tools developed by Healey and co-workers in
previous NSF-sponsored work will play an important role. For phase-change
problems, an entirely new approach based upon higher-gradient regularization,
global continuation and singular limits is being proposed. Broadly speaking,the
proposed work will provide important mathematical underpinnings to difficult
nonlinear problems arising in traditional engineering fields like structural
&amp; mechanical engineering and also in more modern areas like materials scien
ce. The work has the potential to: (i) provide new mathematical tools for the
analysis of hard problems of engineering practice,leading ultimately to safer
and more optimal design of structures; (ii) lead to a better understanding of
the nonlinear material behavior of certain engineering alloys, with potential
applications to manufacturing engineering and the design of non-passive or
"smart" structures. ********* Let me know if this is not acceptable - I'll be
happy to make changes. Thanks, Tim Healey