* 9625360
* Carbon Monoxide in Comets
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Maria Womack, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 07/31/1997
* USD 46,205.00

9625369 Womack The ability to observe and obtain data on comets provides a
unique opportunity to study the formation of the solar system, since they are
the best-preserved specimens of the gas and grains of the protosolar nebula
cloud out of which the solar system was formed. Investigating the chemical
composition of comets is a powerful way to gain insight into the different
populations of comets and the outer planetesimals. This research project has
three main goals: 1) To investigate how the comae of comets, whose formation are
driven by Carbon Monoxide (CO)-ice sublimation, differ from those whose
formation is driven by water-ice sublimation, 2) To search for chemical
composition differences between short-period comets and giant planetesimals,
which share a common origin in the Kuiper Disk in our Solar system, and 3) To
investigate the origin of cometary CO. Carbon monoxide sublimation rates will be
obtained by analyzing millimeter/submillimeter-wavelength spectroscopy
observations of three comets experiencing C0-ice, but not water-ice,
sublimation. Observations of five comets, whose formation of their comae are
driven primarily by water-ice sublimation, will also be made. These data from
the observations will be used to test models of CO-ice sublimation that occurs
directly from the nucleus and to probe variations between short-period comets
and Kuiper Disk objects. Since CO may derive from photolysis of methanol and
formaldehyde, millimeter/submillmeter wavelength spectra of H2CO and CH3OH
abundances will be obtained for several productive comets to search for
correlations between CO and these candidate precursor molecules. Visible and
near-IR wavelength imaging will be performed on the comae in conjunction with
spectroscopy to test models of CO production from the dust and to monitor
cometary outbursts. Pedagogical research indicates that students often learn
much more from collaborative learning, rather than from a solely independent
effort. A group of 3-5 students will work together as an observing team that
will be responsible for implementing an observing program of photometric imaging
using a 16-inch telescope, on the Erie, Pennsylvania campus, that is equipped
with a Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) detector. The observing team will have two
goals: 1) To track comets over several months to search for outburst activity
and 2) To obtain simultaneous images of a comet when millimeter/submillimeter
wavelength spectroscopy is being carried out at another telescope in another
part of the country. ***