* 9625549
* Quantum Nonlinear Science
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Richard Prange, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 225,000.00

9625549 Prange This grant supports work of this senior, distinguished theorist
whose past contributions have ranged over a variety of diverse areas in
condensed matter physics. More recently the PI has been involved in the general
area of quantum nonlinear science. This subject, on the interface between
quantum disorder problems and such nonlinear properties as chaos and fractals is
expected to have strong influence on the emerging fields of nanoscale devices.
The PI has been instrumental in a major conceptual advance in this field, namely
the removal of the divergence in a quasiclassical approach. This grant will
further develop the applications of the quasiclassical approach. In another
project the PI will explore the synergism of the random matrix theory and the
quasiclassical methods in their application to the properties of disorder at
quantum scale. %%% Small scale (nanoscale) devices have properties whose
description sometimes poses a special mathematical challenge. In this continuing
work of a distinguished theorist, attempts are being made to try a variety of
modern mathematical techniques, such as random matrix theory and quasiclassical
approximation in search of a effective and efficient computation of the material
properties. This work will advance the state of quantum nonlinear science. ***