* 9625053
* CAREER:  All-Optical SCM and WDM-SCM Multi-Access Networks  Based on Optical Current-Controlled Oscillators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Guifang Li, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 10/31/1997
* USD 125,000.00

9622298 Li The Department of Electrical Engineering at Rochester Institute of
Technology will purchase a phase and amplitude measurement systems which will be
dedicated to support research in engineering. The equipment will be used for
several research projects, including in particular: 1. "A Novel FM Microwave
Fiber-Optic Link for Antenna Remoting and Phased Arrays' 2. "An Ultra Wideband
Microwave Fiber-Optic Transmitter Based on Laser Diodes with Short External
Cavity" 3. "All-Optical SCM and WDM-SCM Multi-Access Networks" These research
projects share a key innovation in generating microwave/millimeter-wave
subcarriers on an optical carrier exploiting "instabilities" of nonlinear
optical systems. Specifically, the microwave/millimeter-wave subcarriers are
generated all optically using the optical current controlled oscillator (CCO)
which systematically exploits inherent nonlinear dynamics, mainly the formation
of periodic orbits. The phase and amplitude noise of the subcarrier determines,
to a large extent, the signal-to-noise ratio (bit-error rate) of the analog
(digital) links or communication networks. The equipment requested will be used
in combination with theoretical investigations to determine the dependence of
the amplitude and phase noise as functions of device parameters and operating
conditions. Subsequently strategies for reducing these noises will be
formulated. Ultimately, low-noise optical CCO's will be inserted in microwave
fiber-optic links as well as SCM and WDM-SCM multi-access fiber-optic networks.
***