* 9625451
* Structure, Dynamics and Transport in Self-Assembled         Ionomeric Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2002
* Shulamith Schlick, University of Detroit Mercy
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2002
* USD 505,830.00

9625451 Schlick This proposal is directed to the study of self-assembling of
perfluorinated and protiated ionomers in the bulk and in solution, as a function
of the solvent, the ion content, and the degree of neutralization. The following
experiments are planned. (a) F-NMR spectra of perfluorinated ionomers as a
function of concentration will be measured in ethanol, water, formamide and
N-methyl formamide, solvents that span a range of dielectric constants from 24
to 182. The lineshapes will be analyzed and compared with results for
perfluorinated polymers and short-chain perfluorinated surfactants, to deduce
the smallest unit that exists at low concentrations, and the degree of
aggregation. (b) The diffusion coefficients of neutral, cationic and anionic
tracers in perfluorinated ionomers will be measured by ESR imaging and
correlated with the degree and type of self- assembling of the polymer chains.
(c) In an attempt to understand the contribution of the backbone to self-
assembling, poly(ethylene-co-methacrylic acid) (EMAA) ionomers in solution, and
in the dry and solvent-swollen state, will be studied by the spin probe ESR
method and ESR imaging as a function of the concentration of the ionic monomer
(MAA), to deduce the dynamics of the aggregates and the curvature of the
polymer-solvent interface. (d) ESR imaging will be further developed in three
main areas. The time required for data acquisition will be reduced by a Fourier
transform method for image reconstruction so as to increase the range of
diffusion coefficients that can be deduced; the hardware and software necessary
for 2D spatial- spatial imaging will be assembled; and novel spin probes
designed to enhance the spatial resolution will be prepared. %%% The methods
proposed for the study of, and collection of data on, self-assembled ionomer
systems are considered important for the study of transport processes in drug
delivery systems; in ocular and intraocular lenses; in preparation of new
materials, including catalysts; and in biological systems that involve transport
through cell membranes. ***