* 9625455
* Exploratory Research:  Systematic, Regional Survey in       Southeastern Shandong Province, China
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1996,06/30/1996
* Anne Underhill, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1996
* USD 25,080.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Anne Underhill, Gary Feinman and
their colleagues will conduct an archaeological survey in southeastern Shandong
province which is located in the Yellow River region of China. The goal of this
one month field season is to conduct a preliminary evaluation of the region,
determine the extent of surface materials present, and establish a program of
long term collaborative U.S. - Chinese research. Previous work in the region has
revealed the presence of abundant remains from the late Neolithic Period,
including large walled sites that were probably centers of settlement
hierarchies, cemeteries indicating social differentiation and finely made craft
goods such as jade ornaments and elaborate pottery vessels. Given the early
dates for these sites, the region has long been recognized as a likely center
for the development of complex societies. Research to date however has focused
on individual sites and has not attempted to set these into a broader regional
context. It is not known how such central places interacted with or extended
their power over surrounding hinterlands. Research into complex societies in
other parts of the world has demonstrated that full understanding can be gained
only when individual sites are viewed from this broader perspective. Drs.
Underhill and Feinman will use survey techniques which were developed and have
been broadly applied in Middle America and test their feasibility in the
Shandong region. They will conduct a systematic survey of a 50 km square region
and the results will provide the basis to design a larger scale project.
Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies arose and were
maintained in many parts of the prehistoric world. Through the comparison of
individual cases they hope to discern underlying general processes. While it is
clear that complex societies developed independently in China, and while many
sites have been excavated, they have not been set into the necessary regional
contexts. The Underhill-Feiman research is important because it will accomplish
just this. It will introduce a new archaeological approach to China and further
collaboration between Chinese and American scientists.