* 9625920
* Multiobjective Robust Control:  Linear Versus Nonlinear     Controllers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Mario Sznaier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2000
* USD 183,887.00

9625920 Sznaier Robust control has undergone extensive developments that have
been successfully applied to challenging practical problems. However, these
techniques are limited by the fact that, in their context, performance must be
measured in the same norm used to assess stability. Clearly, a single norm is
usually not enough to capture different, and often conflicting, design
specifications. Therefore, designers are forced to use weighing functions and
similarity scaling, coupled with extensive trial and error, in an attempt to
translate realistic specifications into a form amenable to the theoretical
framework. In this research we propose to develop a synthesis framework that
explicitly takes into account multiple performance specifications and
uncertainty. The proposed research will combine elements from functional
analysis, linear systems theory and viability theory. In the case of linear
controllers, multiobjective problems can be recast into a convex optimization
form that can be exactly and efficiently solved. In the case of nonlinear
feedback, preliminary results using viability theory show that any performance
level obtained with a linear dynamic state-feedback controller can also be
achieved using nonlinear static controllers. Thus, there exists a potential
tradeoff between linear dynamics and static nonlinearities. This research effort
will result in an expanded robust control framework, capable of addressing
realistic problems without necessitating neither potentially conservative
approximations for multiple trial and error type iterations, leading to improved
and less costly designs. The portion of the research related to synthesizing
multiobjective controllers under hard control constraints and their experimental
validation in an anaerobic digester will be carried out in cooperation with an
interdisciplinary control group located at the Universidad Autonoma
Metropolitana, Mexico, headed by Dr. Rodolfo Suarez Cortez (Mathemat ics). This
research is supported under NSF- CONTACYT Collaborative Research Opportunity.
***