* 9625293
* Design and Properties of Films, Coatings and Brittle        Materials:  A Combined Education and Research Program
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1996,12/31/2001
* Ivar Reimanis, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2001
* USD 277,256.00

9625293 Reimanis A coordinated teaching and research program that targets
several national critical needs in the semiconductor and the structural ceramics
industries will be implemented. The educational component will emphasize
materials selection in design and will develop the integration of computer-based
design and/or numerical modeling into several undergraduate classes in materials
science. The research aspect of the program will examine relationships between
the residual stress distribution and the fracture behavior in graded composites.
Graded composites represent a new class of materials in the sense that many of
their properties can not be predicted with existing scientific models. One of
the P.I.'s long term goals is to develop some of these models. The effect of the
size scale of the microstructure relative to gradation on mechanical properties
will be examined by synthesizing composites with different graded layer
thicknesses and different gradation architectures employing vapor deposition,
and powder metallurgy. Both thermal and mechanical loading will be used to
examine failure mechanisms. Crack trajectories will be observed so that fracture
criteria may be developed. %%% The proposed research plan of this CAREER
proposal is to develop an understanding of the failure mechanisms in
metal/ceramic composites and coatings that are compositionally graded.
Understanding these mechanisms will enable materials engineers to design better
advanced materials for the automotive and aerospace industries. ***