* 9625784
* Parallelization of Scheduling Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Min-You Wu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1998
* USD 101,438.00

Static scheduling utilizes the knowledge of problem characteristics to reach a
global optimal, or near optimal, solution. Although these scheduling algorithms
apply to parallel programs, the algorithms themselves are sequential, and are
executed on a single processor system. The memory and speed of a single
processor limits the size of the graph that can be handled. Using
multiprocessors to schedule tasks to multiprocessors is a natural solution to
solve these problems. In fact, a scalable scheduler is not feasible without
parallelizing the scheduling algorithm and running it on a parallel computer.
There are two major data domains in a scheduling algorithm, the source domain
and the target domain. The source domain is the macro-dataflow graph; the target
domain is the schedule for target processors. Two approaches are proposed, the
vertical scheme and the horizontal scheme. The advantages and disadvantages of
the two approaches will be studied. This research has already accomplished the
primary stage. Two parallel scheduling algorithms have been developed, vertical
parallel MCP (VPMCP) and horizontal parallel MCP (HPMCP). New parallel
scheduling algorithms will be developed. An incremental parallel scheduling is
also proposed for applications with dynamic and unpredictable features. The goal
of this project is to investigate this approach and evaluate its performance for
some important applications, and to integrate these results into a tool-set that
will provide support for scheduling of dynamic and irregular problems. ***