* 9625217
* CAREER: Algebraic and Geometric Techniques for              Interface Detection in  Static and Dynamic Enviroments
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Dinesh Manocha, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* William Randolph Franklin
* 02/28/2001
* USD 199,886.00

The problems of interference detection are fundamental in computational
geometry, solid modeling, robotics, manufacturing, computer graphics and
computer-simulated environments. These include collision detection between
geometric models undergoing motion, surface intersection between linear and
curved surfaces, collision avoidance for robot motion planning, visibility
computations, hidden surface removal and boundary computations. This research
takes a three-fold approach to these problems using algebraic, numeric and
geometric techniques: 1. Develop fast and robust algorithms for interference
detection between geometric models in static and dynamic environments. The set
of models include polyhedra, splines, algebraic surfaces and deformable objects.
2. Specialize these algorithms to interactive collision detection, hidden
surface removal, surface intersection and boundary computation with special
emphasis on robustness. 3. Develop efficient software libraries for interference
detection between moving polyhedral objects, solid models defined using
algebraic surfaces and boundary evaluation. The resulting libraries will be
distributed as public domain code and demonstrated on different applications.
The research efforts will be complemented with the following educational goals:
1. Development of undergraduate and graduate courses on geometric, symbolic and
scientific computing. 2. Develop novel teaching methods and electronic course
notes using the World-Wide Web (WWW) technology. 3. Use of graphics, geometry
and animation tools to develop an algorithm animation and programming laboratory
for undergraduate courses. 4. Serving as a mentor to high school and
undergraduate students to work on graphics and modeling related projects in our
laboratory. ***