* 9625732
* Asymptotic Approximations in Probability and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Sandor Csorgo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1999
* USD 96,000.00

9625732 Csorgo ABSTRACT In probability, the investigator studies a concrete
construction of an infinitely divisible approximation to the distribution of a
sum of independent and identically distributed random variables with a
completely arbitrary distribution. This construction, motivated by a purely
probabilistic approach to the problem, has the potential to achieve the best
possible overall rate of such approximations. In statistics, the investigator
studies three different and unrelated groups of problems. One of these is
concerned with the overall asymptotic normality, at the best possible rate of
convergence, of certain least squares estimators for the exponent of a regularly
varying tail of a distribution function, by means of the quantile-transformation
method. The second is the exploration of universal large-sample Gaussian
approximations to cumulative-hazard and product-limit processes under random
censorship without any conditions on the estimated distribution or the censoring
mechanism, where the investigator uses a combination of strong-approximation and
martingale-theoretic analyses. The third group of problems is concerned with
rounding off a recent theory of nonparametric curve estimation under short- and
long-range dependent Gaussian subordination by answering the outstanding
questions for random-design regression. The investigator's Probability project
studies an approximation to sums of independent observations, which, unlike the
usual approximations in terms of bell-shaped curves-- responsible only for the
middle portions of the data -- attempts to incorporate the effects of the
extremes as well. In Statistics, the investigator is studying three different
groups of problems. The first one is concerned with the robust estimation of
measures of "thickness of the tails" of data sets. This problem is important in
various applied statistical and actuarial situations, such as the assessment of
the variability of stock-price changes and the distribution of large claims in
insuran ce business, particularly in bankruptcy re-insurance. The second group
of statistical problems is to investigate the basic large-sample behavior of
estimation when the observed data are incomplete due to the presence of nuisance
effects and/or the necessity of an early termination of data collection;
situations commonly referred to as random censorship. Here the investigator's
anticipated results aim at greatly stretching the limits of concrete
applicability of statistical estimation techniques for survival analyses with
randomly censored data. These are of great interest in medical follow-up studies
and reliability engineering. In the third group of problems in Statistics, the
investigator extends his recent theory to cover all major curve-estimation
patterns (density estimation, fixed-design and random-design regression) with
long-memory data sets. The complete theory will explore the basic distributional
properties of commonly used curve-estimation methods in time series analysis
when the observations may be long-range dependent, as in many typical applied
problems in geophysics and hydrology.