* 9625236
* CAREER:  Development in Innovative Optoelectronic Devices   and Optical Characterization Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* M. Selim Unlu, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 08/31/2001
* USD 320,000.00

9625236 Unlu We propose a research program in innovative optoelectronic devices
and characterization techniques closely tied to educational efforts in photonics
curriculum development. The research program focuses on high speed and high-
efficiency photodetectors, critical components in optical communication signal
processing and measurement systems. In parallel, research in near-field thermal
imaging can yield a factor of 10 improvement over current techniques, providing
important information for the design optimization of sub-micron devices and
circuits. The educational component utilizes these research programs and others
in creating modular photonics applications suitable for incorporation into the
standard undergraduate engineering courses and upper-level laboratory settings.
Photodetectors for today s high performance optical communication and signal
processing systems must have high sensitivities, short response times, and low
power consumption. Over the past five years a new family of optoelectronic
devices has emerged whose performance is enhanced by placing the active device
structure inside a Fabry-Perot resonant microcavity. Computer simulation studies
have shown that a drastic improvement in the high-speed performance of
conventional photodetectors can be achieved using the resonant cavity enhanced
(RCE) detection. Since the RCE scheme is independent of material system
operation at a variety of wavelength regions is possible. We propose to build on
the mature theory and existing experience in the RCE detectors and to prototype
high-performance ultrafast photodetectors operating at near-IA wavelengths. Also
based on the RCE scheme, we propose to fabricate monolithic photodetector arrays
sensitive to polarization of the incident light without requiring any external
polarization filters and/or beam splitters. Sensitivity of discrete devices can
be controlled by recessing the top surface of the detector allowing for the
monolithic fabrication of detector ar rays with varying sensitivities to TE and
TM polarizations. In parallel to our efforts in optoelectronic devices, we will
also pursue innovative optical characterization techniques based on near-field
optical microscopy. We have established a state-of-the-art near-field
spectroscopy laboratory funded by NSF and industrial collaborators. The proposed
nearfield microscopy research will emphasize diagnostics of optoelectronic
devices and the development of a new thermal imaging technique utilizing
nanopositioners and IR fibers. Boston University has made a major commitment to
Photonics. The construction of a new interdisciplinary Center for Photonics
Research with state-of-the-art facilities and advanced laboratories is underway.
Recently, a new NSF-funded curricular program, PRIDE: Photonics Research in
Interdisciplinary Education has started under the direction of the PI. The PRIDE
program will create three levels of photonics modules to enrich standard core,
specialized elective, and design courses of the upper division undergraduate and
early graduate curricula. These modules will incorporate photonics research into
a wide range of existing curricula, and demonstrate vertically integrated
curriculum development. Modular implementation of photonics into existing
courses represents a significant departure from standard curricular development.
This novel approach reduces the barriers to entry for cross-disciplinary
education, is inherently transportable while maintaining local flexibility of
content, and incorporates photonics research into a wide range of different
curricular topics. The PI's research program is an integral part of the PRIDE
effort. His research advances in photodetectors and near-field optical
microscopy will be incorporated into this modular curriculum. In addition to the
group effort in curriculum development, PI will also continue to develop new
courses in photonics and innovative teaching techniques utilizing World Wide
Web. ***