* 9625903
* Acquisition of a Multi-Impact Position-Sensitive Detector   for a Tomographic Atom-Probe: Atomic Scale Chemical Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,02/28/2003
* Peter Voorhees, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 02/28/2003
* USD 421,000.00

9625903 Seidman The tomographic atom probe (TAP) is a fundamental extension of
the atom-probe field-ion microscope (APFIM or simply atom probe), which provides
atomic-resolution depth profiling capability in one dimension. While the TAP
yields three- dimensional (3D) chemical profiles in direct lattice space at a
lateral spatial resolution of 0.2-0-5 nm, and a depth resolution equal to the
interplanar spacing along the direction being probed (&lt;0.2-0.3 nm). The TAP's
principal features are: subnanometric 3D images with quantitative compositional
information on an atomic scale, multi-impact position sensitive detector (PSD)
with 100 anodes that allows for the detection of up to 8ions per field-
evaporation pulse, an average detection rate of 1 ion pulse -1 and a pulse
frequency of 100 Hz, a million individual atoms can be collected and analyzed in
three hours employing a modern work station, high mass resolution (m/m = 200)
with atomic scale images in direct lattice space. There is no other instrument
with the above unique experimental capabilities of the TAP. This award provides
support for the acquisition of a multi- impact PSD, associated data acquisition
electronics, a work station, and an advanced visualization program for creating
3D images from the collected data. This TAP will be part of a facility that is
named "The Chicago-Area Consortium for Atomic-Scale Chemistry"; in addition to
Northwestern University, the University of Illinois' Materials Research
Laboratory and Argonne National Laboratory's Materials Science Division are
involved. %%% The proposed research centers around problems that require a
knowledge of interfacial chemistry on an atomic scale, and chemical information
associated with 0.5-2 nm size nuclei that form in the decomposition of alloys of
technological importance. ***