* 9625457
* Mathematical Sciences:  Some Limit Theorems in Probability  Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Evarist Gine, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 10/31/1999
* USD 78,362.00

9625457 Gine ABSTRACT The investigator does research on several types of limit
theorems in Probability Theory, with incidence in Asymptotic Statistics and
actual computation of spectra of integral operators. The first set of questions
relates to the law of the iterated logarithm for degenerate U-statistics,
particularly when the kernel is not square integrable, and to applications of
U-processes to the asymptotics of lifetime distributions for truncated and/or
censored data. In a second related set of questions the investigator and
collaborators approximate spectra of compact integral operators by the spectra
of certain random matrices and study several aspects of this approximation. The
procedure amounts to discretizing the kernel by means of a random grid instead
of the usual deterministic grids. The third main area of research concerns
selfnormalized sums of independent identically distributed random variables,
which are related to the Student t-statistic, and the aim is to determine the
set of distributions for which the t-statistic is asymptotically standard
normal, or converges in distribution, or is tight. The investigator also studies
the bootstrap in some non-standard situations. These seemingly diverse sets of
problems have in common the use of many techniques from limit theory,
particularly empirical processes and Probability in Banach Spaces, some of them
previously developed by the researcher in collaboration with others. One ongoing
project of this researcher to study so-called U-statistics and U-processes and
to expand the scope of their applicability. Knowing their properties should help
us better understand the behavior of large classes of statistical functionals
since U-statistics are their building blocks. In particular, some of this
research will help to better assess the accuracy of statistical procedures
currently used in the study of censored and/or truncated data in Medicine,
Astronomy and other fields. Another project involves approximation of spectra of
operators, which are mathematical objects that describe the behavior of systems
such as chemical reactions. The third main topic of proposed research concerns
the celebrated 'Student t-statistic,' a classical statistical object familiar to
virtually everyone who does data analysis. This research is related to
determining when the t-statistic can be safely used.