* 9625129
* Mathematical Sciences: Theoretical and Computational        Methods in Optimal Design of Elastic Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Robert Palais, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 116,400.00

9625129 Cherkaev A program of research is proposed for structural optimization
of elastic and conducting bodies which combines modern variational techniques,
homogenization, and new computational methods. Since structural optimization
problems are typically ill-posed as stated, the efficiency and stability of
numerical algorithms for these problems depends upon theoretical formulation of
a well-posed problem. The expected results include advances in relaxation of
non-convex variational problems, discovery of new microstructures with extremal
properties, and developing effective algorithms for highly sensitive problems.
The applications include real-time design of practical optimal structures, such
as rotors, cylindrical shells, wheels, domes, etc. Various efficiency
functionals such as the overall stiffness, principal eigenfrequency, weighted
deflection, etc. will be examined. Systematic selection of suboptimal projects
will also be considered. The research involves improving upon and integrating
the best current theoretical and computational methods for systematically
designing structures with optimal performance characteristics. This permits the
reduction of the overall cost of materials, and their weight, which greatly
influences the ultimate cost in aerospace and similar applications. The
theoretical aspect involves understanding the nature of optimal microstruatures,
while the computational aspect involves distributing and modifying these
composites to best adapt to practical working conditions. The efficiency of both
the design methods and the designs themselves should prove advantageous in
industrial applications.