* 9625139
* CPMSA:  Comprehensive Partnerships for Minority Student Achievement (CPMSA)
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2002
* Dan Merritt, Jackson Public School District
* Cooperative Agreement
* Celestine Pea
* 09/30/2002
* USD 4,004,974.00

The Jackson Public School District proposes to provide a program which addresses
the need to increase the number of minority students enrolled in science and
mathematics courses while decreasing the disparity between the academic
performance of minority and majority students nationally. The Comprehensive
Partnerships for Student Achievement (CPMSA) project will be a collaborative
partnership among the Jackson public School District, Jackson State University,
Tougaloo college, the Algebra Project, and others. Middle school students will
be targeted initially, and the project will insure full participation of all who
come in contact with the students, including principals, teachers, counselors,
and parents. Plans and strategies include: restructuring the science and
mathematics curriculum to align it with the national standards and eliminate
general courses; moving toward more hands-on, student-centered, discovery-based
learning; requiring content certification for teachers of science and
mathematics; providing enrichment experiences for students; enhancing skills of
teachers and counselors; and increasing mathematics and science awareness and
expectations of parents. JPSD already has initiated curriculum and
administrative restructuring which emphasizes the need "to improve the quality
and quantity of science and mathematics education received by minority students,
who are significantly underrepresented in science, engineering, and mathematics
(SEM) fields." The District has adopted these goals--Every JPSD student will be
at or above grade level; score at or above the national average on the ACT: and
graduate or pursue continuing education and/or military services. The new
administration also is promoting the significance of "expectation" in student
achievement. All of those involved with students are being advised to "expect"
students to do well. Administrators, teachers, and parents have embraced the
proposed reforms and are actively involved in developin g plans for change.
University support is evident, such as Jackson State University with a history
of forerunner programs designed to accomplish the described goals. The fact that
the goals and activities of the District are already in line with those of CPMSA
will make systemic reform an easier task. All segments of the community,
including universities, businesses, churches, and community organizations are
agreeing to participate in this endeavor. The goal of this project is to
increase the number of minority students enrolling in an successfully completing
precollege courses which will prepare them to pursue undergraduate programs in
the sciences, engineering, and mathematics. ***