* 9625095
* CAREER:  Understanding the Plasma Deposition of Amorphous   Thin Films Using Advanced in situ Infrared Spectroscopies
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Philip Morrison, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/2000
* USD 310,000.00

Abstract - Morrison - 9625095 Research Portion: The goal of this research is to
develop a new, fundamental understanding of the chemistry found in radio
frequency (RF) induction plasmas using novel in situ Fourier transform infrared
(FTIR) diagnostics. The research will initially investigate methane plasmas and
the growth of amorphous carbon films (diamondlike carbon or DLC) while
performing the in situ FTIR measurements. Although well known for their
hardness, recent preliminary research indicates that these films would be
outstanding gas permeation barriers and useful in field emission displays.
Education Portion: Engineering education has a mismatch between the learning
styles of the students and the teaching styles of the faculty. In addition, the
students have difficulty grasping the interdisciplinary nature of chemical
engineering which draws on concepts from mathematics, chemistry, physics, and
other engineering disciplines. To address these issues, the education plan will
begin developing hypertexted class notes for an undergraduate class in fluid
mechanics. Hypertexted class notes allow the learning process to adapt to the
learning style of the student as well as provide much opportunity for feedback
to the instructor; it also frees the instructor to spend class time
demonstration problem solving skills rather than writing on the board. As the
hypertexting grows, links to other course work becomes possible, emphasizing the
multidisciplinary nature of engineering.