* 9625121
* CPMSA:  "Hartford Partnership for Minority Student          Achievement"
* EHR,ESR
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Patricia Daniel, Hartford Public Schools
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Reed
* 09/30/1999
* USD 950,000.00

The Hartford Public Schools requests $2,966,810 for a five year project to
implement its Comprehensive Partnership for Minority Student Achievement.
Through the efforts of a strong alliance led by the Hartford Public Schools, it
will more than double the number of minority students enrolling in and
successfully completing precollege courses and triple the number advancing on
the SMET studies in four year colleges by the last year of the grant cycle. The
Hartford Public Schools is the largest school district in Connecticut and the
second largest in New England, enrolling 24,745 students in thirty-two schools.
Enrollment is 94% minority, about equally divided between African American and
Hispanic populations, making it the highest percentage minority enrollment LEA
in New England. Hartford's school dropout rate, poverty index, and adolescent
crime and unemployment are among the highest in the nation. Among Connecticut's
166 school districts, Hartford students score the lowest on State tests in
reading, mathematics and science. Less than 2% of graduating seniors go on to
pursue SMET studies in higher education. Confronting these dismal statistics,
the Hartford Board of Education, with help from parents, teachers and leaders
from higher education, government, business and the community has made school
reform its top priority. Guided by a reform-spirited Strategic Plan, the school
system has set its sights on revolutionizing its educational program. hartford's
CPMSA both complements and strengthens Plan initiatives, and a successful
application will enable Hartford to focus even greater energy and resources in
the critical area of science and mathematics teaching and learning. The Hartford
CPMSA will lead systemic change through the strategic use of resources in an
environment of true partnership. Hartford's proposed CPMSA builds on past NSF-
funded efforts to both the school system and its partnering agencies and focuses
on revitalizing science and mathem atics education through (1) teacher training
(2) student enrichment (3) parent involvement and (4) curriculum reform and
enhancement. 1,016 teachers--90% of K-6 generalist teachers and 100% of 7-12
mathematics and science teachers--will be trained through the project and all of
Hartford's students will benefit, with 4,470 directly participating in after
school, weekend and summer activities. Hartford and its partners are prepared to
offer a wide and coordinated array of activities through the CPMSA and through
the extensive leveraging of resources that build on recent efforts. These
efforts include: a nationally acclaimed, Fund for the Reform and Improvement of
Schools and Teaching pilot project integrating mathematics, science and
technology at the middle school level; a new K-12 mathematics curriculum and a
strengthened 7-12 science curriculum; a network of higher education providers
and representatives from government, business, industry, and community-based
organizations geared towards attracting and keeping minorities in college; a new
set of performance standards across all grade levels in all content areas; and a
recently authorized technology improvement budget. The Hartford area is rich in
science, mathematics, engineering and technology-infused business and industry.
However, the gap between the competencies of Hartford school system graduates
and local labor market needs has widened during the last ten years, with
industry becoming increasingly technological and complex at the same time that
student performance has plummeted. The CPMSA is an opportunity to prepare
Hartford's youth for future employment in these industries as it raises the
number of minority SMET professionals in the population and contributes to
lasting reform of the Hartford Public Schools. ***