* 9625354
* Tailoring of Grain Boundary Chemistry of Alumina Ceramics   for Corrosion Resistance
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Riccardo Levi-Setti, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2000
* USD 284,340.00

9625354 Levi-Setti Commercial ceramics that are presently available are
generally unsuitable for highly corrosive applications because they contain
corrodible glassy grain boundary phases. Such phases result from the commercial
use of liquid- phase sintering additives or from poor control of powder purity
and processing. In this project, we are interested particularly in alumina
ceramics and their corrosion properties in hydrogen fluoride (HF) ambients, with
a view to developing improved materials of construction in the fluorochemical
manufacturing. Corrosion research at DuPont has led to the discovery that a
small amount of MgO (0.05%), a classic solid-solution sintering aid, improves
the corrosion rate of alumina in HF, even in the presence of glass-forming
impurities. The atomistic mechanism by which MgO functions is not understood,
mainly because its influence on other cation impurities is not known. The goal
of the proposed collaboration between the University of Chicago and DuPont is to
improve our understanding of the grain boundary chemistry and its effect on
corrosion behavior, with a view to designing corrosion-resistant ceramics. The
approach will be to develop fabrication strategies that eliminate or adjust the
nature of glassy grain boundaries. The distributions of trace dopants and
impurities in a number of systematically designed alumina compositions will be
studied by high resolution imaging secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). %%%
The principal focus of this study is to correlate the grain boundary chemistry
of aluminum oxide to the corrosion behavior of the bulk material. This
information will aid in the design of commercial ceramic materials that are
resistant to corrosion by a variety of materials. ***