* 9625960
* Development of a Compact, Broad Range Magnetic Spectrometer for Ion Beam Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,04/30/2000
* William Lanford, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Robert J. Reynik
* 04/30/2000
* USD 480,356.00

9625960 Lanford This award is to develop a compact, broad range magnetic
spectrometer to be used in ion beam analysis for materials research. This
spectrometer is designed to be used as a detector for Rutherford backscattering
(RBS) wihich will allow the measurement of RBS spectra with equal ease and
precision as current systems, but with more than a factor of ten better energy
resolution. This order of magnitude improvement in energy resolution translates
into an order of magnitude improvement in the near surface depth and mass
resolution of RBS. With this spectrometer, 4HeRBS will have mass resolution
better than (i.e. smaller than) 1 amu for all target nuclei and will have a near
surface depth resolution approaching atomic dimensions. One novel feature of
this spectrometer is the ability to measure RBS spectra with a large solid angle
centered at 180o where kinematic broadening is minimized (dE/d=0) for all target
masses. An extended focal plane allows the simultaneous measurement of relative
intensity of He+ and He++ ions in order to correct for charge fraction effects.
Although designed with the needs of RBS as a primary concern, this spectrometer
can also be sued as a detector in nuclear reaction analysis (NRA) and energy
recoil detection (ERD), where the high energy resolution will again translate
into dramatic improvement in the depth resolution attainable by these analytic
methods. %%% This instrument is likely to provide substantially improved
capability for materials analysis, and will provide training to students. He
will provide important feedback for processing development and device
fabrication. ***