* 9625875
* CISE Postdoctoral Research Associateship in Experimental    Computer Science: Processor Allocation in Hierarchical      Heterogeneous Networks of Workstations
* CSE,EIA
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1998
* David Lilja, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 03/31/1998
* USD 46,200.00

9625875 Lilja, David J. University of Minnesota, Twin Cities CISE Postdoctoral
Research Associateships in Experimental Computer Science: Processor Allocation
in Hierarchical Heterogeneous Networks of Workstations The wide availability and
reasonable cost of networks of workstations makes them an attractive alternative
to traditional supercomputer systems. However, the low degree of uniformity in
the execution and communication times of parallel applications in heterogeneous
systems can impose significant constraints on the possible parallel task
scheduling solutions. The primary goals of this work are to develop techniques
for determining the appropriate number and type of processors to be allocated to
each application in a heterogeneous network of multiprogrammed workstations, and
to match the diverse hardware platforms to the computational and communication
requirements of the specific application tasks. The proposed "matching factor,"
which provides a performance indicator for pairing hardware and applications in
a dedicated environment, will be extended with scheduling heuristics for a
network of multiprogrammed workstations with heterogeneous processor types and
interconnection networks. The highly experimental nature of this work will
greatly benefit from the interaction with computational scientists and engineers
working at the University of Minnesota, and from the availability of the
University's unique hardware and software resources. ***