* 9625862
* Field Trial of Home Internet Use
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Robert Kraut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 08/31/2000
* USD 716,642.00

Whose aim is to investigate the integration and impacts of residential Internet
use among a sample of some 100 urban families in Pennsylvania and some 200
small-town Minnesota families. The Internet and commercial online services are
growing rapidly with a substantial portion of this growth occurring through
connections to homes. The telecommunications and computing industries are
reorganizing to provide electronic services to households through computer-based
telecommunications. Despite these changes, we have little understanding of how
people at home---in their roles as family members, students, participants in the
labor force, as members of groups and communities, or as citizens---would use
the new services available to them. Similarly, we have little understanding of
how these services, once they are used, will affect peoples' lives. This
research project capitalizes on an ongoing field trial of residential Internet
use that has been developed with industrial sponsorship. There are three
questions driving the research: What leads to diffusion and domestication of
technology in homes? How do electronic groups develop? What impact do electronic
groups have on peoples' social support, information, and household influence?
The goal of this NSF-funded project is to address these questions by developing
new measures, designing experiments and field studies, and analyzing data that
is being collected from the field trial, focusing on intra-family interactions,
the development of electronic groups, and the impact that Internet use has on
relations within and among groups.