* 9625391
* Redox-Control Over Ligand Binding: Consequences for         Stoichiometric and Catalytic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 05/31/2000
* USD 379,000.00

Dr. Chad A. Mirkin, Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division to perform studies of redox-active ligands with transition
metals. The ligands, known as redox-switchable hemilabile ligands (RHLs), are
designed to yield electrochemical control over the steric and electronic
environment of the transition metals to which they are bound. The magnitude of
these effects will be quantified, and the relative importance of electrostatic
and inductive effects in binding affinity changes resulting from the redox
chemistry will be assessed. Electrochemical control of chemical transformations
that occur at late transition metal centers is the ultimate objective. Potential
applications for these complexes include catalytic olefin hydrogenation,
asymmetric olefin hydrogenation, hydrosilation, hydrocyanation, and methanol
carbonylation. Compounds containing metal ions such as rhodium which are bound
to molecules containing phosphorus, oxygen and sulfur atoms have been found to
be particularly useful catalysts, and this results from the fact that one part
of the molecule binds much more strongly than the other part. The objective of
this project is to synthesize new molecules of this sort, known as redox-
switchable hemilabile ligands, where the binding of the ligand can be controlled
by the addition or abstraction of an electron to or from a redox active
substituent on the ligand itself. Because the oxidation state of the ligand can
be controlled quite easily using electrochemistry, this could provide an
additional element of control to the catalytic reactions, making the catalysts
either more or less reactive depending on the oxidation state. The increased
level of control is expected to have important implications for industrially
important catalytic processes.