* 9626653
* Application of Information Technology to Engineering and    Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Robert Sullivan, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 05/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

IEEE Education Society's for Proposal a Special Issue on the "Applications of
Information Technologies to Engineering and Science Education" 1. Executive
Summary In August of 1996, the IEEE Education Society will publish a special
issue of its Transactions, accompanied by a CD-ROM, tided "Applications of
Information Technologies to Engineering and Science Education" to demonstrate
how WWW/CD ROM technology can be used by engineering and science societies to
review, disseminate, and most importandy, archive software and multi-media
material. Although the CD-ROM may contain electronic versions of the printed
contributions, its main role is to permit distribution and archiving of special
material related to the printed articles, such as software, color graphics,
video files, sound files and postscript files. There is no doubt that such
material will become an integral part of all future publications. The EEE Vice
President for Publications has already approved placing the special issue on a
widely publicized, carefully monitored WWW server for four months starting two
months before publication to assess the success of dhe use of information
technology in publishing archival journals To maxirnize the usefulness and
impact of dhe special issue, cross-platform compatibility will be achieved by
treating the CD-ROM as a World Wide Web (WWW) server so dhat WWW browsers (such
as Mosaic, Netscape and others) running on Microsoft Windows machines,
Macintoshes or X-Windows machines can view the files on dhe same CD-ROM. This
approach to cross-platform compatibility exploits the cross-platform de facto
standard that has been generated by dhe recent explosive use of the WWW.
Although the Ii4.141&lt; Education Society is leading dhe effort, dle EEE
Computer Society, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and other
societies and entities are being invited to join the effort as co-sponsors. Co-
sponsors will i nsure dhe multidisciplinary scope of the effort will guarantee
that the special issue experiment receives widespread visibility and
distribution, and answers many of the questions now being posed about dhe
benefits of using inforamtion technology in this way. However, since there are
added costs for the production of the issue, financial support from the co-
sponsors and the NATIONAL SCENCE FOUNDATION is needed. The projected need for
financial support from the Foundation is $10,000.00.