* 9626828
* Polymeric Surfactants in Supercritical Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Keith Johnston, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2000
* USD 255,933.00

9626828 Johnston The objectives are (1) to combine experiment and theory to
provide a fundamental understanding of the effects of surfactants on interfacial
properties in systems containing compresses carbon dioxide, and (2) to use these
surfactants as steric stabilizers to form uniformly sized polymer microparticles
and microfibers by precipitation into carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is an
environmentally benign solvent that is being used to replace organic solvents
for waste minimization. In future materials formation and heterogeneous
polymerization processes, surfactants will play an important role. Because Co2
has very different properties than either hydrophilic or lipophilic solvents,
innovative new types of surfactants will be required. The interfacial tension
between liquids and carbon dioxide, and the adsorption of surfactants at these
interfaces, will be measured with a novel tandem variable-volume tensionmeter
for the first time and also calculated with a new lattice fluid self-consistent
field model. The experimental studies and the model will be used to design
polymeric surfactants at the molecular level to stabilize the interface between
Co2 and liquids of varying polarity including water, and oligomers of
poly(ethylene glycol), polyacrylates and polystyrene. The solvation of polymer
chains by supercritical fluids will be studied by Monte Carlo computer
simulation. Specifically, the transition from solvated chains to collapsed
chains with the approach to a lower critical solution temperature phase boundary
will be determined. The above fundamental knowledge will be used to design
surfactants to produce polymeric materials by precipitation into liquid and
supercritical fluid carbon dioxide. Here, a polymer solution is sprayed through
a capillary into CO2 to precipitate microparticles, microspheres, and
microfibers, with dimensions as small as 100nm. The surfactant will sterically
stabilize the precipitating polymer microstructure to minimize flocculation and
agg lomeration, which is often a major limitation in the current technology.
Interfacial properties play a key role in materials formation processes and
heterogeneous polymerizations. Surfactant adsorption has not yet been addresses
for CO2 soluble surfactants. The interfacial tension and adsorption influence
many phenomena including nucleation, growth, stability and coalescence of
dispersed phases, atomization of sprays, and fiber formation from sprays. A
knowledge of surfactant adsorption at CO2 liquid interfaces will be high
beneficial to both fundamental studies of these phenomena and the development of
new materials formation and polymerization processes. ***