* 9626624
* Mathematical Sciences:  The Topology of Generalized         Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,05/31/1999
* Washington Mio, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 05/31/1999
* USD 76,000.00

9626624 Mio Topological n-manifolds are separable metric spaces that are locally
homeomorphic to euclidean n-space. They occur ubiquitously in mathematics and
its applications and are among the most important objects of study in all of
mathematics. Their most observable topological properties are that of being
finite dimensional, locally contractible, having the local homology of euclidean
n-space, and allowing nicely embedded subspaces to be put in general position. A
space is called a generalized n-manifold if it satisfies all of these
properties, except possibly the last. If in addition, n is at least 5 and X
allows general position, X is said to satisfy the disjoint disks property (DDP).
The long standing conjecture that a generalized n-manifold X having the DDP must
be a topological manifold was disproved recently by the investigators in joint
work with S. C. Ferry and Shmuel Weinberger. Among the most significant
questions that remain concerning generalized manifolds and that are the subject
of this project is the question of whether generalized manifolds are
topologically homogeneous. Other goals are to establish other structure theorems
for DDP generalized manifolds that are known to hold for topological manifolds,
such as the s-cobordism theorem, various splitting theorems, and regular
neighborhood theorems. Splitting theorems, in particular, would be useful in
attacking the conjecture that the pathology exhibited by generalized manifolds
resides in dimension 4. It has been quite a shock for topologists to learn that
n-dimensional manifolds are not characterized by a small collection of their
most obvious properties, as had been conjectured. Since these spaces are the
most heavily used in mathematics, it is highly desirable to understand this
phenomenon better. The two co-investigators, who were among the four who
dispatched the conjecture several years ago, are now intent on doing just this.
As mentioned above, they will attempt to le arn whether, like ordinary
topological manifolds, generalized manifolds exhibit the same topological
structure in the vicinity of each of their points. The interest of these spaces
arises from their potential as models for several phenomena observed in the
study of dynamical systems, geometric group theory, and other areas, but lack of
such homogeneity would seriously limit this potential. ***