* 9626735
* Structure and Dynamics in Boron-Containing Oxide Glasses and Liquids:  High-Resolution and High-Temperature Nuclear     Magnetic Resonance Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Jonathan Stebbins, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 07/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9626735 Stebbins The proposed studies will use nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy at ambient temperature to determine the effects of varying fictive
temperature on glass structure, which will constrain temperature effects on
liquid structure in the vicinity of the glass transition. In situ, high
resolution, high temperature NMR on boron, oxygen, sodium, aluminum, and silicon
nuclides will be used to determine temperature effects on average coordination
environment. The effects of observed structural changes on entropy, enthalpy,
activities, molar volumes, and other properties will be assessed using simple
thermodynamic models. At lower temperatures but still in the liquid range,
static and magic angle spinning NMR will be used to observe exchange among
structural species and measure their exchange rates. Spin- lattice relaxation
times will be measured to gain dynamical information over wider ranges in
temperature. These results for molecular-scale dynamics will be compared to
shear relaxation times derived from existing data on viscosity, and to data on
electrical conductivity and diffusivity. Models linking the microscopic and
macroscopic will be formulated and tested. %%% Silicate and borosilicate
glasses, and their corresponding high temperature liquids, are of wide-ranging
importance in industry and society. In order to formulate accurate predictive
models for the properties of glasses and glass melts, fundamental data on their
atomic-scale structure and dynamics are required. The work proposed here will
extend our group's extensive studies of simple silicate glasses and liquids to
borate, borosilicate, and boroaluminate-systems in order to address basic, but
poorly understood questions about these technologically more relevant materials.
The focus of this project is to use nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy to acquire quantitative structural and dynamical information at
ambient and high temperature, and to interpret and model existing macroscopic
thermodynamic and transport property data in light of these new findings. ***