* 9626728
* Nonlinear Differential Equations &amp; Linear Equations in      Physiology &amp; Cell Biology.
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Bard Ermentrout, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 260,000.00

Ermentrout 9626728 The investigator continues his work on the applications of
nonlinear dynamics to cell biology and physiology. He studies the effects of
dendritic, axonal, and synaptic delays on the behavior of coupled neural
oscillators. He develops and analyzes models of neural oscillators in the
presence of noise. He proposes and analyzes a variety of models for synaptic
wave propagation in neural tissue including: 1. Systematic numerical exploration
of models for spindle waves in the nucleus reticularis. Software developed in
the previous grant is capable of interactively solving these integrodifferential
equations. 2. Analysis of synaptically induced bistability; how do synaptic time
constants and synaptic strengths effect the ability of a group of synapses to
maintain two modes of behavior: resting and oscillatory 3. Formal reduction of
synaptically coupled biophysical models to simplified models that are tractable
to mathematical analysis. Both synaptic and intrinsic slow currents are
incorporated in these models. 4. Rigorous and formal mathematical analysis of
the above reduced models with particular attention to maintaining quantitative
similarity to the full equations. He extends his model of vasomotion in
collaboration with Dr. Jose Gonzalez-Fernandez to incorporate spatial aspects
and coupling via the tissue bed. The goal is an explanation for the classic
results of Krogh on recruitment of capillaries and to understand the dynamic
regulation of blood flow at the microvascular level. He and Gonzalez-Fernandez
intend to compare the results with some recent data of Segal's as well as older
studies. As a side benefit, they hope to develop some new methods for analyzing
systems of oscillators coupled though spatially continuous, but nonoscillatory
media. He continues his collaboration with George Oster, using prior results on
linear molecular motors and rotary motors to develop and analyze models of (i)
the p ortal protein of bacteriophages, (ii) proton-driven motors, (iii) proton
pumps. He collaborates with Leah Edelstein-Keshet on models for distribution of
the lengths of actin filaments and their spatial variation within the cell. This
work attempts to apply mathematical methods to aid in the understanding of
physiological rhythms. Many human biological processes are governed by waxing
and waning of different quantities. Some examples are the voltage of the heart
pacemaker, the regular drifting in and out of different brain states during
sleep and the control of oxygen flow in muscles by rhythmic contractions of
small arteries during periods of exercise. The approach of this work is to use
computer and mathematical models. Computing tools and tools for the
visualization of simulations are developed as part of this work. The main goal
is to use the models to bridge the gap between details about the microscopic
workings of cells and their consequences for behavior. For example, when muscles
work hard, they consume oxygen and thus need more oxygen from the arteries.
Within the cells that form the arteries are special gates that sense the amount
of "fuel" so that as this fuel decreases, the gates tell the artery to open up.
This feedback loop provides a way to dynamically alter the rhythm of the artery
in order to insure that the tissue is evenly oxygenated. Thus, by starting at
the microscopic level of these gates or channels, a model is built that can
explain how the consumption of oxygen is regulated in tissues. Another example
occurs in the nervous system. Information from different parts of the brain is
transmitted through special connections between nerve cells called synapses.
Reaction times and cognitive abilities depend on the speed of this propagation
as well as the prevention of propagation into other regions of the brain. Much
is known about the reactions of individual nerve cells to stimuli. Models
provide a way of coupling many such cells together in order to understand the
behavioral consequences of the individual cell properties. Is the whole greater
than the sum of the parts? The goal of this proposal is to try to answer this
question for a variety of rhythmically controlled physiological processes.