* 9626129
* Electronic and Vibrational Energy Transfer Dynamics Studied Through van der Waals Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Hai-Lung Dai, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/2000
* USD 343,285.00

Hai-Lung Dai of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program to continue his studies on van der Waals (vdW)
complexes. Intermolecular interactions that induce electronic and vibrational
energy transfer will be studied through vdW complexes formed with the two
molecules involved in the encounter. The vdW forces place the two molecules in a
unique orientation and at a fixed distance defined by the complex structure. By
monitoring the fluorescence decay and emission spectra following optical
excitation of the complex, energy transfer dynamics can be examined with
orientation and energy specification. Isomeric complex structures will be used
to enable the orientation effect to be studied. Specifically, (a) collision-
induced electronic relaxation such as intersystem crossing will be studied
through monitoring laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) decay in vdW complexes.
Molecular orbital dependence in electronic relaxation of molecules will be
characterized together with the effect of different collision partners. (b)
Degenerate four wave mixing (DFWM) will be developed to study complexes with
rapid nonradiative decay and low fluorescence yield. (c) Structures and vdW
modes will be determined from LIF, DFWM and stimulated emission spectroscopy.
Models for calculating intermolecular potentials will be tested against these
experimental measurements and used for searching isomeric structures of the
complexes. This research deals with the problem of how energy flows within and
among vibrationally and electronically excited molecules. The molecules of study
are incorporated in molecular clusters which are held together by weak
intermolecular vdW forces. Vibrational or electronic excitation of the component
molecules will generally cause the complex to dissociate. This dissociation
process mimics the energy transfer that occurs between colliding molecules. The
experiments with molecules embedded in a vdW complex provide a measure of
control over the reaction process that is not available with molecular gases in
which the molecules are randomly oriented. The experiment will provide
information useful for the understanding of the reactivity of different
molecular orbitals, and for the determination of the potential energy surface
which characterizes the reaction. With this information it will be possible to
devise novel photochemical reaction pathways.