* 9626291
* Experimental Studies of Organic Charge Transfer Salts
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Paul Chaikin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 480,000.00

9626291 Chaikin A series of experiments are proposed to understand some of the
basic properties of states of matter in organic conductors, and to gain insights
into several current problems in condensed matter physics. For example, the
Bechgaard salts are the only materials which exhibit the quantum Hall effect as
a bulk three dimensional phenomenon. They are therefore unique systems for
studying what happens when the conventional two dimensional electron gas layers
are coupled. Questions as to the perpendicular conductivity and the coupling of
edge states are open and testable. As superconductors these systems are at least
as anisotropic as any others and they have much longer mean free paths. They are
excellent candidates for investigating flux pinning, dynamics and Josephson
vortices. Investigation also are proposed on the nature of the superconducting
state. The magnetic field effects in both the"normal" metal and field induced
spin density wave states have proven so unusual that there are a wealth of new
phenomena to be explained. Coupled with the fact that questions of
commensurability, magnetic breakdown, competing order parameters and frustration
leave the limiting high field ground state an open question theoretically as
well as experimentally, there is much to fuel continued excitement in this
field. %%% This proposal is for continuation of a mostly experimental study of
how low-dimensional strong interactions and frustration from applied fields act
together to produce some quite interesting states of matter in organic
conductors. The Bechgaard salts are among the most interesting electronic
materials ever discovered. At room temperature they are highly anisotropic
metals, but upon cooling they undergo a variety of transitions to a remarkable
number of low temperature states. They were the first organic superconductors,
but that is arguably their least interesting property. Depending on the anion
and the pressure the ground states may be var ied from charge or spin density
wave insulator to metal or superconductor. However, the properties discovered in
moderate magnetic fields are even more unusual and striking. The normal metal
phase also is extremely unusual showing angular dependent resonances and large
magnetoresistances completely unexplainable from the known bandstructure.