* 9626661
* The Nucleation of Supersaturated Vapors
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1996,10/31/2000
* Joseph Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* VIJAY T JOHN
* 10/31/2000
* USD 199,366.00

Abstract Joseph L. Katz Johns Hopkins University CTS-9626661 The goal of this
continuing research project is to provide a better understanding of nucleation
processes, and to allow one to make accurate quantitative predictions. The
research focuses on three complementary fields of investigation; ion-induced
nucleation, homogeneous nucleation of metal vapors, and heterogeneous nucleation
of water vapor onto uniform surfaces. Efforts in ion-induced nucleation have
resulted in the development of a method for measuring nucleation rates under
conditions where all the important variables (supersaturation, temperature, and
ion density) are accurately measurable and all can be varied. Initial
measurements on n-Nonane have been made. Measurements now will be made on
several substances for which ions have a much larger nucleation propensity.
These will begin with substances with significant dipole moments (1-Pentanol as
well as 1-Butanol and 1-Hexanol), and will be followed by measurements on
substances with significant quadrupole moments (Benzene, p-Xylene). A second
major effort is the homogeneous nucleation of metal vapors. Metals in their
dilute vapor state are non-metallic. Thus there has to be a non-metal to metal
transition which is a function of cluster size. Nucleation studies of metal
vapors enable the study of this size dependent non-metal to metal transition and
also the testing of the validity of nucleation theories when they are applied to
a class of substances which are very different from any studied until now. This
part of the project involves collaboration with a research group in Marburg,
Germany, and to date has focused on the homogeneous nucleation of Cesium vapor.
Results obtained thus far suggest that a smooth non-metal to metal transition is
being observed. These measurements will be extended to higher temperatures,
since critical cluster sizes then will be much larger and thus closer to being
fully metallic. The homogeneous nucleation of Rubidium then wil l be
investigated and will be followed by measurements on Cadmium and Mercury,
substances which are known to have more sharply size-dependent non-metal to
metal transitions. The third major effort is the heterogeneous nucleation of
water vapor onto the surface of water insoluble liquids. By investigating
heterogeneous nucleation onto a liquid substrate one takes advantage of the
uniformity of the substrate's surface properties, thus avoiding many of the
uncertainties encountered in heterogeneous nucleation onto solid surfaces. Even
more important, all surface free energies needed to characterize this process
(the interfacial tension between the condensing liquid and the liquid that it is
condensing onto, and the surface tension of each liquid) are experimentally
measurable. The critical supersaturations required for water nucleation onto
Dodecane and Hexadecane will be determined and compared to theory.