* 9626947
* SBIR Phase II:  The Role of Gamma Aminobutyric Acid (GABA)  in Plant Growth and Productivity
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Alan Kinnersley, Auxein Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1999
* USD 397,861.00

*** 9626947 Kinnersley This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
will expand on the Phase I demonstration that formulations containing
4-aminobutyric acid (GABA) increase plant growth and reduce plants' fertilizer
requirements. There are growing concerns with both providing enough food to feed
the world's growing population and problems of nitrogen pollution caused by
overuse of nitrogen fertilizers. This has created opportunities for products to
increase fertilizer efficiency while either maintaining or increasing crop
productivity. Auxein Corporation has developed proprietary formulations that
have significantly increased production in diverse plants such as turf grass,
bush beans and cherries, and reduced the levels of fertilizer needed to give
optimal productivity. Mineral analysis of treated plants has shown an increase
in the content of the macronutrients needed for plant growth with the most
consistent increase shown in tissue potassium content. In treated rye grass and
duckweed, levels of potassium increased more than 200 percent. The correlation
between GABA-mediated increases in plant growth and increases in tissue
potassium content led to a working hypothesis that GABA bioactivity in plants is
similar to its mechanism of action in animals, where it is known to affect
transport of calcium and potassium. The research objectives of Phase II are
designed to develop a product formulation suitable for commercial application
and establish the efficacy of the company's formulations in field tests,
emphasizing targets crops where both increased yield and quality through
improved potassium nutrition would be of benefit. Another objective is to
quantify the savings in fertilizer requirements that can be achieved in the
field. The results of Phase II research are expected to establish the efficacy
of the company's formulations for increasing plant growth and productivity and
reducing plants fertilizer requirements, and to demonstrate their commercial
utility. The co mpany estimates the total U. S. market opportunity for such
products to be approximately $3.0 billion, and its goal is to achieve $200 MM in
product sales within five years of product introduction. The product value will
be further increased if use results in a mitigation of nitrogen pollution and if
GABA functions in plants by increasing mineral availability, thereby improving
crop quality. ***