* 9626896
* VPW:  Chemical Studies of Natural Inducers of Larval        Settlement and Metamorphosis in Tropical Marine             Invertebrates
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Valerie Paul, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1998
* USD 123,434.00

The research involves the chemical characterization of natural inducers of
larval settlement and metamorphosis in several species of marine invertebrates.
The goal is to isolate and characterize the active molecules that function as
natural inducers. Natural inducers will be studied for the nudibranch Phestilla
sibogae (Opisthobranchia: Nudibranchia) that specializes on Porites corals; the
tube-building polychaete worm Hydroides elegans, a ubiquitous fouling organism
that settles in response to chemical cues from microbial films; and the
herbivorous sea hares Stylocheilus longicauda, Aplysia juliana and Aplysia
parvula (Opisthobranchia: Anaspidea) that specialize on certain seaweeds.
Isolation of active compounds will be carried out by chromatographic separations
of active extracts with subsequent bioassays of larval settlement to determine
which fractions induce settlement and metamorphosis. Once purified, NMR and
other spectroscopic methods will be used to elucidate the structures of active
inducers. This approach to isolating and elucidating the structures of natural
inducers will work best for relatively small organic molecules or peptides, and
may require modification to use chemical or enzymatic degradation techniques if
inducers are proteins or other large macromolecules. Understanding the chemical
nature of specific cues for settlement and metamorphosis of marine invertebrate
larvae is important for different fields including developmental biology, marine
benthic community ecology, and aquaculture. Interactive activities include
developing and teaching a graduate course in Chemical Ecology and a graduate
seminar in Marine Chemical Ecology at the University of Hawaii Department of
Zoology; participating in Natural Products Chemistry and Organic seminar courses
at the University of Hawaii Department of Chemistry; and mentoring undergraduate
students and interacting with graduate students and postdoctoral researchers at
the Kewalo Marine Laboratory and the Zoology and Chemistry Departments at the
University of Hawaii.