* 9626261
* SBIR Phase II: A Novel Approach to OCR Handwriting          Recognition with Application to Man-Machine Interaction
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* John Ostrem, Communication Intelligence Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/1998
* USD 297,491.00

9626261 Ostrem This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop a novel OCR reader within the framework of an integrated technology
aimed at providing ordinary people with the means to interact with computers in
a more natural and productive way. The technologies required to make this
possible include on-line hand-writing recognition, Optical Character Recognition
(OCR), image processing, speech recognition, and the methodology for handling
interactions between input modalities. This Phase II work will take a first
important step in this direction - bringing on-line handwriting recognition and
OCR into a common algorithmic framework. If successful, three significant
benefits will result: 1) Humans will interact with computers in a more natural
way; 2) The state-of-the-art of handwritten OCR readers will improve; and 3)
Efficient new commercial products will be developed. Recently, the United States
Post Office, a major user of advanced OCR systems, stated that "as significant
advancements in OCR technology are needed to bring the read rate (of
handwriting) to the desired level, innovative approaches are sought to achieve
those advancements." From a commercial standpoint, a product combining OCR and
on-line handwriting recognition in a common framework with shared resources will
be smaller, more efficient, less costly, and easier to maintain than two
separate products. Improved user-interfaces and OCR performance are of
significant interest to major computer manufacturers because they will lead to
increased hardware sales and new software products.