* 9626194
* 17th International Union of Crystallography Congress and    General Assembly to be held in Seattle WA August 8-17, 1996.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Robert Bryan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9626194 Bryan The project provides for partial matching travel support for
overseas scientists participating as invited speakers or session leaders at the
17th International Union of Crystallography Congress (IUCr), to be held at the
Washington State Convention and Trade Center, Seattle, WA, from August 8-17,
1996. The triennial IUCr Congresses are the accepted international forum for the
discussion and dissemination of new results and theoretical and experimental
advances in crystallography. Crystallography, through its primary tools, the
diffraction of X-rays, neutrons and electrons by crystalline solids, is the
principal method of obtaining accurate information on the three-dimensional
structures of molecules and materials. Such information is of fundamental
importance in the development of many different branches of science, including
chemistry, molecular biology, condensed matter physics, mineralogy and materials
science. The invited speakers and session leaders at the Congress are the
acknowledged leaders in their specialties. Because this will be the first IUCr
Congress to be held in the United States since 1969, it provides an unusually
valuable opportunity for large numbers of US scientists to meet with and learn
from these distinguished colleagues from overseas. Funds provided by the
Foundation will be combined with matching contributions from the IUCr itself, to
provide needed support of travel costs. ***