* 9626104
* Mathematical Models of Molecular Motors
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* George Oster, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 330,000.00

Oster 9626104 The investigator and his colleague construct mathematical models
to describe three important classes of protein molecular motors. (1) 'Linear'
motors driven by nucleotide hydrolysis, including (i) the kinesin and myosin
superfamily which move along microtubules and actin filaments, respectively, and
(ii) HSP70, which drives the translocation of proteins across intracellular
membranes; (ii) RNA and DNA polymerase, which move along the DNA double helix.
(2) 'Rotary' motors driven by electrochemical gradients, including (i) ATP
synthase, the mechanochemical engine that synthesizes ATP, and (ii) the
bacterial flagellar motor, which drives the motion of many prokaryotic
organisms. (3) Motors driven by polymerization free energy, including the
microtubule depolymerization process that moves chromosomes during anaphase
mitosis, and the polymerization motors which drive the motion of certain
pathogenic bacteria and viruses, such as Listeria and Vaccinia. The approach in
each case is to begin by formulating analytical stochastic models consisting of
Langevin mechanical equations or Fokker-Planck diffusion equations that describe
the mechanochemical and statistical behavior of the molecular machinery. These
models then are analyzed mathematically where possible and by numerical
simulation in all cases. The mean mechanical properties of these protein motors
are derived, such as force-velocity curves, along with their stochastic
properties such as trajectory variances. Results are presented in a visual
format that facilitates comprehension by biologists and comparison with
experimental data. The most striking feature of biological cells, and indeed the
hallmark of life itself, is their constant motion. These motions are of two
kinds: those that move the cell from one place to another, and those that move
vital material from one place to another within the cell. Both kinds of motions
are driven by specialized protein molecules that function as ti ny robotic
motors, powered by chemical energy. The world in which these protein machines
operate is dominated by Brownian motion, which gives their movements a
statistical character. Although these molecular machines operate on a length
scale of nanometers and a force scale of piconewtons, they are absolutely
essential to the life of the cell. Recent advances in instrumentation have made
it possible to measure the mechanical properties of individual protein motors,
and recent advances in high-performance computing have enabled their simulation
in realistic detail, including the effects of thermal fluctuations. Taken
together, these advances provide an unprecedented opportunity to deduce how
biomolecular motors work. This is done through the formulation of mathematical
models, and through the careful comparison of model predictions with
experimental data.