* 9626607
* Spectroscopic Characterization of Surfactant and Biopolymer Adsorption in Liquid/Liquid Interfaces and Chemically       Modified Metal Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Robert Corn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 10/31/1999
* USD 460,000.00

This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program, investigates the design and spectroscopic characterization of
monolayers formed by the adsorption of surfactants, polypeptides and
oligonucleotides at liquid/liquid interfaces and at chemically modified metal
surfaces. During the tenure of this three-year continuing grant, Professor Corn
and his students at the University of Wisconsin will utilize molecular second
harmonic generation (SHG) to probe spectroscopically the structure of the
liquid/liquid interface. This information is useful for developing an
understanding of ion transport across biological membranes, for the design of
systems for DNA detection and identification, and for the control of biomimetic
systems formed from self-assembled monolayers. The tools and information
developed in the course of this research have wide application in a number of
areas of fundamental analytical technology. Spectroscopic probes of the
orientation of molecules adsorbed at the liquid/liquid interface and in organic
overlayers on metallic surfaces are being developed in this research program.
Non- linear laser spectroscopic probes, and reflection absorption infrared and
plasmon resonance spectroscopies are used to investigate the orientation and
structure of molecules at these interfaces. Information obtained from these
studies will be useful in the development of new analytical methodologies, as
well as forming a fundamental base for the exploitation of biological models of
information storage and computing.