* 9626202
* Iterative Algorithms for the P-Version of the Finite        Element Method:  Parallel Multi-P
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* I. Norman Katz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/29/2000
* USD 85,000.00

9626202 Katz The p and h-p versions of the finite element method are now firmly
established as important methods for finite element analysis (FEA). A major part
of the computational burden in FEA is the solution of the assembled system of
equations. Current practical problems, particularly those in three (or higher)
dimensions, may require the determination of hundreds of thousands, even
millions of unknowns. Such problems cannot be solved on serial computers because
of excessive computation time and memory requirements. Implementation on
parallel processors is indispensable because of time requirements. Iterative
methods are indispensable because of memory requirements. Whereas iterative
methods for the h-version of FEA have long been the object of much investigation
(e.g. domain decomposition, multi-grid), relatively little is known about
iterative schemes for the p-version. This research addresses that problem.
Multi-p methods can be used independently as smoothers, or as preconditioners
for other iterations such as conjugate gradient. The term multi-p processes
includes both approaches. This research develops multi-p V cycle methods with
particular emphasis on problems in 3D. Parallelization with respect to both
computation costs, costs of communication among processors, and costs of using
auxiliary memory are considered. The use of multi-p algorithms as
preconditioners, which currently shows great promise for 2D problems, is a major
area of study. The ultimate objective of the research is to make the p-version
of FEA a practical tool for large scale problems. Modern engineering design
relies heavily on computer simulations, and specifically on high-performance
computing. For example, in structural elastic analysis, it is necessary to solve
(sometimes nonlinear) partial differential equations on complicated geometries.
To solve such partial differential equations numerically on computers,
discretization techniques are used. Such discr etizations may involve thousands
or hundreds of thousands unknowns and efficient numerical methods are
indispensable. The numerical techniques being developed in this project lead to
procedures that assure the reliability of engineering decisions based on high-
performance computing. The algorithms being formulated permits solution of
(nonlinear) mathematical models in diverse areas including those used in
aircraft and automobile structural design, determining elastic properties of the
human heart, study of boundary layer effects in composite materials, and fatigue
life analysis.