* 9626835
* Sequencing Glycoprotein Oligosaccharides by Glycosidase     Digestion/MALDI-MS
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Ronald Orlando, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 05/31/2000
* USD 275,000.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project,
supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the
development of a standardized method for preparing glycoprotein digests for
subsequent structure analysis of carbohydrate side chains using matrix assisted
laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS). This method will
permit structure determinations on samples more than one thousand times smaller
than is now possible and thereby enable analysis of naturally occurring samples
of limited size. During the tenure of this three year project, Professor Ronald
Orlando and his students at the University of Georgia will collaborate with
industrial partners at Hewlett Packard to develop this method and the software
with which to analyze the MALDI-MS results. The data base of carbohydrate
structures that exists at the Complex Carbohydrate Research Center at the
University of Georgia will be used in this project. The carbohydrate side chains
of mammalian glycoproteins provide functional control for many life processes.
The determination of the structures of these side chains in naturally occurring
glycoproteins is limited by the sensitivity of existing methods. Professor
Orlando and his students at the University of Georgia will collaborate with
their industrial partners at Hewlett Packard in developing a new mass
spectrometric method for making these measurements. This project will provide a
new analytical tool which can be used to study the function of glycoproteins.