* 9626553
* The Kinetics and Surface Chemistry of Mineral Corrosion
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* William Casey, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 222,482.00

Casey 9626553 No processes are more essential to low-temperature geochemistry
than those leading to mass transfer among distinct solute species, and between
minerals and adjacent aqueous fluids. We propose to continue research that
organizes dissolution reactions into a predictive framework. The approach is to
demonstrate quantitative similarity between the rate coefficients for metal
removal from a surface and the better-characterized mechanisms of ligand
exchange around dissolved complexes (Casey, 1991; Casey and Westrich, 1992;
Ludwig et al., 1995a, b). The quantitative similarity between these processes
allows establishment of linear-free-energy relations (LFER) to predict rate
coefficients. In suitable cases we can identify possible rate-controlling
elementary step reactions at mineral surfaces, such as the rates of water
movement in the activated complexes, which we now know to be important (e.g.,
Ludwig et al., 1995a). New research will expand the predictive framework to
examine the effect of organic ligands on rates of metal transfer. We test the
hypothesis that ligand-promoted rate coefficients (KL) for small-molecular-
weight complexes are predictable using either the rates of solvent motion in the
corresponding dissolved metal-ligand complex or the equilibrium constants that
describe metal-ligand speciation in solution (see Ludwig et al., 1995a,b). Key
to success is acquisition of high-quality rate data on oxide minerals that
differ considerably in metal-oxygen bond strengths. Also critical are: (I)
choice of ligands that form a single dominant surface complex stoichiometry in
the dissolution reaction, (ii) in understanding the role of adsorbed protons in
reaction, and (iii) in characterizing the degradation products. This research
addresses the common criticism of equilibrium models of contaminant geochemistry
(e.g., Oreskes et al., 1994) that the important reactions are slow and the rate
coefficients unknown. Systematic study of a few ligands may serve to bound the
re activities of a wide range of compounds because steric crowding must
ultimately limit the size, rigidity, and number of ligands that can coordinate
to a surface metal.