* 9626906
* The SkyTour Expansion Project
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Derrick Pitts, WHYY, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2000
* USD 575,707.00

9626906 Pitts ABSTRACT: WHYY, Inc., in cooperation with the Franklin Institute
Science Museum, is producing and implementing a radio-based science education
program for families. Skytour is a live radio program designed to involve the
public in observing astronomical phenomena and engaging in science activities
related to the sciences of the sky. Each program centers on a particular science
theme and includes short pre-produced pieces designed to capture listeners
interest, a live orientation to the night sky with specific instructions to
listeners about how to locate the phenomenon being discussed, and discussion
with a guest astronomy expert. During the broadcast, listeners can call in to
ask questions and to discuss their observations on-air. The program has been
successfully piloted in Philadelphia. The current project will enable the
applicants to increase the number of shows to six, two-hour shows each year of
the project and to expand broadcast to at least three other areas. WHYY
currently has definite commitments to participate in the project from four radio
station/planetarium partners: New York City: WFUV and The Hayden Planetarium
Pittsburgh: WDUQ and the Buhl Planetarium Raleigh-Durham: WUNC and The Morehead
Planetarium Vermont: Vermont Public Radio and The Fairbanks Museum and
Planetarium Outreach components of the project will include a newsletter, local
sky parties organized on the evenings of the Skytour broadcasts, related hands-
on science activities and workshops at each of the participating planetaria, and
a Skytour World Wide Web site. The PI will be Derrick Pitts, Vice President and
Chief Astronomer at the Franklin Institute. Neil Tickner, WHYY Special Projects
Producer, will direct all production activities. Dale McCreedy, the project
director for the Franklin Institute's National Science Partnership and Girls At
the Center, and Minda Borun, the Franklin Institute's Director of Research,
Evaluation and Planning, will both work with the project in their respective
areas of expertise in outreach and evaluation. The project team will work
closely with an advisory team of astronomers, informal science educators, and
parents.