* 9626703
* Mathematical Sciences:  High Order Accurate Numerical       Methods for Interface Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Stanley Osher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 60,000.00

Osher 9626703 Many physical problems involve interfaces where two different
materials contact with each other, or singular sources or dipoles are present
along the interfaces immersed in the same fluid. Mathematically, interface
problems usually lead to differential equations whose input data and solutions
have discontinuities or non-smoothness across interfaces. Many numerical methods
designed for smooth solutions do not work efficiently for interface problems.
The investigator's colleague Zhilin Li combines the immersed interface method, a
second order method for solving differential equations involving interfaces,
with the level set approach, an efficient method for capturing moving fronts, to
develop high order accurate and efficient numerical methods for interface
problems. The project develops convergence and stability theory to provide
theoretical justification for the proposed methods. Several specific interface
problems, including elliptic and parabolic equations with fixed or moving
interfaces, Hele-Shaw flow, and other applications, are studied in depth. Many
important practical problems lead to differential equations in regions of 2- or
3-dimensional space that are geometrically complicated, and that contain
interfaces across which the nature of the solution changes. These equations can
rarely be solved exactly, and large-scale computation is required to obtain
well-resolved solutions over multi-dimensional regions. The goal of this work is
to develop efficient computational methods to approximate solutions of such
problems. The approach is to combine two different methods with complementary
strengths. To test the new method, it is applied to several problems
representative of those with arising in practical applications.