* 9626014
* NSF/Sloan Foundation Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in    Molecular Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* John Braverman, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

This program of fellowships is a joint activity of the Directorate for
Biological Sciences of NSF and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation of New York City.
The five-year program is in its third year. Eighteen two-year fellowships are
offered each year for research and training in theoretical, comparative,
computational, and /or experimental analyses of biological patterns and
processes at the molecular level, within the framework of evolutionary change
and adaptation of organisms, or in the use of molecular data to address broad
evolutionary questions. Fellows are encouraged to broaden their scientific
experience and perspective in molecular evolution by selecting a host laboratory
where new conceptual approaches and experimental techniques can be learned. The
research and training plan supported by this fellowship is entitled "the role of
epistatic selection and pre-mRNA secondary structures in molecular evolution."
Epistasis is the interaction among different genes or gene regions to produce a
single phenotype; epistatic selection refers to selection acting on such a
phenotype. Ten species of Drosophila are under study to determine if a cluster
of linkage disequilibria observed in the 3' end of the first intron of the
Drosophila melanogaster white locus is due to epistatic selection conserving
precursor mRNA secondary structures. Empirical methods will be used to test for
secondary structures with long-range pairings in the precursor m-RNA for D.
melanogaster alcohol dehydrogenase. Lastly, computer simulations will be used to
test alternative hypotheses explaining the observed clustering of linkage
disequilibria. The null hypothesis is neutral mutation and genetic drift.