* 9626151
* A Probabilistic Theory of Positional Games
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Jozsef Beck, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2000
* USD 120,000.00

9626151 Beck ABSTRACT In this proposal the investigator outlines a new,
probabilistic approach to positional games (i.e. board-games, or combinatorial
games). The straightforward way to analyze a position is to examine all of its
options and all the options of these options and all the options of the options
of these options and all the.... The obvious difficulty is that this exhausting
search through the game-tree takes an enormous amount of time even for very
simple games (exponential running time in terms of the board-size). Note that
the game-matrix approach, the set-up of traditional game theory, is much worse:
usually requiring double exponential time. A desperate attempt to make up for
the lack of time is to study the random walk on the game-tree. Now the basic
idea of the probabilistic theory of the investigator is that the probabilistic
analysis of the random walk (i.e. the random game) is often a tractable problem,
and also what one has learned from this analysis can often be converted, via
potential arguments (like resource counting with loss-probabilities), into
deterministic optimal strategies. The probabilistic theory is basically a game-
theoretic adaptation of the so-called Probabilistic Method in Combinatorics
applied to hopelessly complicated games where algebraic and other exact methods
fail to work. The surprising thing is that this desperate attempt turns out to
be very successful for large, interesting classes of positional games. The main
chapters of the proposal are: the foundations of positional games (a
surprisingly non-trivial task), game-theoretic Ramsey theory, game-theoretic
random graph theory, game-theoretic Lovasz Local Lemma, and applications in
algorithms and complexity. Traditional game theory, i.e. von Neumann's theory,
is basically the theory of games of incomplete information. It provides good
insights to Economics, and many areas of social science (Management, Military
Strategy, etc.). Similarly, one can expect many new applications from a
successfu l theory of games of complete information (i.e. positional games).
This is exactly what the investigator's proposal is all about. An extremely
exciting aspect of studying positional games is that it might give a better
understanding of how human intelligence works. It might have some impact on
fundamental questions like whether human understanding is a computational or a
non-computational process. Note that in Japan there are several "perfect"
players who, when playing first, can consistently win Go-Moku (5-in-a-row on the
19 by 19 Go board), but nobody can turn these heuristics into precise arguments.
Similarly, 6-in-a-row on a sufficiently large board between two reasonably good
players is always a boring draw-game, but again we cannot precisely explain why.
Or what is the reason that Go-playing computer programs are nowhere close to the
best human players? These are just three of many examples where the human mind
"knows" something beyond rigorous mathematics. One more thing: in contrast to
Go, the best Chess-playing computer programs have now reached the level of human
Grandmasters. But there is a basic difference. Computer programs examine
millions of positions before deciding what to do next. On the other hand, even
the best Grandmasters do not search more than 100 positions per move. In human
Chess, pattern recognition plays a more important role than search. How to
supply this human knowledge to a computer is a puzzle that no one has solved
yet. Beside its theoretical importance, the investigator's project could be a
crucial step toward the solution of these questions, too.