* 9626586
* Accidental and Natural Torsion in Earthquake Analysis,      Design and Retrofit of Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Anil Chopra, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John Scalzi
* 08/31/2001
* USD 377,623.00

Observations of performance of structures during past earthquakes demonstrate
that buildings with asymmetric floor plan tend to suffer greater damage because
it is impractical to avoid such buildings with irregular distribution of
stiffness and strength in plan and such buildings are especially vulnerable to
earthquake damage, there is urgent need to develop an improved understanding of
the earthquake response of these buildings. The objectives of this research
project are to: (1) develop an improved understanding of the inelastic response
of buildings undergoing torsional motions during earthquakes; (11) develop
simplified analysis procedures suitable for preliminary design of such new
buildings and for the design of retrofit schemes for existing buildings; and
(III) propose--for consideration by code-writing entities like the SEAOC
Seismology Committee--improved code provisions for accidental and natural
torsion. The central feature of the research is to utilize recorded motions of
well instrumented buildings during recent earthquakes to evaluate and calibrate
analysis and design procedures in order to ensure that these procedures provide
reliable estimates of torsional effects. The comprehensive but simple analysis
and design developed should be of direct benefit to the profession. They would
be useful for checking the preliminary design of new buildings, for evaluating
alternatives to retrofit existing buildings with unacceptably large asymmetry in
their plans, and for improving building codes.