* 9626973
* Collaborative Research: Constraints on EPR Magmatism Through Studies of the North Orozco Region
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1997,01/31/2000
* John Bender, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing grant
* David E. Epp
* 01/31/2000
* USD 234,425.00

The East Pacific Rise (EPR) north of the Orozco transform fault off the coast of
Mexico provides unique opportunities to further our understanding of the origin
of the ocean crust and the nature of the upper mantle. This region is the
shallowest, most-inflated portion of the northern EPR, and extends the range of
axial morphology that has been examined in detail by a factor of two, which
allows the test of a number of models relating axial morphology to magma
chambers, volcanic behavior, and hydrothermal activity. Second, this region
allows a clarification of the nature and origin of the chemical characteristics
of the Pacific upper mantle. Basalts recovered from the EPR differ fundamentally
in their distribution of chemical compositions from those recovered along the
mid-Atlantic Ridge. There are two hypotheses for these differences: (1) that the
mantle beneath the EPR is ubiquitously "veined" by small scale heterogeneities
that are a natural consequence of plate recirculation in the upper mantle; (2)
that hot spots under the EPR are smeared out and mixed in to the upper mantle
more efficiently than along the MAR. The Orozco anomaly is a potential small hot
spot track near the EPR. If we find that it is a hot spot, and that its chemical
characteristics can explain the enriched MORB along the EPR, then the second
model will be supported. If not, then model (1) is more likely.