* 9627323
* Analysis of the Effects of Adjustable Speed Drives on the   Operation of AC Motors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Annette von Jouanne, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9627323 Von Jouanne The general drive towards automated high efficiency and low
cost control of ac motors has resulted in an increased application of solid
state electronic Adjsutable Speed Drives (ASDs) in all levels of the power
system. The recent advancements in power electronic devices have enabled high
frequency switching operation and have improved the performance of pulse-width
modulated (PWM) inverters for driving induction motors. In a typical ASD
application a rectifier and a high frequency PWM inverter control both the
voltage and frequency applied to the motor and thereby achieve variable speed
operation over a wide range. High switching frequencies (2 to 20 kHz) are common
with the present day insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) technology for
power levels over 200 kW. However, while the high switching speeds and advanced
PWM switching schemes substantially improve the performance of the PWM inverter-
fed induction motors, the associated high rate of voltage rise (dv/dt), of 0 to
600V in less than O.1 us, has adverse effects on the motor insulation, and can
contribute to bearing and leakage currents. In response to these problems, the
objective of this proposal is to analyze the effects of the application of ASDs
on the operation of ac motors, investigate mitigation techniques and bring the
results into the graduate and undergraduate power electronics curricula as
appropriate. ***