* 9627919
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Regions, Contexts and       Political Changes in Italy, 1989-1996
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 09/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

Shin, Michael U. of Colorado, Boulder This proposal uses a geographic
perspective to examine the nature, formation and succession of political
attitudes and behavior in central Italy. The focus is on two major parties of
the Italian left and how contextual effects or the numerous social, economic and
political processes and interactions occurring within and between places
influence attitudes and behavior. The major question to be addressed is what
political and social mechanisms and processes lie behind the concepts of
neighborhood effect and forced field bias. The research will develop a
methodological framework for identifying and evaluating contextual effects. The
study will utilize archival census and election data to assess major spatial
effects in behavior. Both aggregate statistical analysis and regression modeling
will be used to examine the spatial relations that exist within and between
communes, along with the attributes of the voters of each commune, to understand
political support in central Italy. Surveys and interviews in 20 to 25 communes
will be undertaken to obtain local-level comparisons of social processes and
influences on political behavior. The work will contribute to a theory of
contextual effects with respect to political behavior by identifying important
influential social processes. In addition it will present a methodology that
detects, identifies and evaluates such effects and which can be replicated
elsewhere.