* 9627787
* Mathematical Sciences: Complex Analysis: Quantized Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Tomasz Dubejko, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1997
* USD 15,099.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9627787 PI: Dubejko This proposal by Dubejko contains a
research plan whose realization would considerably expand the development of the
"quantum" theory of complex analysis. This discrete theory is built using circle
packings, which are, roughly speaking, collections of circles on Riemannian
2-manifolds with prescribed patterns of tangencies encoded in simplicial
2-complexes. The plan has three main objectives with strongly represented
computational aspects. The first objective is to develop a notion of discrete
meromorphic functions in such a way that discrete functions would possess main
characteristic properties of their classical counterparts. Approximation issues
and the development of a constructive algorithm for the approximation are also a
part of this first objective. The second objective calls for the construction of
a discrete analog of the harmonic measure via random walks induced by circle
packings on their tangency graphs. This construction should utilize the geometry
of the objects involved. Furthermore, algorithms for computing the discrete
measure and for approximation of the classical harmonic measure by discrete
counterparts are expected to be developed. The third objective is to obtain a
complete discrete version of the Uniformization Theorem of Riemann S12urfaces.
In particular, the complete classification of univalent and proper branched
circle packings must be given according to certain properties from potential
theory on networks. In more general terms, the Dubejko's overall goal for this
project is to create a discrete analog of the fundamental classical area of
mathematics called complex analysis. The primary objects of the proposed studies
are discrete, and as such they have the advantage of being more suitable for
applications than their classical counterparts. Furthermore, they allow
researchers to employ computer technology in various forms, for example, in
computer experiments and visualization of geometric objects. In fact, the co
mputational issues form an integral part of the project. It is hoped that a
consistent new theory can be developed which will give an alternative look at
problems in mathematics and other fields, provide new tools to deal with them,
and play an important educational role.