* 9627882
* Making and Breaking Carbon-Carbon Bonds at                  Transition Metal Centers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Russell Hughes, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

Dr. Russell P. Hughes, Department of Chemistry, Dartmouth College, is supported
by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry
Division to determine how transition metals make and break carbon-carbon bonds.
To investigate the scope of metal-mediated carbon-carbon cleavage and formation,
detailed mechanistic studies will be carried out for the reversible insertion of
metal centers into the carbon-carbon bonds of cyclopropenyl rings. As the
product of metal-mediated carbon-carbon forming reactions is often dependent on
the conformational properties of the metal complex, `sticky` fluorinated
substituents will be attached to cyclopentadienyl rings to control
conformational properties of metal complexes containing two cyclopentadienyl
ligands. This will force the self-assembly of dissymmetric and asymmetric
complexes from two achiral cyclopentadienyl ligands. New valence isomers of the
metal-cyclopentadienyl fragment and new transition metal complexes containing
metal-carbon and metal-heteroatom multiple bonds will be produced through
harnessing the steric strain imparted by adjacent tertiary butyl groups on
cyclopropenyl and cyclopentadienyl rings to force skeletal rearrangements.
Transition metal complexes promote very selective catalytic and stoichiometric
transformations of organic compounds. Since many of these reactions involve the
activation of normally inert bonds, it is of considerable interest to understand
how metal centers make and break bonds between carbon atoms. This study aims
toward a fundamental understanding of such processes. The detailed knowledge
that will be obtained will permit an increased usage and expansion of metal
catalysts and will permit the catalysts to be fine tuned in order to precisely
control chemical reactions.