* 9627458
* A Mathematical Derivation of Geologically Important         Silicate Minerals and a Study of Electron Density           Distributions and the Nature of Bonds in Silicates
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Monte Boisen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2000
* USD 340,000.00

9627458 Gibbs This project is designed to advance work in three fields:
mineralogy, crystallography and geochemistry. Recent advances by the
investigators have resulted in a determination of crystal structures, space
group symmetries and cell dimensions. Software, developed by the investigators,
was used to derive more than 85 distinct stable and metastable framework silica
structure types employing a potential energy function created from quantum
mechanical calculations. An examination of the structure and the potential
energy functions used in the derivations will improve the understanding of the
forces that bind the structures together and clarify the role that these forces
play in governing the atomic arrangements and the symmetries of the resulting
phases. The calculations will also provide a catalog of structure types that
will facilitate the identification of any new structure types that are
discovered either in the laboratory or in nature. First principle crystal
calculations will be used to generate structures for the new low energy
structure types derived in this study. It is anticipated that this information
will increase the understanding of the connection between potential energy and
structure thereby enhancing the understanding of the role that the binding
forces and the electron density distributions play in determining structure. An
analysis will be completed of the electron density distributions calculated for
the bonds of a variety of hydroxyacid molecules in an attempt to relate the
fractional ionic character of the bonds in these molecules to the electron
density and the local kinetic and potential energy densities at the bond
critical points. One of the benefits of this study is that it could lead to
improved models and strategies for the synthesis of new porous tectosilicates,
materials that have found use in the beneficiation and generation of petroleum
products. Another benefit is that the calculations could produce a collection of
dense silica structure type s with 6-coordinate Si, phases which would be of
importance in geophysical research.