* 9627117
* VPW:  Cultivation of Cell-Polymer Tissue Constructs in      Novel Bioreactors
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Gilda Barabino, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1998
* USD 117,579.00

The overall objective of this research is to investigate the effect of the in
vitro culture environment on the cultivation of cell- polymer constructs in
bioreactors. Seeding mammalian cells onto biodegradable polymer scaffolds and
growing tissues on these scaffolds in bioreactors represents a novel approach to
tissue regeneration. Studies have shown that tissue growth and function is
affected by environmental forces. In these studies, cell- polymer constructs are
cultivated in three bioreactors with distinctly different fluid dynamic
environments. Measurements are made using laser doppler and ultrasound doppler
techniques to characterize the fluid dynamic environment in each reactor. These
measurements are correlated with structural and functional tissue properties.
Results from these studies will increase our basic understanding of tissue
growth and function under various hydrodynamic conditions and contribute to the
optimization of bioreactor systems for cultivation of clinically useful tissues.
The interactive activities include developing and teaching an interactive tissue
engineering course, coordinating a "Brown Bag Lunch" Series for women and
minority faculty and students, coordinating an outreach program for K-12
students, and participating as a Faculty Role Model/Mentor in student activities
administered by the New England Board of Higher Education.