* 9627010
* VPW:  Millenial Scale Variations in Thermohaline            Circulation:  A Pilo-Pleistocene Record from the ODP        Leg162 North Atlantic Drift Sites
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Suzanne O'Connell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 02/28/1998
* USD 160,909.00

Reconstructing and understanding past ocean circulation and heat transport are
central to establishing the causes and mechanisms of long-term climate change.
Ocean circulation directly influences the global environment through the
formation of ice, by influencing oceanic and atmospheric CO2, and by heat
transfer. Ice and marine records show millennial-scale changes in temperature
and circulation during the last glacial interval, suggesting climate instability
on very short time scales. The high-sedimentation-rate cores recovered during
ODP Leg 162 provide a unique opportunity to investigate the millennial-scale
stability of climate and thermohaline circulation over the last three million
years. This will be accomplished by examining sedimentological parameters which
are influenced by climate and current strength and comparing them to
independently generated isotopic and faunal records. Four different climatic
regimes will be investigated; the 100 kyr dominated late Pleistocene world with
large marine based ice-sheets, the 41 kyr dominated world during the early
Pleistocene and late Pliocene, and the mid-Pliocene warm interval before
initiation of the Northern Hemisphere ice ages. Interactive activities focus on
teaching a graduate course entitled "Drift Sedimentation in Modern and Ancient
Oceans," collaborating with scientists at Cambridge University, and giving a
lecture tour to college students in the U.S. as a U.S. Science Advisory
Committee Distinguish Lecturer.