* 9627223
* Feasibility Study of Decomposition of Semiconductor Device  Model
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Elizabeth Brauer, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9627223 Brauer Process engineers gather data to make decisions regarding
semiconductor fabrication processes in two ways. One, test structures are
designed, fabricated, and evaluated on wafers costing upwards of $1000 and
requiring several weeks of manufacture. The second method involves computer
simulations of limited accuracy, long runtimes, and poor convergence. Neither
method is completely satisfactory in terms of cost, time, and accuracy. Given
the continuing decrease in computing cost, modeling and simulation of
semiconductor processes and devices, collectively known as Technology Computer-
Aided Design (TCAD), is an increasingly useful tool for process engineers. Much
research has been done in this area but the results have not been adequate for
industrial use while industry needs continue to grow. Historically, commercial
TCAD tools have lagged leading-edge process development by one generation. Thus,
increased effort in TCAD research and commercialization is a critical need, as
identified by the Semiconductor Industry Association. This proposal addresses
the need for improved device simulation by investigating the feasibility of
using additive decomposition in the solution of the semiconductor device
equations. We are specifically interested in implementing the semiconductor
hydrodynamic model in a practical, computationally efficient, parallelized
device simulation tool use in a industrial setting. The hydrodynamic model is
chosen for three reasons. First, hot electrons degrade long-term reliability
through shifts in transistor threshold voltage and the hydrodynamic model has
been shown to accurately model the hot electron effect in submicron MOSFETs.
Second, the semiconductor hydrodynamic model is much cheaper computationally
than the Monte Carlo method. Third, previous work developing the hydrodynamic
model predicts accurate simulation of MOS devices to gate lengths of 0.1um.
Numerical robustness and computational cost are roadblocks to practical use of
the hyd rodynamic model. The proposed work is a novel approach to semiconductor
device simulation by application of additive decomposition, a technique for
decomposing governing equations into large-scale and small-scale parts without
averaging that has been successfully applied to Burgers' equation and the
Navier-Stokes equations governing fluid flow. To our knowledge, no researcher
has applied additive decomposition to the semiconductor device model. The
additive decomposition technique is particularly well suited to problems with a
large range to time and/or space scales, as found in the carrier concentration
and carrier temperature in submicron MOS devices, leading to convergence
difficulties and requiring robust numerical techniques in the solution method.
Furthermore, additive decomposition adds another level of parallelization,
improving the computational cost. The project investigates the feasibility of
the additive decomposition technique applied to the one-dimensional
semiconductor equations. The drift-diffusion model is a simple version of the
hydrodynamic model and is, thus, an ideal vehicle for the feasibility study. The
test case is the submicron ballistic diode with an n+-n-n+ structure, which
captures the essential features of the MOS channel. The proposed work develops
and tests the discretization and parallelization schemes for the one-dimensional
drift-diffusion model using additive decomposition. The project collaborators
are Mr. Scott Irving, Process CAD Engineering Manager, National Semiconductor,
and Prof. James McDonough, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Kentucky. ***