* 9627908
* Quantitative Reconstruction of Sediment Provenance:  A      Geochemical Study of the Amazon Fan/Delta
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Scott McLennan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 93,999.00

9627908 McLennan Siliciclastic sediments preserved within the Amazon subaqueous
delta and deep-sea fan were derived from the Amazon drainage basin under
contrasting climatic conditions. The delta represents relatively recent
deposition largely under tropical conditions whereas the fan represents
deposition during various Pleistocene glacial stages when the shelf was by-
passed during low sea level stands. Stratigraphically constrained samples have
only recently been made available for the Amazon Fan from ODP Leg 155. This
proposal is concerned with quantitatively evaluating the relative importance of
Andean versus cratonic provenance for these sediments during these contrasting
climatic conditions. Preliminary petrographic, geochemical and isotopic data
suggest a dominance of Andean sources but also suggest that in detail the
provenance history is complex. The study will evaluate the sources of both muds
and sands using neodymium and lead isotopes and a variety of geochemical and
petrographic techniques. For the sands, the lithology most often used in
provenance studies of ancient sequences, we will further evaluate the provenance
of the major individual components, quartz, feldspar and heavy minerals (using
zircon as the proxy) using a combination of Pb and Nd measurements. The purpose
of this aspect of the study is twofold: (1) to determine if the provenance
inferred from whole rock Pb and Nd isotope measurements can be applied to the
major minerals that contain relatively little Nd (quartz and feldspar) or Pb
(quartz); (2) to determine if the provenance inferred from detrital zircon
studies is similar to that inferred for major minerals (quartz and feldspar),
bulk sands and associated muds. From these data, we will be able to reconstruct
the provenance of both sands and muds with some precision and evaluate if the
craton plays a greater role for sands that muds, as suggested by others, and
whether the craton plays a greater or lesser role during contrasting climatic
conditions. Th is study will provide fundamental information regarding
limitations on how various approaches to provenance (e.g., petrography,
geochemistry, radiogenic isotopes) can be interpreted. The Amazon drainage
system is the largest in the world and understanding the origin and history of
sediment derived from this system is of the great interest in its own right. Any
contrasts between sediment preserved on the fan and delta would have
significance for paleoclimatological studies of this drainage system.