* 9627047
* Mathematical Sciences:  RUI:  Mathematical Modeling of      Hematopoiesis and Cell Cycles in Escherichia coli
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 105,000.00

9627047 Mahaffy The principal investigator continues his research on
hematopoietic and cellular control systems. One study examines an age-structured
model for erythropoiesis, which is compared to a simpler model with two delays.
Bifurcation analyses predict oscillations that correlate reasonably well with
studies on auto-immune hemolytic rabbits. Mathematical studies investigate the
key modeling elements that lead to oscillations observed in some serious
hematopoietic diseases. Study of the erythropoietic model extends to a related
system for thrombopoiesis for which more clinical problems have been observed.
This research improves a current age-structured model so as to match better
experimental data following a phlebotomy, including the effects of plasma
regeneration, the accelerated maturing and active destruction in the aging of
erythrocytes. Mathematical analyses examine the significance of the state-
dependent delays in the reduced age-structured model and parameter sensitivity.
Research continues in collaboration with Dr. J. W. Zyskind on the modeling of
initiation of DNA replication in Escherichia coli. Mathematical models are
developed to support current theories on the most important biochemical events
beginning the DNA replication cycle. Interest centers on the role of the stable
protein DnaA, which experimentally has been shown to play a key role. The models
consider the significance of an eclipse period for DnaA mRNA synthesis following
initiation, the existence of an unknown protein recently discovered that
inactivates DnaA, and the competition for binding important activation sites
with a growth dependent protein, Fis. Mathematical studies continue on cellular
control systems in exponentially growing cells and extend to examine what
happens when cells experience starvation. Both proposed areas of study use
mathematical models to provide a better understanding of the fundamental
controls in important biological systems. The f ear of contamination of the
blood supply by the HIV virus, which causes AIDS, results in many surgical
patients providing their own blood for the operation. The mathematical models in
this proposal allow the study of optimal schemes for regeneration of red blood
cells, which could indicate ways for increasing this supply. This leads to a
lower demand on the general blood supply and increased security of the blood
supply for the self-donors. In addition, there are several serious hematopoietic
diseases (diseases linked to the formation of different types of blood cells)
that are poorly understood. The proposed models provide a non-invasive means to
examine which aspects of this complicated biological control system are most
likely to result in the observed problems. This gives clinicians more
information on possible therapeutic treatments and narrows the search for the
primary cause of the disease. The mathematical models for the initiation of DNA
replication in bacteria again provides a non-experimental approach to better
understand an important biological process. In this case, the study examines the
control of the cell cycle in bacteria, which is fundamental to cell growth and
reproduction. Biotechnology relies heavily on the bacterium, E. coli, for many
of its experiments and products, so a better understanding of the cell cycle
aids this industry as well as providing some answers to basic questions in cell
biology.