* 9627161
* Linking Intermetallics and Zintl Phases:  Experimental      and Theoretical Studies of Ternary "Trielides"
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Gordon Miller, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract DMR-9627161 Miller The role of valence electron concentration (vec =
electron/atom ratio) to influence structure is well documented for Zintl phases
(valence compounds of electropositive metals with post-transition elements:
covalent networks and cages involving two-center two-electron bonds) and Hume-
Rothery phases (intermetallic compounds of late and post-transition elements:
dense packings involving "metallic" bonds). Zintl phases occur for vec &gt; 4
(based upon the network of post-transition elements) and Hume-Rothery phases are
observed for vec ~ 2. To date, there is no systematic investigation of the broad
region in vec between these two extremes. Since the two established compound
classes show dramatic differences in structural principles and electronic
properties, studies involving compounds with vec in the intermediate regime will
provide a means of examining the transformation from one class to the other.
This research involves the synthesis and detailed characterization of ternary
compounds in- volving (i) an electropositive alkaline earth or rare earth metal;
(ii) either a late transition metal, i.e. groups 8-12 elements or one of either
Li or Mg; and (iii) a group 13 element (Al, Ga, In), called "trielides," in
order to probe materials with vec between two and four by tuning the electron
count. Synthetic strategies will include high temperature methods (arc-melting)
and using metallic fluxes. Products will be examined for their crystal
structure, composition, and physical properties. In particular, X-ray and
neutron diffraction, electron microscopy, thermal analysis, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, electrical resistivity, and magnetic susceptibility measurements
will be utilized. Later stages of this investigation will involve the
incorporation of boron, carbon, and nitrogen into these intermetallics. In
addition to these experimental approaches, theoretical methods will be applied
to investigate the valence electron distribution in thes e systems as the vec
changes. Specifically, relationships between these solids and molecular
analogues, e.g., ranging from metallocarborane deltahedra to Zintl-type anionic
cages, will be explored. Semiempirical electronic structure calculations will be
used to examine the ternary systems under study, with the aspirations of
adapting the LMTO calculations to these complex systems. %%% This investigation
represents the first concerted effort of experiment and theory to perform a
systematic examination of compounds linking complex intermetallics with complex
valence compounds. The ternary compounds in this investigation may show high
electrical conductivities coupled with regions of strong covalent bonding.
Therefore, these materials may offer potential applications as high temperature
metals, or may provide a means of studying either strengthening or embrittlement
mechanisms in intermetallics.