* 9627072
* Conspectus of the Vascular Plants of Madagascar - Phase II  (final)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Porter Lowry, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 02/29/2000
* USD 268,035.00

Conspectus of the Vascular Plants of Madagascar - Phase II (final) The
Conspectus of the Vascular Plants of Madagascar Project is an international,
multi-institutional endeavor involving the Missouri Botanical Garden (MO), the
Mus─um National d'Histoire Naturelle (P), the Parc Botanique et Zoologique de
Tsimbazaza (TAN), and the Centre National de la Recherche Appliqu─e au
Dev─loppement Rural (TEF), whose goal since 1991 has been to make information on
the diverse, endemic and highly threatened vascular plant flora of Madagascar
widely accessible. Serving as an immediate interim resource for biodiversity
conservation efforts, and a complement to the ongoing monographic Flore de
Madagascar series, the Conspectus carefully assimilates verified nomenclatural
and bibliographic data from primary source literature, as well as historical and
contemporary specimen data. Information is accessible both in a PC version in
Madagascar, and as part of MO's Internet/World Wide Web resources. During the
second and final Phase of the project, core taxonomic data capture will be
completed. Specimen data capture will also conclude with the entry of all
adequately labeled specimens at TAN and TEF, effectively computerizing those two
herbaria. Type specimens, as well as additional representative collections at P
that voucher the occurrence of taxa in each province and Protected Area, will be
captured. Painstaking post-facto assignment of geographical coordinates to
historical specimens throughout the project will allow automated mapping of
species distributions and full accessibility of data for Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) applications. Geo-referencing of collection data has also resulted
in the compilation of a Gazetteer to the Botanical Collecting Localities in
Madagascar that will go on-line during the first year of Phase II. Specimen-
vouchered images, historical illustrations associated with types, and the types
themselves, will be incorporated into the database and linked to core specimen
and nomenclatural data. Images will also be utilized in the production of an
Interactive Identification System for the families and woody genera of Malagasy
vascular plants. The Madagascar Web (http://www.mobot.org/MOBOT/Madagasc) will
continue to serve as an effective means of disseminating information on Malagasy
biodiversity. The completed electronic Conspectus of the Vascular Plants of
Madagascar will reach a broad diversity of end-users, from international
specialists preparing monographic treatments for the Flore de Madagascar series,
to Malagasy NGO's charged with assessing, conserving, and sustainably managing
Madagascar's rich plant biodiversity. -- aÝª ▀ ; áª ªá = ÓaOÀ h¢µ +'ª`0 ·   ª
&amp; , 8 D P X ` l Ù µ ó áááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááá &gt; Meredith's
MacHD:Applications:Microsoft Word:Templates:Normal National Science Foundation
National Science Foundation '@ Ãv+=ªt @ Ãv+=ªt @ Àª Áa+ @ Microsoft Word 6.0.1 S
u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( áááááááááááá 9 + áááááááááááá áááááááááááá
áááááááááááá 3 ; áª -- aÝª ▀ ; áª áááª ááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááá
áááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááá
áááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááá
áááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááá
áááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááááá
ááááááá_Ðh O+ e Û Û l l l l l l l ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ¹ ß ¹ * = ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ &amp; g X
+ J * l ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ * ¼ l l ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ ¼ l ¼ l ¼ Ã Û l l l l ¼ ¼ X ¼