* 9627181
* Hall of Earth and Planetary Exploration
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* JoAnn Coburn, Cleveland Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Orrin Shane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 754,032.00

9627181 Hannibal The Cleveland Museum of Natural History will develop an exhibit
that integrates earth sciences and planetary geology. Currently titled "The Hall
of Earth and Planetary Exploration" this 8700 sq. ft. exhibit will consist of a
series of ten sections, each one focusing on a different theme including "The
Big Bang", "Plate Tectonics", "Earthquakes and Volcanoes", "Ores and Mining",
and the like. The goals are to instill curiosity about the Earth and planetary
sciences and their interrelationships, to invite deeper exploration into
scientific information and processes, to improve general science literacy by
organizing the information into comprehensible themes, and to present an exhibit
that is relevant to the daily lives of the general public. Visitors leaving the
exhibit should know about the uniqueness of the earth with its moving
continents, liquid water and living beings. They will also have some sense of
the new scientific knowledge about the universe and the solar system and have
their desire piqued to explore these topics further. The exhibit will have a
number of complementary components including brochures, an expanded docent
program, scheduled demonstrations and lectures by museum staff, devices for
physically disabled, teacher guides and workshops, and traveling kits for
schools. The exhibit goals and complementary activities align with Cleveland's
Urban Systemic Initiative. The exhibit is scheduled to open late in 1997.