* 9627453
* Chemical Separations Using Combined Structure Fluid         Gradients and Countercurrent Field Flow Fractions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1998
* T. Alan Hatton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* ELDRED H CHIMOWITZ
* 05/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT Proposal No: 9627453 Proposal Type: Investigator Initiated Principal
Investigator: T. Alan Hatton Affiliation: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
This grant is awarded through the Interfacial, transport and separations program
of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division. The principal investigator is
Dr. T. Alan Hatton of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The research
addresses the development of a new technique applicable to many difficult
chemical separation problems, particularly in low-volume high value-added
applications. Externally-applied field gradients will be utilized to generate
systems having lateral gradients in solution structure and hence in their
interactions with specific solutes or particles. The differences in distribution
of different solutes over such structured gradient solutions can be exploited in
separation processes by using filed-flow fractionation concepts with imposed
countercurrent flow. Certain block copolymer solutions, for instance, can
undergo microphase transitions over a relatively narrow temperature range such
that if a temperature difference is applied across the solution, micelles are
formed in the warmer regions of the flow channel but are not formed in the
colder parts of the solution. This could affect the distribution of hydrophobic
solutes through solubilization within he micelle cores, or could lead to size
exclusion of larger molecular species such as proteins and viruses. Another
example would be the use of polymer-stabilized magnetic nanoparticles as
separations media in a magnetic field gradient. Highly selective complexing
agents, such as calixarenes or chiral surfactants, can be attached to these
polymers to enhance the separation capabilities. These methods will have the
significant advantages that the process may be operated continuously, it will be
gentle and low in toxicity and may achieve high resolution even when the driving
force for separation of two solutes is small. Potential applications include
fine chemicals separations, the optical resolution of enantiomeric mixtures,
protein separations, and virus purification. Vijay T. John, PD/CTS 03/27/97