* 9627324
* Isotope and Geochemical Studies on Mantle Zircons,          Diamonds, and Deep Mantle Xenoliths
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Peter Deines, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1999
* USD 110,200.00

9627324 Deines It is one of the aims of the planned work to examine whether it
is possible to establish a chronological 18O record of mantle fluids through a
combination of oxygen isotope measurements with other isotopic and geochemical
investigations of kimberlitic zircons. From the Jagersfontein kimberlite, South
Africa, a suite of xenoliths for which an origin in the transition zone and
below can be postulated, has been collected by Dr. Haggerty, University of
Massachusetts. These samples provide a unique opportunity to examine the, as yet
unknown, oxygen isotope geochemistry of this part of the mantle. The P.I.s plan
to carry out a systematic oxygen isotope study on these very deep mantle
samples. Studies are planned in three different, but related, settings. The
P.I.s will carry out: 1. An examination of the oxygen and radiogenic isotope
record of zircons from the Jwaneng and Orapa kimberlites. Dr. N. Shimizu, Woods
Hole Institute of Oceanography, who will carry out the geochronological work and
trace element measurements on zircons. 2. An investigation of the oxygen
isotopic composition of silicate inclusions in diamonds from Orapa. The
measurements of the nitrogen content and aggregation state of the host will be
coordinated with Dr. J. W. Harris, University of Glasgow. 3. A detailed oxygen
isotope study on deep mantle xenoliths. This part will be coordinated with
petrographic, mineralogical and geochemical studies by Dr. S. E. Haggerty,
University of Massachusetts. All stable isotope studies will be carried out
under the supervision of the principal investigator. The work will show whether
it is possible to develop a tool for the study of the chronology of mantle
fluids, and aid in the characterization of fluids present during diamond
formation.