* 9628475
* RIMI:  Center for Molecular Systematics, Evolution and      Evironmental Biology
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* James Ackerman, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 09/30/2000
* USD 250,479.00

HRD-9628475 Ackerman Long Island University's Brooklyn Campus requests support
for the acquisition of a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer with a
superconducting magnet, operating at 300 MHz. The University will provide non-
Federal matching funds on a one-to-one basis. The University is a private
institution and its Brooklyn Campus has an enrollment of 8,000 students, more
than 50% of whom are minorities underrepresented in the sciences. This proposal
is made on behalf of the department of chemistry, which experiences
approximately 900 undergraduate and 70 graduate (master's level) registrations
per semester. There are 41 undergraduate chemistry majors: 14 are Black and 3
are Hispanic; 27 are women and 14 are men. The Molecular Biology undergraduate
program (co-sponsored by the chemistry and biology departments) has 20
undergraduate majors: 7 are Black and 2 are Hispanic; 12 are women. The master's
program in chemistry has 16 majors: 7 are Black, 2 are Hispanic, and 12 are
women. The acquisition of the NMR spectrometer will fill a major gap in the
otherwise adequate research and instructional equipment of the department. It
will strengthen the research environment of the institution and will enhance
very significantly the research capabilities of five faculty, will have
beneficial impact on the capabilities of two more, and will bring about a
significant improvement il the laboratory training of those students majoring in
chemistry. The proposed research to be performed on the instrument includes
classical organic syntheses, the development of new catalysts for organic
compound transformations and polymerizations, the development of new materials
with interesting electrical properties, the better understanding of properties
and thermodynamics of unsaturated molecules, and the better fundamental
understanding and modeling of industrial resin manufacture. These projects are
for the immediate future and it is expected that the equipment wi ll remain in
service for the next 10-15 years, maintained by the University, will support
many more research undertakings, and will increase significantly the
contribution of this institution to the Nation's scientific research activities.