* 9628617
* Dissertation Research:  Hunting, Feasting, and Communal     Ritual:  Social Differentiation in Ancient Zuni Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Katherine Spielmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1997
* USD 5,290.00

Under the direction of Dr. Katherine Spielmann, Mr. James Potter will collect
data for his doctoral thesis. He will analyze both faunal and ceramic remains
from a series of archaeological sites from the Zuni region of Arizona. He will
focus on the crucial interval from approximately 1250-1350 A.D. It was during
this period, many archaeologists argue, that the first indications of
differential status and political differentiation appear. To test this
hypothesis Mr. Potter will examine large collections of faunal remains and plot
their differential distribution across sites. He argues that status
differentiation among individuals should be reflected in the clustering bones
which derive from choice cuts of meat in relatively restricted areas. A non-
clustered distribution should be indicative of an egalitarian society. Both
archaeological and ethnographic data indicate that Southwestern Native Americans
employed control of ritual knowledge to achieve status and this often involved
the use of species of birds which were used for ceremonial purposes. In his
research Mr. Potter will also examine the distribution of bird bones across the
sites. Because tree ring dating has allowed precise chronological ages to be
assigned to many Southwestern U.S. sites, it is possible to examine social
transitions at a chronological scale impossible to achieve in most other parts
of the world. Thus archaeologists have used this area as a test case to study
how complex socially stratified societies arise. Based on architectural changes,
the period under examination appears to mark a critical transition stage and Mr.
Potter's analyses will bring a new class of data to bear in this study. This
research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to
many archaeologists. It will shed new light on the prehistory of the United
States and will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.