* 9628974
* A Resurvey of California Absolute Gravity Sites
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/1998
* USD 53,209.00

9628974 Zumberge This grant provides $53,209 as partial support of investigator
salaries and the costs of computing equipment to be used in an absolute gravity
resurvey of sites in California together with testing of a new fringe-signal
processing technique. Specifically, surveys and instrument calibrations will be
made at 7 sites using a new Micro-g solutions Model FG5 absolute gravity meter
together with an older IGPP-AGM-1 instrument which was used at these sites six
years ago. The newer instrument provides approximately five times greater
sensitivity in the measurement of local acceleration of gravity. The comparison
between measurements using both instruments is important for calibration of the
newer instrument in order to monitor secular changes in vertical tectonic
displacements at these sites. Without such a calibration study, the older
measurements would be lost as a baseline with the retirement of the IGPP- AGM-1.
Resurvey of these sites is timely as sufficient time has passed so that the
centimeter scale vertical resolution possible with absolute gravimetry will
allow significant determination of rates of vertical crustal deformation in this
tectonically active region of the world. Of particular interest, these
measurements, when made in conjunction with GPS or satellite laser ranging (SLR)
as independent measures of vertical displacement, should yield insight into the
mechanisms responsible for deformation. Historical SLR measurements exist for
two of the proposed resurvey sites, namely, Quincy and Monument Peak. ***