* 9628767
* RPG: A Novel Genetic Screen for the Identification of Genes Involved in Streptomyces Morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Joanne Willey, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 15,285.00

Willey 9628767 The Streptomycete spp. are gram positive soil bacteria that
undergo a temporally and spatially regulated cycle of morphological and
physiological differentiation similar to that of the filamentous fungi. During
the streptomycete life cycle three cell types are made. The substrate-
penetrating vegetative mycelia give rise to the upwardly growing hair-like
aerial mycelia. Antibiotic biosynthesis is concomitant with the onset of the
aerial mycelium formation. The aerial mycelium subsequently differentiate into
uninucleate spores. Two classes of developmentally controlled genes have been
identified in Streptomyces coelicolor: the whi and bld genes. The whi genes
control the development of spores form the aerial mycelium; whi mutants thus
from only the aerial mycelium. The bld genes are involved in the differentiation
of the vegetative mycelium into the aerial mycelium. Mutations in bld genes
result in the growth of colonies that form only the substrate mycelium; many of
these mutants are pleiotropically blocked in antibiotic formation as well. bld
mutants are also blocked in the synthesis of a small morphogenetic peptide,
SapB, which appears to be directly involved in aerial mycelium formation. This
is evidenced by the restoration of aerial mycelium formation by bld mutants
following the exogenous application of purified SapB. Additional evidence
supports the notion that SapB is synthesized nonribosomally, presumably by a
multienzyme complex in analogy with the peptide antibiotics. What is the
function of SapB in S. coelicolor morphogenesis and what is the role of nutrient
sensing in the differentiation of the vegetative to the aerial mycelium? This
research planning grant seeks to address these questions by the identification
of genes involved specifically in SapB biosynthesis and/or the nutritional
regulation of aerial mycelium formation. This approach is based on the
observation that the addition of purified SapB relieved the suppression of
aerial mycelium formation in the morphologically wild type strain S. coelicolor
J1501 when grown in LB agar media. This restoration of aerial mycelium formation
permits the screening of a genomic library expressed in high copy in S.
coelicolor J1501 cells in attempt to overproduce genes essential for SapB
biosynthesis and thereby mimic this phenomenon. Plasmid from complemented
colonies will be purified and inserts subcloned to establish the minimum size
required for the selected phenotype. Subcloned inserts will then be sequenced
and analyzed so that a putative function might be assigned to specific gene
products. Complementing sequences might encode either i) the SapB structural
gene or ii) regulatory or structural genes that are part of a presumed SapB
peptide synthetase operon and/or iii) genes not directly involved in SapB
biosynthesis or regulation but nonetheless involved in morphological
differentiation. The identification of such genes would then provide preliminary
data on which a full research proposal will be based. ***