* 9628166
* Collaborative Research:  An Integrated Study of the         Fractionation of Natural Dissolved Organic Matter Upon      Sorption to Mineral Surfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Yu-Ping Chin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2000
* USD 60,124.00

9628166 Chin Natural organic matter (NOM) is an important component of soils,
streams, lakes, ground waters, and estuarine waters, and it plays a key role in
such diverse environmental phenomena as mineral growth and dissolution, cycling
of trace metals, and the global biogeochemical C budget. Perhaps most
importantly, NOM plays a crucial, though complex, role in the transport of
organic and inorganic pollutants through porous media. On the one hand, NOM that
is bound to mineral surfaces may remove trace metals, nonpolar organic compounds
(NOCs ) and other pollutants from the water column. On the other hand, NOM that
remains free or in colloidal form within the water column may increase the
mobility of pollutants. Hence, understanding and quantifying the bulk
partitioning of NOM between solid and dissolved phases is fundamental to a wide
range of pollutant transport phenomena. Moreover, because NOM consists of a
variety of hydrophobic and hydrophilic molecules with variable structure,
functionality, and reactivity, we need to understand not only how NOM partitions
but also how it fractionates upon sorption to mineral surfaces. For example,
preferential sorption of the more hydrophobic components may increase the
retardation of NOCs through porous media. Numerous field and laboratory studies
have suggested that NOM fractionates upon sorption, and provided clues to
fractionation processes. Nevertheless, many questions remain regarding the
effects of NOM composition, solution characteristics, mineral surface properties
and kinetic considerations on fractionation. Additionally, little is known about
the effects of mineral dissolution, metal complexation, and NOM coagulation on
apparent fractionation. Finally, much of our current understanding of
fractionation is based on largely indirect evidence. For example, although
observed kinetic effects on fractionation have been attributed by some to
changes in conformations of sorbed NOM molecules, this hypothesis has not been
tes ted directly. To better understand NOM fractionation processes, we propose a
3-year interdisciplinary research effort combining field sampling at a carefully
chosen freshwater wetland watershed, McDonalds Branch basin in the New Jersey
Pinelands, with newly developed molecular-level methodologies, to study NOM
sorption and fractionation in a far more direct manner than previously has been
possible. NOM samples will be collected from surface waters, soils, and shallow
and deep ground waters in carefully documented recharge and discharge zones.
Fractionation on sorption of McDonalds Branch and standard NOM samples will be
quantified by characterizing solutions prior to and following adsorption, using
a combination of analytical techniques, including: 13C NMR and 1H NMR; UV-Vis,
fluorescence, and attenuated fourier transform infra-red (ATR-FTIR)
spectroscopies; high pressure size exclusion chromatography (HPSEC); total
organic carbon analysis (TOC); vapor pressure osmometry; potentiometric
titration's; and elemental analysis. Scanning-tunneling and atomic-force
microscopy (STM and AFM), including the new tapping mode AFM, will be used to
determine the structure of sorbed organic molecules, and the role of structural
changes in sorption and fractionation. High pressure liquid chromatogrphy (HPLC)
and AA will be used to study oxide dissolution and NOM-metal binding phenomena.
Surface FTIR will assist in deterring sorption mechanisms, and how they
influence fractionation. We believe that this project is fundamental to many
areas of water quality research, and that we have chosen a true end-member
natural laboratory watershed to conduct the field investigation. The combination
of state-of-the-art laboratory techniques listed above will allow us to tackle
this problem in a far more quantitative, mechanistric manner than previously has
been possible. Over the course of this research, new techniques of metal-
complexation analysis will be refined, new methods of STM/AFM imaging of sorbed
organic molecules will be furthered, and a new approach to integrating
laboratory and field investigations of NOM structure, composition, and
reactivity will be fostered. The proposed research will lay a strong foundation
for a broad spectrum of additional research. For example, the approach may be
expanded to encompass sampling at a greater diversity of watershed types, with
different NOM characteristics. We anticipate that this research will enable a
wide range of future studies of how NOM fractionation influences the transport
of hydrophobic and hydrophilic pollutants. Finally, given the importance of
freshwater wetlands, and the rapidity with which they are disappearing from our
landscape, we feel that investigations involving NOM evolution in wetlands are
crucial to further our understanding of such complex but fragile ecosystems.