* 9628763
* CRB:  Workshop on Developing the Conceptual Basis for       Restoration Biology, to be held in Santa Barbara on April   19-21, 1996
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1997
* Edith Allen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1997
* USD 25,000.00

9628763 Allen A workshop will be convened to improve the scientific basis of
ecological restoration. The field of restoration biology is growing rapidly and
is in need of a stronger conceptual basis. Restoration may be considered an
experimental tool for understanding functioning of ecological systems, but the
promise of the contribution restoration ecology can make has not been fulfilled.
There are literally thousands of restoration projects throughout the country,
with many opportunities for restoration research on already-prepared sites.
However, the number of these projects in which researchers collaborate remains
relatively small. The goals of the workshop are to encourage more scientists to
write high quality proposals, enhance the conceptual basis of restoration
research, and develop linkages between scientists and practitioners. A major
theme is changing the emphasis in restoration from an anecdotal to a scientific
approach. A two-day workshop will be organized hierarchically to discuss
organismal, community, ecosystem, and landscape level issues relevant o
restoration. The workshop will determine if there are conceptual challenges to
restoration that are unique to restoration biology. A special area of emphasis
will be building partnerships between practitioners and theorists to improve the
practice and research in restoration biology. The topic of this workshop is
timely and important. The products of the workshop will be a report to NSF
regarding mechanisms to increase and improve the quality of restoration oriented
proposals, and a set of published paper to expand upon the themes discussed at
the workshop.