* 9628413
* Directed Blast - Debris Avalanche Relations at              Bezymianny Volcano, Kamchatka
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Barry Voight, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/1999
* USD 136,000.00

9628413 Voight The broad long-term objective of this work is to improve our
understanding of magmatic interactions in large-scale volcanic edifices collapse
and associated explosive eruptions. magma intrusion may trigger large-scale
edifice failure. Rapid edifice failure may in turn provoke destructive explosive
events, including the phenomenon known as the 'directed blast'. This project
aims at understanding these interactive processes. The best examples of true
directed blasts are found at Mount St. Helens (1980), which has been thoroughly
studied, and Bezymianny Volcano (1956), which has been little studied. Therefore
the proposed research focuses on the Bezymianny blast deposit, and its relation
to the debris avalanche that triggered the blast process. The proposed research
builds on recent preliminary field studies at Bezymianny by Belousov and
Belousov, and collaborating scientists, which suggest that the Bezymianny blast
deposits are not analogous with known pyroclastic surge deposits, with the sole
exception of Mount St. Helens. Field work will comprise standard techniques of
study of stratigraphic relationships, mapping, sampling, sedimentology, and
study of bed forms. Samples will be subject to granulometric analyses and
studied with SEM, XRD and microprobe. Temperature data will be established from
carbonized wood fragments. Grain size distribution, shapes and compositions of
particles, together with field observations, will provide the basis for
interpretation of eruption processes. The study is expected to have significant
implications on volcanic hazards.