* 9628713
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gender, Pastoralism, and    Intensification: Changing Patterns of Resource Management in Morocco
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Douglas Johnson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas R. Leinbach
* 05/31/1997
* USD 9,900.00

Steinmann, Susanne H Clark University The doctoral dissertation research will
examine how women's resource management practices affect and respond to
ecological and socio-economic changes associated with pastoral sedentarization
and agro-pastoral intensification on the semi-arid steppe of eastern Morocco. In
this region more intensive herding and farming practices help sustain a growing
human population. Fieldwork will involve primary ethnographic data collection in
the town of Tendrara, a village of settled Beni Guil nomads. A questionnaire
survey of 150 recently settled pastoral women will illuminate how gendered
patterns of resource management shape and respond to sedentarization. The study
will seek to learn how ecological and economic changes affect women's access to,
control over, and knowledge about animal and natural resources. A major
objective is to investigate the ways in which gender-specific interests,
activities and knowledge adjust to these changes and influence land use
decisions. Wealth ranking, resource mapping, life histories, and informal
interviews of women will complement the quantitative data. This work is critical
for it provides knowledge, now lacking, of the interrelationships between land
use change, gender, and environment.