* 9628365
* Multiuser Transmitter Optimization for Mobile Cellular      Communications With Coordinating Base Stations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Michael Honig, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 348,544.00

A class of multi-user transmitter optimization problems is treated in the
context of mobile cellular communications. THe objective is to optimize
transmitter pulse shapes given a variety of assumptions concerning the channel
model, receivers, and signaling constraints. Solutions to these problems reveal
optimal multiple-access strategies, given particular sets of modeling
assumptions. The work may also lead to adaptive algorithms for multi-user
transmitter optimization which enable a significant increase in system capacity.
Both linear time-invariant and statistical (i.e., Rayleigh fading) channel
models will be considered. Models for an isolated cell (the multiple-access
channel), an isolated pair of cells, and a linear array of cells are presented.
In the latter two cases, neighboring base stations may share information (i.e.,
received or transmitted signals for the reverse or forward link, respectively).
The multi-cell channel models can capture different combinations of intra- and
inter-cell multiple-access schemes. Antenna diversity at the transmitter and/or
receiver will also be included. Receivers include the (single-user) matched-
filter, and multi-user linear and decision-feedback detectors. In most cases the
transmitters and detectors will be optimized according to a zero-forcing or Mean
Squared Error criterion. For statistical channel models, the objective is to
optimize performance averaged over the channel parameters. Multi-user
transmitter optimization assuming multi carrier signaling will also be
considered. In this case the objective is to maximize the size of the rate
region by allocating transmitted bits and power to subchannels (independently
for each user), subject to performance constraints. Finally, transmitter
adaptation in the presence of time-varying channels and interference, and
associated performance issues are studied.