* 9628810
* Applications of Frontal Chromatography to Multicomponent    Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Jon Parcher, University of Mississippi
* Continuing grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 11/30/1999
* USD 348,590.00

This work by Profs. Jon F. Parcher and Kwang S. Yun of the University of
Mississippi focuses on fundamental studies of phase distribution equilibria
using chromatographic techniques and is supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division. Chromatographic experiments will be
carried out which will yield the glass transition temperature of polymers. The
data will be used to test and develop models for the correlation of the glass
transition temperature with composition. Chromatographic approaches will be
developed for the measurement of the sorption of supercritical fluids, including
carbon dioxide, in polymer matrices. Measurement of the corresponding swelling
of the polymer will yield the molar volume. Phase transitions produced by the
sorption process will be determined. This research project will examine the
interaction of supercritical fluids as mobile phases, particularly carbon
dioxide, with polymer materials as stationary phases to obtain basic
thermodynamic information about the uptake of mobile phase components by the
stationary phase. The approach to making these measurements is chromatographic
and is unique. Success will establish an entirely new way to obtain this
information which would be superior to methods currently in use. The results of
this study will have immediate application in the separation of complex chemical
mixtures and in the production of plastics.