* 9628803
* EROC:Interactions of Nitrogen, Phosphorus and other Elements During Long-Term Soil Development: Contributions to        Nutrient Limitation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Peter Vitousek, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 02/29/2000
* USD 559,998.00

Author: Peter M Vitousek &lt;vitousek@leland.Stanford.EDU&gt; at NOTE Date:
5/28/96 7:41 PM Priority: Normal TO: cdahm at nsf2 Subject: Re: DEB-9628803
------------------------------- Message Contents -------------------------------
Hello Cliff, Thank you for the good news on the proposal. My revised budgets are
making their way through our process and will get to you soon; my abstract in
non-technical language is below. Revise away as you think best - and I would
appreciate feedback on how to do this (important) task better. On a technical
note - I take the panel's recommendation not to use Century as the sole vehicle
for integration - but I don't think writing our own model for these systems is a
very productive approach. What I hope to do is use what we learn here to affect
how people in general model these processes; tying it to Century is limiting,
developing our own model that's "best" for these systems is even more so... And
- the summary: Soil fertility controls plant production and many other aspects
of ecosystems. Nitrogen and phosphorus are the most important of the nutrients
governing soil fertility, and both the nature of ecosystems and their responses
to natural and human-caused change differ depending on whether nitrogen or
phosphorus is in the shortest supply. This research is designed to determine how
interactions between the cycles of nitrogen and phosphorus control plant
production in ecosystems, and with what consequences. It makes use of a set of
forests in Hawaii that range in soil age from 300 to 4,100,000 year. Most
factors, including tree species, are constant on this sequence, but fertility on
young soils is controlled by nitrogen, while that on old soils is phosphorus
controlled. The sites thus facilitate our understanding of the basic processes
that regulate soil fertility and its consequences. And I'll be happy to take
another crack at it, if appropriate. With best wishes, Peter Vitousek