* 9628479
* Sulfur and Oxygen Isotope Compositions of Seawater Sulfate  as Recorded in Marine Barite
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Miriam Kastner, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1999
* USD 199,737.00

Kastner 9628479 Global changes in climate and atmospheric chemistry are
intimately related to the sulfur and carbon sedimentary cycles. Evidence for
large scale transfers of S and C between the sedimentary reservoirs is provided
by the isotope records of oceanic sulfate and carbon. Coupling between the S and
C reservoirs maintains a steady-state atmospheric oxygen reservoir. Thus, an
increase in the rate of sulfide oxidation must be compensated by an increase in
the rate of organic C burial, resulting in an overall inverse relationship
between marine 34Ssulfate and 34Scarbonate, as observed. A high resolution
marine carbonate 13C age curve exists. The evidence that S and O isotope
compositions of seawater sulfate have fluctuated significantly through the
Phanerozoic, is mostly based on the comprehensive isotope data obtained from
marine evaporite sulfates; but the geological record of marine evaporites is
episodic, with gaps of millions of years. Evaporites are also susceptible to
diagenesis, their age control could be problematic, and the purely marine origin
of some is questionable; it is therefore important to identify another marine
phase that reliably records and maintains seawater sulfate S and O isotope
compositions. Marine barite is a readily available ubiquitous minor phase in
deep-sea sediments, it is continuously deposited, its associated sediment ages
can be determined, it is not susceptible to diagenetic alteration in oxic
sediments, and has been shown to record reliably seawater Sr isotope
composition; it seems to be a very suitable mineral for this study. Thus, the
objectives of this research are: (I) to confirm that marine barite is a reliable
recorder of seawater sulfate S and O isotope values, (II) to construct detailed,
continuous, well dated seawater sulfate S and O isotope records over the past 65
m.y., (III) to construct high resolution S and O isotope records during three
special time intervals (1) the Messinian event, (2) the Cretaceous-Tertiary
boundary , and (3) the distinct minimum in 34S near the Albian-Aptian boundary,
using well dated deep-sea sediments. The refined S and O isotope curves of
seawater sulfate will be related to the oceanic 13C record of carbonates and
interpreted in terms of the processes controlling the dynamic balance between
the oceanic S and C input and output fluxes. The role of increased weathering
fluxes, especially from the Himalayan uplift over the past -40 m.y., will also
be evaluated by correlating data from this research with the existing 12C/12C
and 87Sr/86Sr seawater data for this time interval. The emphasis of the work
will be on barite that will be separated from sediments of Holocene to 65Ma age,
at about 1 to 2 million year intervals. Barite samples from the Holocene to 38
Ma have previously been analyzed by us for their Sr-isotope composition. For the
three "special" geologic time intervals higher resolution sampling will be
carried out at an interval of about 0.5 m.y. The habit of the barite crystals
that will be studied by SEM, and Sr- isotope composition of the separated
barites will be tests for possible diagenesis. Continuous records of seawater
sulfate S and O isotope values, by analyses of marine barite, and their
correlation with existing high resolution oceanic C and Sr isotope age curves,
should help to unravel the climate-tectonic coupling during these three
important geological events.