* 9628807
* A Design Methodology for Architectural Glazing Systems to   Resist Windborne Debris Impacts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Richard Behr, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* John Scalzi
* 08/31/2001
* USD 303,020.00

9628807 Behr The vulnerability of building envelopes have been amply
demonstrated during recent extreme wind events which resulted in damage to
building interiors, loss of building functions and great replacement/repair
costs. Laminated glass units have shown significant promise for glazing systems
that resist windborne debris impacts. A computer-based design methodology will
be developed to predict the probability of an inner glass ply fracture in a
given laminated glass unit under impacts from a design missile traveling at a
prescribed speed. To accomplish this, a robust structural mechanics-based
predictive model for laminated glass units with polyvinyl butyral interlayers
will be developed and verified by means of comprehensive laboratory tests.
Project deliverables will include a computerized design package that can be used
to design and develop cost-effective glazing systems that exhibit "sacrificial
ply behavior," i.e., the outer glass ply may be fractured, or "sacrificed" to
windborne debris impacts, but the interlayer/inner glass ply composite is
sufficiently resilient to protect the inner glass ply from fracturing. Thus, the
integrity of the building envelop is preserved during the windstorm. This
project will involve a team of civil engineers, mechanical engineers and
statisticians. Project results will provide the research community with needed
data, will have a significant positive impact on mitigating building envelope
damage due to severe windstorms, and will benefit building owners and building
insurers in the United States.