* 9628655
* RIMI:  Enhancing Minority Power Research in the Development of Advanced Tools for the Emerging Needs of Power Systems
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2002
* James Johnson, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Roosevelt Y. Johnson
* 08/31/2002
* USD 250,000.00

Momoh Howard University HRD 9628655 Howard University has been involved in power
systems research for over a decade and is now among the top five schools in the
United States for power research, attracting minority students (both
undergraduate and graduate), faculty and postdoctoral research associates from
across the country as well as from abroad. Recent outreach programs involving
high school and pre-college minority students have created a strong awareness
and interest in electrical engineering concepts. The Enhancement of Minority
Power Research in the Development of Advanced Tools for Emerging needs of Power
Systems is designed to meet the challenges of today's power industry with the
objective of delivering an economic reliable power supply and enhancing research
education for minority students an faculty. The following tasks outlined in this
proposal build upon our current strengths: (a) Develop a program to build
research of current interest to the US economy. (b) Develop a program to
attract, retain and expose minority students (high school, college, graduate and
postdoctoral fellows and faculty and visiting professors. (c) Develop and
maintain a first-class research center with modem state-of-the-art equipment.
(d) Conduct an outreach program via seminars and other activities for high
school and pre-college students. The research component of the proposal focuses
on investigating two of the top national needs in power systems as identified by
the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), Department of Energy (DOE) and the
National Science Foundation (NSF). The two topics are in the area of generation
and transmission planning and distribution automation. In the generation and
transmission planning area, two major priorities are identified- incorporating
unit commitment and transmission constraints in the medium term operations
planning models or the production costing mod els, and combining unit
commitment, optimal power flow and power brokerage functions in an integrated
environment for analysis of power scheduling and trading. A multi-objective
optimization-based dynamic security-constrained rescheduling model is proposed
as a means to guard against potential instability against dynamic contingencies.
In the area of distribution automation two key problems, automatic fault
location and network reconfiguration. have been selected. The core research
involves designing and implementing fault location algorithms using a hybrid
expert system/fuzzy logic approach. The network reconfiguration modeling
involves use of the interior- point-based mixed-integer-programming optimization
algorithms coupled with artificial neural network and a rule-based system for
performing switching operations, VAR control and load curtailment. The
Electrifcal Engineering department s educational curriculum ensures proper
dissemination of our finds through seminars, visiting scientists program and
short courses. This proposal will help increase the representation of minority
engineers in the field of power engineering by increasing the number of minority
students entering graduate and undergraduate programs. It will help develop the
infrastructure, thereby providing graduate and undergraduate students state-of-
the-art equipment for conducting research. It will assist minority research
faculty and staff in conducting and assisting minority students in high level
research. Finally, it will provide solutions to top priority research needs of
the power industry.