* 9628486
* Using 238 U-Series Disequilibrium to Constrain              Time-Scales of Rhyolite Generation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Mark Reagan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/1999
* USD 90,000.00

9628486 Reagan It is important from a volcanic hazards mitigation point of view
to understand the length of time needed to generate silicic magmas and for them
to accumulate into significant volumes. Radiometric dating of mineral separates
from magmas can directly provide information about the history of mineral
phases, which in turn can provide information about the history of the magmas.
The requested funding will be used to complete ongoing studies of the rates of
rhyolite generation and accumulation for the Crater Lake and Mount Katmai-
Novarupta volcanic centers by analyzing whole volcanic rocks and mineral
separates for U-series disequilibrium and Th isotope ratios. About half of the
is project will focus on the Crater Lake magmatic system. Andesitic and
rhyolitic tephras associated with the climactic eruption will be analyzed for U
and Th concentrations and isotopic compositions. The rest of the effort of this
project will focus on the Mount Katmai-Novarupta magmatic system, which ejected
rhyolite, dacite, andesite, and lithic tephra, and a rhyolite dome in 1912. To
determine the residence times of the three 1912 magmas and to formulate a better
understanding of their genetic interrelationships, whole rocks and mineral
separates from the three magma types erupted in 1912 and some associated lavas
will be analyzed for U, Th, and Ra nuclide abundances and Ba concentrations. To
properly determine the time-scales of evolution for the silicic magmas studied
here, numerical techniques will be developed to model U-series and Th isotope
values in magmas, suspended minerals, and crystal-liquid mushes. These
techniques will be designed to acccount for crystal fractionation, magma mixing,
assimilation of old country rock (including incomplete dissolution of crystals),
and assimilation of crystal fractionation products from the same magmatic
system, with parameters adjusted as appropriate based on U-series data,
petrography, and whole rock and phase composition data available from other stud
ies.