* 9628345
* Collaborative Research: Tropical Taphonomy and Porewater Geochemistry: Comparative Analysis of Molluscan Preservation in Siliciclastic and Carbonate Sediments, Western Carribean
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Susan Kidwell, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2000
* USD 165,000.00

9628345 Kidwell The post-mortem fate of molluscan carbonate is influenced by
processes of biological and geochemical recycling, but little is known about the
rates and selectivities of these processes in the tropics, nor what their net
effect on the surviving fossil record might be. Understanding these phenomena is
pre-requisite both in using taphonomic damage to reconstruct paleoenvironmental
conditions (e.g. taphofacies criteria) and in controlling for bias in
paleoecologic, biogeographic, and evolutionary analyses. These issues also have
geochemical significance, because Sr isotope compositions of shell material may
be affected by compositional changes driven by organic matter respiration and by
carbonate and silicate mineral dissolution in pore waters. This proposed
collaborative field study of tropical siliciiclastic and carbon sediments of the
western Caribbean will focus primarily on the San Blas Archipelago of Panama,
and secondarily on the Los Cochinos shelf of Honduras; it builds on a successful
taphonomic pilot study in the Bocas del Toro area of Panama, and extensive pore-
water work in carbonate sediments of Florida Bay. This research will produce the
first information on taphonomic patterns and processes in tropical
siliciclastics, which constitute about half of modern shelf areas in low
latitudes, and will permit the first test of carbonate reactivies and pore-water
evolution in both Fe-rich (siliciclastic) and Fe-poor sediments (carbonates)
within a single region. The research will quantify: 1. post-mortem damage on
dead bivalve shells as a function of physical environment (e.g., water depth,
grain size, sedimentation rate as determined by Pb-210), including frequency of
boring, encrustation, rounding, surface degradation, and fragmentation; 2. post-
mortem damage as a function of pore-water chemistry, particularly carbonic acid,
major and minor element, and sulfur system parameters that govern rates of
carbonate dissolution and recrystallization; samples will also permi t
determination of stable isotope (C &amp; S) and 87Sr/86Sr compositions in pore-
waters to assess how pore-water chemistry influences the isotopic signatures of
shell material with and without microstructural alteration; 3. selectivity in
taphonomic destruction as a function of taxonomy, life habit, mineralogy and
microstructure of bivalves, and the importance of these factors relative to
environmental forces in determining geographic variation in death assemblage
condition and bias; 4. environmental variation in scales of time-averaging,
stratigraphic disordering, and relationships between shell damage and shell age-
since-death (i.e., test for a taphonomic clock), especially as a function of
sedimentation rate, dissolution rate, composition of local shell input, and
other environmentally arrayed variables; and 5. rates and pathways of shell
degradation under specific conditions, using experimental arrays of shells
deployed over periods up to 3 years; this a corroborative means of testing for
selecitivities in and controls on shell destruction, with implications for
compositional fidelity of fossil assemblages.