* 9628749
* Support of a Regional Microprobe Facility at Woods Hole     Oceanographic Institution
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Graham Layne, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 02/29/2000
* USD 553,107.00

9628749 Shimizu This grant provides $538,966 as partial support of costs of
salaries, equipment and supplies associated with the continued operation of the
North East Regional Ion Microprobe Facility (NERIMF) at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution over the next three years. Previous support of this
facility was solely for the operation and maintenance of a Cameca ims 3f ion
microprobe. Support for the development of operational techniques on their newly
acquired,state-of-the-art, Cameca ims 1270 ion microprobe (EAR-9214641) is
included in this awards for facility support. The two-machine operation will be
under the direct supervision of Nobumichi Shimizu at Woods Hole but the ims 1270
was purchased through contributions from a partnership of institutions
including, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), the American Museum of
Natural History (AMNH), Brown University, Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory
(LDEO), the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Rennselaer
Polytechnic Institute (RPI) so that early technique development on the ims 1270
will include PI's from these institutions as well as WHOI. This award represents
a modest increase (ca 9%) over their current level of support for operation and
maintenance of the ims 3f, yet development of techniques utilizing the ims 1270
will be the primary thrust of this group over the next three years.
Specifically, outside user access to the ims 1270 will be restricted for the
first 27 months to allow the partnership to pursue technique developments
including, in situ measurement of U/Pb ratios in zircons for geochronologic
investigations, measurement of isotopic ratios of elements in the U-series
disequilibria in Mid-Ocean Ridge Basalts as indicators of the petrologic history
of these magmas and high precision measurements of the Sr/Ca ratio recorded in
corals at very high resolutions (sub-annual to possibly sub-weekly) as proxies
of paleo sea surface temperatures in paleoclimatologic studies. A dditional work
will focus on the development of standards for both U/Pb zircon geochronology
and for trace elemental analyses. Analyses of trace element ratios in biogenic
carbonates at micro-scale spatial resolution will allow unprecedented
determination of records of global change. While the ims 1270,due to its high
mass resolution and high transmission is uniquely suited to studies of U-series
isotopic ratios as well as high spatial resolution elemental analyses of
environmentally important trace elements (i.e. Cu, Zn, Pb) in biogenic
carbonates, the ims 3f will continue to provide for the analytical determination
of trace elemental abundances in geological samples where the high sensitivity
of the ims 1270 is not critical. ***