* 9628065
* Continued Geochronologic, Paleomagnetic, and Rock-Magnetic  Studies of the Parana-Etendeka Flood Volcanic Province
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 08/31/1999
* USD 170,000.00

9628065 Renne The proposed research will provide fundamental data toward
clarifying the spatial-temporal evolution of flood volcanism in the Parana-
Etendeka province (PEP) of southwestern Africa and eastern South America. The
PEP is one of the largest continental flood volcanic provinces known, and data
acquired herein will be relevant to broader questions about the origin of flood
volcanism. Relations between volcanism, the Tristan da Cunha hotspot, and Early
Cretaceous rifting of the South Atlantic will be elucidated by high-precision
geochronologic and paleomagnetic and rock magnetic work that will be done in
connection with ongoing stratigraphic and petrologic studies. New and detailed
magnetostratigraphy will be established for volcanic sections in the Etendeka
Province of Namibia as well as the Parana Province of Uruguay. Refined and well-
dated apparent polar wander paths (APWP's) will be derived for both South
America and southern Africa over the interval of 135-120 Ma; the APWP's will
quantify rotation due to asymmetric opening of the South Atlantic and will be
used to refine the trace of the Tristan hotspot. 40Ar/39Ar and U/Pb dating will
be used to constrain with greater certainty any migratory trends in volcanism.
Correlations between individual flows across the Atlantic will be tested
paleomagnetically and rock-magnetically; a corollary of such correlation will be
a high-precision basis for pre-drift reconstruction of western Gondwanaland.
Determination of volcanic flow directions (constraining locations of sources)
will be attempted using anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility (AMS) from widely
separated flow sequences, particularly units being tested for Transatlantic
correlation.