* 9628382
* Collaborative Research: Interbasinal Applications of Newly- Resolved Middle to Late Cambrian Sr Isotope Stratigraphy:   North American Cordilleran Margin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/13/1998
* David Osleger, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 08/13/1998
* USD 53,232.00

9628382 Osleger The proposed research has one primary objective: to carry out a
coordinated sequence stratigraphic and Sr isotope study of Middle to lower Upper
Cambrian Carbonates exposed in the southern Canadian Rocky Mountains. This
project is a natural extension of related work on coeval strata in the southern
Great Basin that integrated a genetic model of deposition with Sr isotope
stratigraphy. The Great Basin research has resulted in 1) considerable
refinement of a portion of the most poorly-defined interval of the Phanerozoic
Sr isotope seawater curve, 2) evidence that the highest seawater 87Sr/86Sr
values over the past 2 b.y. likely occurred in latest Middle to earliest Late
Cambrian oceans, 3) potential for enhanced chronostratigraphic resolution in
this time interval, 4) suggestion of a mechanistic link between eustasy and
seawater 87Sr/86Sr during greenhouse times, and 5) potential for placing
constraints on the timing and magnitude of Cambrian orogenic events. The
ultimate goal of the research laid out in this proposal is to perform an
interbasinal test to evaluate the possible connection between eustasy and
seawater 87Sr/86Sr during greenhouse times. This collaborative proposal is being
submitted in conjunction with a parallel proposal to the VPW Program at NSF that
lays out plans for completing and extending the temporal range of the research
in the Great Basin. The methods that will be used to carry out the proposed work
involved two phases. First, three sections with the most complete exposure and
highest degree of biostratigraphic control will be measured in the southern
Canadian Rockies, focusing on the Mt. Whyte through lower Lyell Formations. Data
from the three sections will be interpreted using the fundamental premises of
sequence stratigraphy, with the resulting genetic model used to construct an
accommodation history. After all available biostratigraphic information is
integrated into the genetic stratigraphy, correlations with the coeval Bonanza
King Format ion will be attempted to assess the degree of synchroneity between
accommodation events. Of the three measured sections, the one section with the
highest petrographic and geochemical analysis of collected samples. All samples
will be examined by plane-light, cathodoluminescence, and epifluorscence for
evidence of recrystallization, preservation of microfabrics and microstructures,
luminescence characteristics, and presence of noncarbonate inclusions which
could contribute radiogenic 87Sr during sample dissolution. Samples that meet
petrographic criteria will be analyzed for geochemical indicators to assess
their state of diagenetic modification as an additional prerequisite to
selection of least-altered components for Sr isotope analysis. Finally, samples
will be run through pretreatment techniques that have been refined as a result
of previous testing on samples from the southern Great Basin. The ultimate goal
of the proposed interbasinal project is to evaluate a new model that suggests a
mechanistic link between eustasy and seawater 87Sr/86Sr during greenhouse times.
Earlier work in the southern Great Basin suggests a correlation between the Sr
isotope stratigraphy and long-term transgressions and regressions that affect
the amount of continental surface area available for weathering. This model, as
well as the secular seawater isotope curve, need to be tested in a completely
different basin to assess their scientific validity. If the results from the
southern Canadian Rocky Mountains confirm the temporal seawater 87Sr/86Sr trend
and the connection between eustasy and seawater 87Sr/86Sr, then an entirely new
level of resolution in the Sr isotope curve for Paleozoic time will have been
attained. This may spur further research into searching for trends in the
Paleozoicseawater 87Sr/86Sr curve at the 106 year scale that may be related to
eustatic variation. On a broader scale, the 87Sr/86Sr data from this integrated
study will contribute critical information regarding the widespread Ca mbrian
orogenesis associated with the assembly of Gondwana, Cambrian biotic radiations
and extinctions, and perhaps about the extensive development of Cambrian passive
margin depositional sequences.