* 9628116
* Time-Constant-Based Traffic Control and Multiplexing        for High-Speed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Ioannis Stavrakakis, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1999
* USD 258,608.00

Recent technological advances have lead to the deployment of high-speed networks
which are capable of supporting a large number of applications in an integrated
fashion. In this environment, the time required for the transmission of a fixed
size information block (slot) has been constantly decreasing. A direct
consequence of a shrinking slot is that time intervals (in seconds) increase in
size, when measured in network time units (slots). As a result, time intervals
which were considered to be too small in the past seem larger and -- for that
matter -- their interpretation and associated functionalities may need to be
reconsidered. In the shrinking slot environment time is becoming a commodity
which may be used more effectively in the design of high-speed networks. The
proposed research will be focused on the development of traffic management
schemes which incorporate rather explicitly the significant time-constants (in
slots) associated with the traffic generation process and QoS descriptors of the
diversified applications in a high speed networking environment. Both,
traditional computer-data-type and real time applications will be considered. In
the first part of the proposed research, a Time-Constant-Based Call Admission
and Traffic Control (TC-based CATC) framework is presented, for controllable
(or, ABR/UBR in ATM Forum's classification) applications. This proposal is based
on the positive impact of a large time-constant associated with a controllable
application, on the effectiveness of a feedback-based traffic control scheme;
this impact has been observed in preliminary results. The proposed class of TC-
based traffic control policies can be viewed as a class of ``generalized''
adaptive, rate-based traffic control policies, since classical adaptive, rate-
based policies are included in this large class. As a result, there is great
potential to substantially improve on the performance achieved by the past
schemes. The TC-based CATC scheme is expected to provide for a faster response
to bandwidth availability fluctuations at different time-scales, by employing
distinct mechanisms for the different time-scales. It is easy to argue that the
proposed TC-based policies are scalable. In the second part of the proposed
research, multiplexing schemes for real-time applications are considered. These
schemes attempt to preserve time-constants of importance associated with these
applications and/or take advantage of time-constant-based Quality of Service
requirement, to maximize resource utilization. Specific proposals include the
integration of the regulation and scheduling functions to improve performance by
coordinating their functionality, as well as ``reinvent'' statistical
multiplexing for real-time applications by taking advantage od the increased
room for traffic manipulation in time, as the network speed increases and QoS-
defining time-constants increase. Finally, a major part of the proposed research
will be dedicated to the study of a number of interesting problems arising from
the above proposals, which are becoming increasingly relevant to the broad high
speed networking environment as the network time unit decreases.