* 9628675
* Rates of Glacial Erosion in Southern Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Bernard Hallet, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2001
* USD 388,228.00

Hallet 9628675 The research bears on an outstanding issue of broad scientific
interest: the rate of glacial erosion in a tectonically active area, and its
implications for the development of mountain ranges as dictated by the interplay
of tectonics, climate, and erosion. The Bering Glacier section of the proposed
study also promises to yield valuable new information on rapid glacial over-
riding of sediments and its implication regarding the dynamics of glaciers and
the stability of calving glaciers. Objectives are: to determine current erosion
rates in the extensive (&gt;5000 km2) and tectonically active region drained by
Bering Glacier, including the Mt. St. Elias area with unsurpassed relief from
sea level, by monitoring sediment accumulation in the proglacial Vitus Lake
complex. to examine considerable new data recently obtained by ACCRETE
researchers in the fjords and inland passages of SE Alaska. These data promise
to yield valuable information about Quaternary and Holocene sediment yields over
a broad, heavily glacierized area that can be compared to longer term regional
exhumation rates known to be high. to compile readily available data from other
SE Alaska glaciers to improve the definition and understanding of factors
controlling regional rates of glacial erosion and sediment transfer to fjords.
to develop a quantitative framework for exploring the topographic and geodynamic
implications of rapid glacial erosion and sediment transfer through a continuum
mechanical model of crustal convergence coupled with a simple abstraction of
erosion and sediment transfer by glaciers. The multifaceted research is deemed
feasible, within the five-year proposed duration of the project: it is a group
effort involving four established researchers and is founded on considerable
data already available. It involves Lew Hunter of the U.S. Army Cold Regions
Research and Engineering Laboratory, and independently funded USGS researchers,
Bruce Molnia and Paul Carslon, as well as principal inves tigator Bernard Hallet
and research assistant Yann Merrand (both at the University of Washington). All
members will participate in field work. The collective expertise of our team is
ideally suited for the proposed work; it emanates from considerable field
experience in fjords and coastal waters and on glaciers in Alaska, and from
quantitative studies of glacial erosion and calving-margin processes, process
geomorphology and geodynamics. We stress that the NSF resources requested herein
will strongly leveraged by the collaboration with the USGS and CRREL. Salaries
for Molnia and Carlson, and for an electronics technician to support the seismic
work, are covered by the USGS. Other USGS contributions include access to past
photographic, seismic, and other records; a well equipped base camp; and
assistance from volunteers, including undergraduate students, sponsored by the
Merit Corp. Limited salary for Hunter permits us not only to draw on his
expertise and to include him as an active member of our research team, but also
enables us to tap additional expertise at CRREL including Daniel Lawson, to use
CRREL editorial, graphics/photography facilities, and to borrow some field
equipment.