* 9628857
* Electric Field Effects on Excited State and Electron        Transfer Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Steven Boxer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 05/31/2000
* USD 430,003.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research by Dr. Steven G. Boxer of the Chemistry Department, Stanford
University, for investigation of the photophysics and reaction dynamics of
coordination complexes in applied electric fields. A Stark spectrometer based on
a step-scan FTIR will be developed for use in obtaining high signal-to-noise
virbrational Stark effect spectra in the mid-IR region and electronic Stark
spectra for the broad transitions characteristic of coordination compounds. Some
of the specific problems to be investigated by Stark spectroscopy include:
electronic coupling in class II mixed valence complexes and metal-bridged
prophyrin dimers; bond anharmonicity in carbonyl and C-F stretches; degree of
delocalization in push-pull polyenes (used in non-linear optical devices)
imposed by large internal electric fields that result from the attachment of
strong electron donors and acceptors; effect of applied electric fields on
excited state proton transfer reactions in 3-hydroxyflavone. Interactions
between molecular fragments separated by relatively long and chemically
interesting spacers will be investigated using Stark effect spectroscopy.
Electronic or vibrational transitions are affected by applied electric fields
and measurement of this effect provides quantitative information on the
magnitude and direction of charge displacement. Electric fields can also be used
to manipulate the rates of electron and proton transfer reactions. The results
are not only of fundamental interest but also potentially applicable to the
development of non-linear optical materials for use in the electronics industry.