* 9628215
* Environmental and Taxonomic Control of Growth, Morphology,  Taphonomy, and Sediment Production in Living Stalked        Crinoids (Echinodermata)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Charles Messing, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 49,786.00

9628215 Messing Stalked crinoids represent a major component of living
assemblages and contribute substantially to modern skeletal sediments along the
western flank of the Little Bahama Bank. Three aspects of stalked crinoid
biology and taphonomy are examined in order to better understand the processes
and rates of production, and post-mortem modifications of modern crinoidal
sediments, as follows: 1) How do growth rates among different species and within
species vary at different depths and under different environmental conditions?
Growth rates are measured directly via proven methods of tagging and recovery
that permit in situ maintenance of specimens. 2) To what extent do depth and
environmental conditions control crinoid morphology? Many features currently
applied to crinoid species diagnoses and phylogenetic hypotheses vary
ontogenetically, ecophenotypically, geographically and/or bathymetrically. Clear
understanding and recognition of crinoid species are critical to
biostratigraphic analyses and paleoecological reconstruction and hypothesis-
testing. Application of previously successful tag-and-recovery experiments will
permit specimens to be transplanted to different habitats and depths. 3) How do
morphological and ecological variations among and within taxa affect taphonomic
processes such as patterns of stalk disarticulation, skeletal sediment
production rates, and the nature of skeletal grains contributed to sediments,
and how can this information be applied to reconstruction of fossil assemblages?
A combination of anatomic and petrographic thin sections and scanning electron
microscopy of living and experimentally decomposed crinoid stalks, and skeletal
grains retrieved from sediments are used to examine ligament anatomy, the
pattern of ligament decay and the development of cements relative to increasing
stalk degradation. The study organisms have a fossil record dating to the
Triassic. As such, these modern assemblages represent an excellent analogue for
better understan ding paleoecological processes and interpreting ancient
crinoidal deposits. The aspects of crinoid ecology and taphonomy proposed for
study are thoroughly interconnected and represent a logical extension of the
successful research program carried out under prior NSF funding at previously
established study sites.