* 9628058
* Study of Feedback Congestion Control Techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Byung Kim, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1999
* USD 196,521.00

Feedback-based congestion control schemes become an integral part of the
connectionless ABR (Available Bit Rate) service class in ATM networks. The major
objective of the proposed research is to build a theoretical foundation to
feedback congestion control schemes. The basis of the foundation is the fixed-
point model, which captures the feed-back feature of ABR congestion control
schemes in a system of delay differential equations and produce fixed-point
constant solutions in terms of the source cell rates and the buffer lengths.
lamely, we consider a broad class of schemes which can produce a stable buffer
length even when sources always try to transmit at their maximum rates. Analyses
of the fixed point model in the context of ABR feedback control schemes have
generated a number of results regarding stabilities of fixed-point solutions.
The proposed research will first compare the stability region of parameter space
derived from the delay differential equations with that obtained by discrete
simulation techniques. We are interested in effects of incorporating details of
control protocols in simulation on resulting changes in the stability region.
Besides, the fixed point model will be investigated in the environments where
ABR bandwidth changes in time as the number of CBR and VBR connections changes.
Since the fixed-point model is constructed in a general context, application of
the model to several control theoretic strategies (such as a proportional plus
derivative control) will be investigated. When a congestion develops (either due
to a new active ABR source or due to a reduced ABR bandwidth), buffer lengths
increase before they stabilize to a new steady-state buffer length. Since buffer
transients are inevitable, we will investigate strategies that can control the
buffer transients in a predictable manner. We will first characterize transients
in terms of bounds: the maximum overshoot in buffer lengths, the rise time until
the buffer length reaches its maximum, and the settling time for the buffer
length to reach its new steady-state value. According to the fixed-point model,
relationships between the set of parameters and the transient bounds will be
investigated. The relationships are to be studied in increasingly complex
network configurations.