* 9628299
* RUI:  Predicting Transport Through Heterogeneous Facies     Assemblages:  Geostatistical Anatomy of Buried-Valley       Aquifiers, II
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Robert Ritzi, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1998
* USD 66,136.00

9628299 Ritzi Contaminant problems have created the need to understand how
hydraulic conductivity (K) is distributed in aquifer systems. Extreme-value
pathways exert a dominant physical control on contaminant transport, and thus
the boundary between high-K and low-K materials (hydrofacies) must be
quantified. Although the exact geometry of the hydrofacies can only be
determined by a prohibitive amount of subsurface information, stochastic methods
such as conditional indicator simulation provide a way to compute a number of
realizations of hydrofacies distributions that honor available data at their
locations, with specified functions for the principal directions of spatial
correlation of the hydrofacies, the scale of correlation in these directions,
and the proportions. Running transport simulations using a large number of these
realizations and examining the central tendency and variance of simulated
contaminant travel times, or the simulated contaminant pathways, can give
insight into how contaminants will move through the real system. These
simulations can also be incorporated into a formal decision-analysis framework.
However, the field data at a specific site commonly are insufficient for the
purpose of defining the spatial correlation and proportions of the hydrofacies
directly. Therefore, analog sites that are data rich need to be studied in order
to find models for spatial correlation and proportions of hydrofacies that, on
the basis of similar geology, can be transferred to data-poor sites. Indeed, one
of the research needs identified by the National Research Council in
Alternatives for Ground Water Cleanup, is the development of statistical models
representing common geologic environments, which can be used to assess the
variability of aquifer properties and thereby improve the success of aquifer
restoration (NRC, 1994, p. 73). The proposed research will develop statistical
models for aquifer properties in buried-valley aquifers, which occur across the
central a nd western glaciated plains of North America and are vital to the
water resources of the region. In such glacially derived aquifers, it is common
to have low-K facies (e.g., till or lacustrine clay) juxtaposed with high-K
facies (e.g., sand and gravel outwash). This is a renewal proposal. In the prior
phase, several locations were studied in a buried-valley aquifer system located
in Ohio, with the successful development of models for the hydrofacies
distribution, proportions, principal directions of spatial correlation, and
correlation scale in these directions. These statistical models were linked to
the deposition processes that created the aquifer system, and therefore are
likely to be applicable to other locations in the aquifer, and to other aquifer
systems where similar depositional processes have operated. However, hydrofacies
models are most useful when based on the features of numerous well-studied
examples. The generality and usefulness of quantitative geostatistical models
will likewise increase with their numbers, if more data-rich analogs are
examined. One goal of this renewal proposal is to develop new geostatistical
models for a buried-valley aquifer system in Indiana. However, the main focus of
this work will be to critically evaluate methods of linking spatial correction
of hydrologic parameters and geologic structure. The transition probability has
been shown to be an even more interpretable representation of spatial
correlation than the variography used in the prior phase. Thus the transition
probability may provide a new tool for linking spatial correlation and
deposition processes. The innovative aspect of this work is that it will provide
a way to test the hypothesis that generic hydrofacies models can be developed
for a specific class of aquifers. This will be the first comparison of spatial
correlation of hydrogeologic parameters among aquifers, and is part of the
longer-term goal of developing a catalogue of quantitative hydrofacies. ??