* 9628973
* Quantum Dot Lasers for Long Wavelength Radiation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Jasprit Singh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 07/31/1999
* USD 462,181.00

9628973 Bhattacharya There is a need for long wavelength, or terahertz, sources
for a variety of applications. In general such sources have been realized with
small bandgap semiconductors and more recently with intersubband transitions in
quantum wells. In general, if intra-band population inversion is to be created
in a quantum well by carrier injection at the barrier energy, it is necessary
that the electron intra-band energy relaxation times are long. Additionally the
bandedge electron-hole recombination times should be short. The use of sub-2
dimensional structures (quantum dots) allows us to increase the intra-band
energy relaxation time from about a picosecond for bulk or quasi-2 dimensional
systems to several hundred picoseconds at room temperatures. Furthermore, by
placing these structures in a high coherent photon density optical cavity, it is
possible to decrease the bandedge electron-hole recombination times through
stimulated emission. Our theoretical studies show that strong population
inversion and gain are possible at room temperature with such systems. We will
carry out careful experimental studies to fabricate quantum dot structures to
realize these concepts. We have already demonstrated the fabrication of buried
quantum dot waveguide structures. We expect the devices to produce radiation in
the range of 10^13 to 10^14 Hz. ***