* 9628260
* Microanalysis of Oxygen Isotope Ratios in Zircon from       Metamorphosed Igneous Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* John Valley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2000
* USD 250,266.00

9628260 Valley This research is a continuation of work to develop and apply new
techniques for micro-analysis of stable isotope ratios. The PI will analyze
oxygen isotope ratios in zircons from metamorphosed igneous rocks of the
Grenville and Superior Provinces of N. America. In the Grenville, one goal of
the zircon research will be to map the limits of a domain of high igneous (18O
values for anorthosite-suite magmatism, believed to represent anomalous
conditions in the deep crust. In the Superior Province, preliminary analysis of
zircons show significant differences in (18O that appear to correlate to the
amounts of crustal contamination. Limited field work in key areas and analysis
of co-existing mineral will test the uniqueness or generality of the data.
Individual zircons will be analyzed by ion probe for zonation or inheritance of
(18O and by electron probe for zonation and alteration. Preliminary studies
suggest that distinct domains and (18O differences will be found and that the
analysis of zircons will have broad significance for the magnetic evolution of
critical portions of the Canadian Shield. This may lead to new criteria for
assessing the tectonic assembly of the Grenville, or various accretionary plate
tectonic processes that are now proposed for crust formation in the Superior
Province.