* 9628218
* Compilation and Automatic Optimization of Network Protocol Implementations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Ron Cytron, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 420,063.00

Network software is hard to design, implement, debug, and maintain. This basic
problem is compounded by heterogeneity and the need for high performance.
Heterogeneity results in multiplying the amount of networking software that must
be developed and maintained. To improve performance, networking software is
often hand-crafted in an operating system kernel, where software is particularly
hard to debug and maintain. Emerging high-speed networking technology, coupled
with next generation multimedia applications, is resulting in increased demand
for high performance and extremely flexible networking software. A fundamental
theme of this proposal is that advances in network software can only be achieved
by an approach that simultaneously considers programming ease, platform
diversity, and performance. This proposal investigates the use of compiler
technology to rapidly prototype and automatically optimize complex protocol
software. The result is network software that is easier to write, more portable,
and more maintainable. Yet, with the appropriate automatic optimizations, the
performance of such implementations should compare favorably to the performance
of hand-crafted implementations. The first part of our proposal concerns
techniques for automatically optimizing network software to achieve Gigabit link
speeds. This involves inventing new optimization techniques (e.g., fusing
together individual message demultiplexing definitions into efficient
demultiplexing code), automating existing optimization paradigms (e.g., header
prediction and address caching), and extending existing work on automated
optimization techniques. Our plans call for building on the existing theory
underlying optimizing compilers to unify various ad hoc techniques, and to
provide a point of departure for producing new optimization techniques. The
second part of our proposal involves a framework that integrates our
optimization techniques to support rapid prototyping of efficient ne tworking
software. We enable protocol code to be developed without undue attention paid
to low-level wire data formats; operating system specific mechanisms for
demultiplexing, synchronization, or error handling. This allows an extremely
compact protocol description that is then compiled and optimized by our
framework to a wide range of target environments. These environments include a
simulator, application-level network interfaces, and shared-memory
multiprocessor platforms.