* 9628513
* 10th International Conference on Domain Decomposition       Methods in Sciences and Engineering. To be Held at the      University of Colorado at Boulder, in the Summer of 1997
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Charbel Farhat, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 01/31/1998
* USD 30,000.00

9628513 Farhat The University of Colorado at Boulder will host the Tenth
International Conference on Domain Decomposition Methods in Sciences and
Engineering. The Conference is scheduled to be held in summer 1997 on the Campus
of the University of Colorado at Boulder. The conference organizers are
Professor Charbel Farhat from the Department of Aerospace Engineering Science at
the University of Colorado Boulder, Professor Xiao Chuan Cai from the Department
of Computer Science at the University of Colorado at Boulder, and Professor Jan
Mandel from the Department of Mathematics at the University of Colorado at
Denver. The profile of the organizers corresponds to the diverse constituencies
of the Domain Decomposition field. The conference is designed to promote the
interaction between mathematicians, numerical analysts, physical scientists,
engineers, and computer scientists. For this tenth meeting, the focus theme will
be High Performance Computing. The conference organizers plan to devote a
significant amount of effort on attracting the participation scientists not only
from academia and government research laboratories, but also from the computing,
simulation software, and key engineering industries. Support will be provided
for the active participation of graduate students who will benefit from exposing
their research to a diversified audience of potential employers, and from
keeping up-to-date with the latest developments in this field.***