* 9629662
* CAA: Molecular Systematic Studies of Selected Genera in     the Red Algal Family Rhodomelaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Nilda Aponte, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1997
* USD 56,000.00

Aponte 9629662 This research is aimed at characterization of selected species of
the broadly distributed, species rich and pharmaceutically important red algal
genus Laurencia. This study also is aimed at elucidation of phylogenetic
relationships among species of Laurencia by molecular analyses and assessment of
the distribution of Laurencia species by comparing molecular data obtained from
specimens assigned to the same taxa from various geographical regions. Species
characterizations will focus on Caribbean species and on species with
cosmopolitan or pantropical distributions. The study will also address the
phylogenetic relationships between members of the genus Laurencia, its closely
related genus Osmundea and their mutual parasite Janczewsia. Laurencia and
Osmundea are ecologically important genera that include numerous species whose
identification is extremely difficult due to morphological plasticity. The
proposed study will provide insight to the relevance of the morphological
characters used to distinguish species in this group of algae as well as help to
clarify the validity of morphological/reproductive characters used to segregate
genera and subgenera among Laurencieae. Inclusion of Janczewsia as a common
parasite of both genera will provide possible insights into the evolution of
algal parasite-host relationships, and will be assessed by a combined approach
of comparative morphology and molecular studies. Molecular characterizations of
species and phylogenetic relationships at the level of genus, subgenus and
species will be inferred from the analysis of nucleotide sequences from specific
portions of the genome, i.e. nuclear and chloroplast genes. Molecular data will
be analyzed by parsimony methods and phylogenetic trees will be generated.