* 9629967
* NSF Conference on Unbundled Power Quality Services in the   Power Industry.  To be Held at the University of Florida,   November 10-12, l996.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Alexander Domijan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 15,000.00

9629967 Domijan The objective of the proposed "NSF Conference on Unbundled Power
Quality Services in the Power Industry," is to provide an open forum for
faculty, students, researchers, utility executives, managers and practicing
engineers, regulators and business professionals to discuss the alternatives of
providing unbundled power quality services to customers. This forum will include
a comparison of cost to benefit of alternative plans and also, to review the
basic state of technology and engineering in this area. It is planned that this
will be a recurring annual meeting rotated between the University of Florida and
the Arizona State University. The first conference is tentatively scheduled on
November 10-12, 1996. The methods to be employed in development of the NSF
conference will be the creation of a workshop atmosphere that will be used to
identify the main research areas in unbundled power quality services, such as:
industrial needs, technology, measurement and billing, competition, and
standards. The topics to be discussed in the proposed conference are significant
to the electric utility industry, which is currently undergoing revolutionary
changes in the way it is structured and the services it provides. Unbundled
power quality services are at the heart of these changes to the power industry.
***