* 9629829
* Collaborative Research:  An Experimental Study of Fire Ecology in Relation to the Red-Cockaded Woodpecker: Linkages Among Population, Community, and Ecosystem Processes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2003
* Walter Tschinkel, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Bowers
* 08/31/2003
* USD 314,636.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop a new approach to basic
research in conservation biology--Species-Centered Environmental Analysis--and
to apply it to an extensive study of the population dynamics of the endangered
red-cockaded woodpecker in relation to its environment. The USDA Forest service
has agreed to conduct an experimental 5-year prescribed-burning program in the
longleaf pine forests of the Apalachicola National Forest in Florida in 60
management compartments where we will be able to monitor the birds and the
ground cover vegetation. In a subset of 24 compartments, we will monitor the
arthropod fauna of the pine trees and the movement of nutrients through the
system. In 12 of the 24 compartments we will conduct a nutrient enrichment
experiment in which treatments will include supplemental calcium with and
without supplemental phosphorus and nitrogen. The major questions being asked
are (1) Is the movement of nutrients through this ecosystem affected by the
season and frequency of prescribed fire; and (2) Does this movement affect the
nutritional quality of arboreal arthropods, the main diet of the woodpeckers.
This project is an example of ecosystem management--the experimental application
of management alternatives that allows the results of basic research in
population and ecosystem ecology to be used to select among future management
options.