* 9629780
* CAA:  Protein Folding in Yeast/Gene Silencing in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Jane Lopilato, Simmons University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 46,629.00

Lopilato 9629780 To update the research skills of Dr. Lopilato, this Career
Advancement award is provided. A six month sabbatical is being taken in a yeast
Molecular Biology research laboratory at Dana Farber Cancer Institute (Boston,
MA), followed by six months with a reduced teaching load at the home
institution, in order to apply those skills to research in her laboratory. Both
the scope and effectiveness of the her research will be expanded by employing
new techniques and approaches to problems that have been under study in her
laboratory for the past few years. Participating in a research project at an
institution where research is the primary activity will allow her to have time
to focus her energies on increasing her research productivity and potential. In
order to progress in her work on gene silencing in bacteria, Dr. Lopilato will
benefit from new ways of approaching projects. She will be studying protein
folding in yeast during the first six months of the sabbatical, which is a clear
expansion of her research interests. In particular, she will be exploiting two
types of genetic interactions, namely synthetic lethal interactions and
suppressor analysis, to detect and identify proteins involved in protein folding
in the endoplasmic reticulum of yeast cells. These approaches will be directly
applied to her own research during the second six months of the sabbatical, and
hopefully, will lead to identifying new proteins which are involved in gene
silencing. A specific skill that she will gain while at the research institution
is DNA amplification using polymerase chain reaction, which will be incorporated
immediately into her research and into the courses that she teaches. The
activities that will advance her research include the genetic and molecular
approaches described above and cell biology approaches such as protein tagging
and localization techniques. All of these methods and approaches will enhance
her ability to pursue research projects and maintain an active research l
aboratory at Simmons College, an undergraduate college where both teaching and
faculty research are high priorities.