* 9629460
* RUI:  Life History and Genetic Demography in                Hemidactylium scutatum
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Reid Harris, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2001
* USD 225,529.00

9629460 HARRIS The factors that affect growth and decline of populations in
nature remain elusive, in part because the importance of social interactions has
been underestimated. Drs. Harris and Knight propose to study joint nesting
behavior in a salamander species and relate that behavior to changes in
population size over time. For example, populations that contain a high
percentage of joint nesters may be larger in size than populations that contain
a high percentage of solitary nesters. In addition, they will investigate
whether joint nesters are the result of cooperative interactions among
relatives. Methods will include experiments in the laboratory, field
observations, and the use of DNA fingerprinting techniques. Results may indicate
that existing predictive models of population growth and decline that treat all
individuals as identical are inadequate and that the incorporation of behavioral
variation among individuals into predictive population models may a necessity.
Furthermore, data derived from this detailed population study may provide
insights into the causes of an alarming decline in amphibian populations in many
areas of the world. Active participation of undergraduate students in all
aspects of this research will prepare them for careers in the biological
sciences.