* 9629022
* Presidential Faculty Fellows/Presidential Early Career      Awards for Scientists and Engineers (PFF/PECASE)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2003
* Jennifer Hwu-Sadwick, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 05/31/2003
* USD 200,000.00

This award funds an initial investigation of design, control, and planning
issues for self-reconfigurable robots. A self- reconfigurable robot is a set of
one or more autonomous modules with the capability to self-organize, that is, to
change their geometric shape autonomously. Self-reconfigurable robots can be
viewed as a minimalist approach to designing versatile, extensible, and reliable
robots. They are suitable for applications that require multiple locomotion
gaits over different types of terrain, or that combine mobility with flexible
manipulation in ways that could not be anticipated at the time of initial design
of a conventional robot. The focus of this work is task-directed self-
reconfiguration, with an emphasis on robots that can self-organize to support
multiple locomotion gaits and on robots that can sequence locomotion and
manipulation gaits. This research will explore several designs for self-
reconfigurable modules. The potential of each design will be evaluated by
geometrically characterizing the class of three- dimensional robotic structures
that can be built with it. This research will also consider control and planning
approaches to self-reconfiguration. For each module design, control and
coordination algorithms will be developed and evaluated. A set of basic
configuration structures that consist of the basic module designs and support
specific manipulation and locomotion gaits will be developed. Planning
algorithms for transitioning between any two such configurations will be
developed and evaluated.