* 9629650
* GOALI:  Pulverization and Agglomeration Polymeric Materials Using High Shear and Normal Forces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Barry Bernstein, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 12/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

Abstract CTS- 9629650 H. Arastoopour and B. Bernstein, Illinois Institute of
Technology A combined experimental and computational study is undertaken to
understand the basic mechanisms in the pulverization process of polymeric
materials by extrusion. The materials are conveyed to an extruder where they are
heated to form a continuous film of polymeric materials, followed by cooling and
exposure in solid state to high shear and compressive forces, and by rapid
relaxation of the induced stresses. This results in pulverization. The materials
may be thermoplastics, thermosetting and elastomers. The experiments will use
disk-shaped samples to model the stress state and its evolution before
pulverization and eventual agglomeration. Finite element method will be applied
to simulate the deformations, including boundary slip, material fracture,
friction, sintering, and agglomeration. This is a GOALI (Grant Opportunity for
Academic Interaction with Industry) project in collaboration with Amoco and W.R.
Grace Co. The industrial partners will participate and provide feedback to the
research work. It is expected that the study will lead to a modeling framework,
including the controlling parameters of the pulverization process, and criteria
of pulverization, agglomeration, and scale-up. The pulverization process has
relevance to manufacturing processes, polymer recycling, textile industry, and
pipe coating. ***