* 9629528
* Research Planning Grant: Structure and Function of SignatureWhistles of Adult Female Bottlenose Dolphins
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Laela Sayigh, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1998
* USD 21,500.00

Bottlenose dolphins produce a variety of sounds, although most research on
dolphin communication has focused on their individually distinctive signature
whistles. Development of these whistles is a complex and variable process that
involves learning. The signature whistle usually develops within the first year
of life, and then appears to remain stable for many years. However, adult
females tend to produce whistles with greater bandwidth and frequency modulation
than do younger animals. Dr. Sayigh will attempt to document quantitatively this
apparent occurrence of vocal modification in adult bottlenose dolphins. She also
will study the functional role (if any) that such modification may play in the
natural communication system of these animals. Selection may have favored any
modification of the signature whistle that facilitates mother-offspring
recognition, given the large investment by dolphin mothers in their offspring.
To quantify the apparent age difference in signature-whistle structure, Dr.
Sayigh will utilize a large library of whistles recorded from dolphins during
temporary-capture-and-release projects in Sarasota, Florida. Whistles will be
analyzed using quantitative techniques of acoustic and statistical analysis,
including the acoustic-feature-extraction program ACOUSTAT. Playback experiments
will be conducted in Sarasota to test whether or not synthetic whistles with
contours similar to those of the mothers' whistles but with greater bandwidth
and frequency modulation are more salient to young dolphins than are the actual
whistles of the mothers. The quantitative-analysis techniques that Dr. Sayigh
learns during this work will be used in future research on whistle development
in free-ranging bottlenose dolphins.