* 9629038
* PFF/PECASE:  Engineering Systems for Integrated Nucleic     Acid Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1997,04/30/2003
* David Burke, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 04/30/2003
* USD 500,000.00

The research plan will develop novel engineering systems for genetic (DNA)
analysis. The work will use silicon microfabrication technology to assemble
complex, integrated, DNA biochemical analysis devices. The silicon fabrication
resources created for the microprocessor industry have the potential to make DNA
analysis systems that are inexpensive, robust, and miniaturized. Examples of a
few of the scientific fields that may benefit from these devices include: (i)
multigenic trait analysis, (ii) infectious disease diagnostics, (iii)
agricultural genetics, and (iv) the Human Diversity Program. Specific c Aims The
biochemical and electrophoretic manipulations for DNA genotyping and sequencing
are well characterized, but have not been assembled into a simple automated
processing system. On the basis of on established methods, the proposed effort
will develop the electrophoretic, detection, and control components of a fully
integrated technology for DNA sequencing. The use of silicon photolithographic
fabrication techniques will allow components to be compatible, readily assembled
as a single device, and inexpensive to mass produce. The planned work will
complement and extend existing efforts in the lab to construct silicon devices
for DNA genotyping. Microfabricated sequencing devices will be developed with
the following experimental plan: 1. Construction of a miniature high resolution
electrophoresis system. Existing electrophoresis technology is able to
sizefractionatesequencingreactions800basepairsandgreaterusing gels 50-100 m
thick and 50 cm long. The lab will duplicate these results using silicon
micromachined 5-100 m diameter channels. Beginning with short (I cm length)
channels, the channel length and detector resolution will gradually be
increased. For longer channels (&gt; 5 cm), folded columns will be used. The
necessary gel channels, DNA detectors, and controllers will be designed,
fabricated, and tested. 2. Fluidic and electronic integration of t he sequencing
system. Template preparation, biochemical reactions, and electrophoresis systems
will be integrated on a single device using silicon microfabricated components.
Integration of electronic components (detector, heaters, liquid detectors, and
temperature sensors) should allow the construction of a self-contained
sequencing system. Interconnections with external fluidics and circuitry will be
developed. 3. Elimination of sequencing bottlenecks using intelligent systems.
The proposed system of integrated fluid-handling, electrophoresis, detector, and
circuitry components allows feedback and decision-making directly within the
device. Information-based processing will be used to reduce both the systemic
and random errors for each sequencing sample. Sequencing strategies will be
tested for improved reproducibility, error-detection, length of readable data,
and compatibility with existing sequencing; protocols. Research description. The
initial proposed device will contain several components: liquid injection ports,
self-pumping channels based upon surface-force gradient phenomena, thermally-
isolated reaction (PCR) chambers, decision split points, and gel electrophoresis
channels. Next to, and underneath, these components are the system's electronic
detectors and controlling circuitry. Within the system a purified DNA sample is
injected, moved to a specific location, and the enzymatic sequencing reactions
are performed. A portion of the sequencing product is isolated and sent to a
preliminary electrophoresis gel for screening. Using the preliminary
information, sequence data acquisition can be optimized by dividing the
remaining product between electrophoresis gels with different resolution
characteristics. Increasingly complex devices can be assembled from the
individual components and basic functional modules described above. The initial
components do not perform any preliminary template handling, and consequently
well characterized template must be used as starting material. The proposed work
will start from the basic DNA sequencing reaction and gel electrophoresis system
and work "back" through the sample processing stream. Since the production of
high-quality template is one of the current difficulties in "on-site" DNA
sequencing, development of integral template synthesis will be essential.
Eventually, it is anticipated that the entire processing stream will be
incorporated onto the device, with all steps included within the silicon-
fabricated environment. In the limit, this will eliminate process bottlenecks,
since each sample will have its own dedicated series of instruments. Using
silicon micromachining techniques, it may be possible to design and build
reaction and separation units that are impractical to build by any other
techniques. For example, silicon fabrication can construct an electrophoresis
chamber with hundreds of DNA detectors along its length for the same cost as
constructing a chamber with only one sensor. The same technology that makes
transistors in integrated circuits inexpensive will allow these complicated,
integrated systems to be produced for a fraction of larger-scale equivalents.
This work will integrate proven biochemical technology with the existing
technology for micromachining and microelectronics to produce a sequencing
system that is fast, accurate, and cheap. A broad range of disciplinary
knowledge, including nucleic acid biochemistry, silicon fabrication, circuit and
sensor design bioseparations, and surface chemistry will be essential to
completing the project. Therefore, research will continue to take advantage of
established faculty collaborations in Chemical Engineering (Dr. Mark Burns) and
Electrical Engineering (Dr. Carlos Mastrangelo), but will occur primarily within
my laboratory group.