* 9629635
* International Seminar and Workshop of State-of-The-Art and  Future Directions of Repair and Rehabilitation of Reinforced Concrete Structures, Maracaibo, Venezuela, February 1997
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Luis Pumarada, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 08/31/1997
* USD 42,959.00

*** 9629635 Silva The "International Workshop on Future Directions in the Repair
and Rehabilitation of Concrete Structures" will be held in Maracaibo, Venezuela
on February, 1997. Renowned researches and consultants from Latin America, the
United States and Europe with present state-of-the-art R&R technology to an
audience consisting of professionals, academics and students from Latin America.
They will meet to discuss research priorities and potential collaborative
projects. The seminar will focus on state of practice, current research and
future developments in the repair and rehabilitation of concrete structures with
steel reinforcement. Prevention and remediation techniques for corrosion
mechanisms will be given special attention. The interaction among experts from
different countries climates environmental conditions and practices, but who
face similar problems, will allow useful exchanges of information, help to set
effective research priorities, and stimulate collaborative projects. The
participants will also have the unique opportunity of examining the R&R work on
one of the first and longest cable- stayed concrete bridges in the world, the
Maracaibo Bridge. The seminar papers, the discussions and the proceedings will
provide for effective technology transfer. The event will be a valuable
opportunity to link participants and institutions from the Americas.***