* 9629868
* Workshop on Research Opportunities at the Interface of      Biology, Mathematics and the Physical Sciences being held   in Arlington, VA on March 14-16, 1996 at the N.S.F
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Peter Kollman, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1997
* USD 27,482.00

9629868 Kollman Characterization of biological systems has reached an
unparalleled level of detail. To organize this detail and arrive at a better
fundamental understanding of life processes, it is imperative that powerful
conceptual tools from mathematics and the physical sciences be applied to the
frontier problems in biology. Modeling of biological systems is evolving into an
important partner of experimental work. All facets of biology, environmental,
organismic, cellular and molecular biology are becoming more accessible to
chemical, physical and mathematical approaches. This area of opportunity was
highlighted in the report of a conference supported by the National Science
Foundation held in 1990 entitled "Mathematics and Biology, the Interface,
Challenges and Opportunities." (MBICO) This grant will support a workshop that
will build on the findings of MBICO in order to critically evaluate its findings
and to suggest which areas in these critical interdisciplinary areas should be
the focus of further research. This workshop will bring together approximately
thirty scientists, with expertise ranging from the molecular to the cellular to
the organism to the population biology level, all of whom have an interest in
applications of mathematical/computational approaches to biological systems. The
goal of the workshop is to identify the important research areas where
theoretical/computational studies can be of most use in giving insight and in
aiding related experimental work. ***