* 9629987
* Theory of Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* J. Robert Schrieffer, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 405,000.00

9629987 Schrieffer Research will be conducted on the theory of strongly
correlated electron systems. The field of strongly correlated electrons has
attracted a great deal of attention from the physics and materials community
since the discovery in 1986 of superconductivity at elevated temperatures. Prior
to this time, related phenomena were studied in transition metal, rare earth and
actinide compounds as well as in magnetic alloys. In contrast to the traditional
electronic band structure approach to solids, these materials require one to
include interelectronic correlations in a fundamental manner. In essence, these
systems involve the interplay of many coupled phase transitions: metal-
insulator, paramagnetic- antiferromagnetic, normal-superconductor and various
lattice distortions. This research involves an ongoing program addressing how a
microscopic theory of such materials can be constructed which directly relates
to experiment. In particular, what is the nature of the ground state and
excitations, both spin and charge, in strongly correlated materials? In terms of
these excitations, or more generally spectral distributions, what is the
effective pairing potential which leads to superconductivity? Why is the pairing
order parameter so anisotropic in these materials compared to low temperature
superconductors? There has been much debate whether spin and charge degrees of
freedom are separate excitations in two-dimensional systems, as they are in one-
dimension. These and related questions will be studied using a variety of
methods including the coherent state spin functional integral approach, quantum
Monte Carlo and exact diagonalization of clusters. With close contact to
experiment we hope to make significant progress in understanding these novel and
technologically important materials. In addition, we will study the dynamics of
electrons moving in space-and time-dependent magnetic fields, both to enlarge
the range of experiments on material s curretly carried out in uniform static
magnetic fields and to develop methods to treat time-dependent magnetic alloy
problems encountered in the coherent state spin functional integral method and
its counterparts. %%% Theoretical research will be conducted on a variety of
materials problems involving electrons which strongly interact. These types of
problems are relevant to many materials of current technological interest such
as the high temperature superconductors. Unfortunately, conventional concepts
and theoretical methods are not directly applicable. Thus, new concepts and
methods need to be developed to understand these materials. The present grant
will focus on the development of new techniques and the application of new
concepts to this important class of problems. ***