* 9629990
* High Pressure Studies of Cr and Mn Near-Infrared Solid      State Cover Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Kevin Bray, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/1999
* USD 329,480.00

9629990 Bray This research project investigates the energy levels and vibronic
interactions of transition-metal dopants in ionic crystals focusing on high-
pressure photoluminescence studies of recently discovered Cr4+ -activated solid
state laser materials. The theme of the proposed research is to address
uncertainties surrounding the properties of Cr4+ materials through high pressure
luminescence, excitation, and lifetime measurements to relate luminescence
properties to crystal field strength, and to understand the effect of interstate
mixing on luminescence properties. Related studies of isoelectronic Mn5+ ,
currently known to occur only as a strong field ion in a few oxides will also be
considered in the project. %%% The project is interdisciplinary combining
fundamental materials chemistry and materials science synthesis and processing
studies with advanced characterization tools and analysis methods to address
forefront issues in a topical area of strong technological relevance and high
potential payoff. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge
at a fundamental level to several aspects of advanced photonic devices critical
to high bandwidth communications technology. Additionally, the knowledge and
understanding gained from this research project is expected to contribute in a
general way to improving the performance of advanced devices and communications
systems by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An important feature
of the program is the integration of research and education through the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***