* 9629462
* Rates of DNA Sequence Change on Avian Chromosomes:          A Test of the Replicative Division Hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Thomas Quinn, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/2000
* USD 225,000.00

9629462 QUINN Evidence that DNA or protein sequences change at a steady rate
through time was presented in the early 1960s, and now comprises the rationale
for using amounts of sequence divergence to estimate how long ago species pairs
diverged from each other. This has become known as the "molecular clock". Just
how steady that rate is has been a matter of considerable debate. In particular,
there has been recent interest in what the "motor" is that determines the rate
at which the clock "ticks". One hypothesis is that DNA mutation occurs primarily
during replication and that the rate is determined by number of rounds of
replication encountered by germ line cell lineages per unit of time. This may
explain why, for instance, mice evolve more quickly than humans at the sequence
level. If this hypothesis is correct, then DNA within chromosomes that are
passed on primarily through male or primarily through female vertebrate lineages
should evolve at different rates because females use fewer numbers of rounds of
replication in the production of gametes than do males. While this trend has
been observed in mammals, other interpretations of the meaning of this result
are possible. In this study, Thomas W. Quinn will compare rates of DNA sequence
change within the W, Z and autosomal chromosomes in birds. Molecular techniques
will be used to identify and sequence comparable DNA sequences found on the W
and at least one other chromosome. The rate of change in these sequences will be
measured and compared with the predicted result, that sequences on the W
chromosome will show fewer changes than comparable sequences on other
chromosomes. This is an important addition to mammalian studies because there is
a female-specific chromosome in birds rather than a male-specific chromosome as
in mammals. The bird study system presents an opportunity to test the hypothesis
of the dependence of DNA mutation rate on frequency of DNA replication, in a
case where rate differences between various chromosomes are predicted to be
different in direction and magnitude from those found on mammalian chromosomes.