* 9629523
* Research Planning Grant: Dynamics of Trophic Interactions   during Early Colony Formation in the Primitive Termite      Mastotermes darwiniensis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Christine Nalepa, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 01/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

Theories that have been postulated for the evolution of eusociality in insects
are rarely applicable to termites, which are taxonomically and ecologically
remote from the ants, bees and wasps. Based on her studies of subsocial
cockroaches, Dr. Nalepa has hypothesized that the manner in which nitrogenous
materials are distributed during trophic interactions in incipient colonies of
termites is the proximate cause of the reproductive and developmental changes
associated with attaining eusocial status. Dr. Nalepa will test this hypothesis
using the Australian termite Mastotermes darwiniensis. Through behavioral
observations, measurements of individuals and colonies, colony manipulations and
chemical analysis of the food and secretions involved in the care of dependents,
she will quantify how the reserves of the adults, the demands of the developing
brood and the input from the first workers in the colony are interrelated, and
how these parameters change as the young family makes the transition to
eusociality. Dr. Nalepa's research employs a cross-disciplinary approach in
analyzing termite social behavior, in that it attempts to relate ecology and
nutritional physiology to behavior and social structure. These studies will
substantially contribute to our understanding of the affinities between
cockroaches and termites, but also bear on much wider issues in the biological
and social sciences. The analysis of eusociality in insects has always played a
central role in the analysis of sociality in all animals, and indeed, of
evolution itself. Clarifying the proximate causes of eusociality in the
traditionally neglected termites may provide biologists with new ammunition in
characterizing the origins of social systems.