* 9629728
* Systematic and Biological Studies of Balansieae             (Ascomycetes)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,12/31/1999
* James White, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1999
* USD 146,583.00

9629728 White A novel set of ecological interactions between grasses and the
fungi that live inside them (endophytic fungi or endophytes) has been revealed
over the last few years. In many cases the fungi appear to confer enhanced
drought tolerance on their grass hosts. But the fungi also produce metabolites
that may be toxic to grazing animals like cattle and others, which may lead to
commercial losses. While ecological research continues on this interaction,
taxonomic studies are also needed to improve understanding of the range and
diversity of fungal species involved. Dr. James White at Rutgers University with
local and foreign colleagues is studying the systematics and phylogeny of a
major group of these fungal endophytes, placed in the tribe Balansieae of the
ascomycete family Clavicipitaceae (the ergot group of fungi). Building on his
previous work, he employs a broad array of methods to gather data on morphology,
life history, mating compatibility, chromosome number, and gene-sequence
diversity for samples of fungi collected in North and South America and Europe.
One major complication, and challenge, in devising a reliable classification of
these fungi is the widespread occurrence of asexual forms that persist for many
generations, forms that have been given their own species and genus names. In a
growing number of cases, because of research by Dr. White and others, these
forms can now be linked with the sexually reproducing species from which they
have been derived phylogenetically. Although traditional morphological and life-
history studies have facilitated these kinds of linkages, new molecular data
from mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences are providing some of the
strongest evidence on which robust classifications can be based. New data from
morphological studies, tests of mating compatibility under laboratory growth
conditions, and DNA sequences of nuclear ribosomal genes will be integrated in
analyses of biological diversity of the fungi that inhabit grass plants and oth
er taxa, as "endophytes." Improved taxonomic understanding of these fungi will
advance knowledge about their evolution and ecology.