* 9629927
* Dissertation Research:  Indonesia, Democracy and the        Practical Politics is Islam
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Lesley Gill, American University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/1998
* USD 6,360.00

This project involves the dissertation research of a cultural anthropology
student from American University. The project is to investigate the relationship
between Islamization and democratization in Indonesia, the largest Islamic
nation in the world (with a population as large as that of Egypt and Iran
combined). Based in a university town in central Java, the student will
interview Muslim university students in groups whose religious orientation
ranges from very fundamentalist to less rigidly doctrinaire. The students will
be asked about their relation to fundamental elements of liberal democracy such
as freedom of speech, minority and women's' rights and the role of an
independent judiciary, and will be asked how they deal with personal issues such
as individual versus group rights, rights versus duties, and the principles of
social equality and hierarchy. Through participant observation and in-depth
interviews the student will learn how local people think about these issues. At
the end of the project a survey questionnaire will be administered to samples of
150 students living in each of two student boarding houses to get information on
a representative range of persons and experiences. This research is important
because militant Muslim fundamentalists are active in an enormous area of the
world, in tense relation to local often fledgling democracies. Advances in our
understanding of the nature of Islamic discourse about democratic issues and
principles is vital to developing realistic policies leading to successful
relations. In addition this project will add to the nation's expertise about
this important area of the world.