* 9629601
* LTREB: Plot Recensus in Tropical Forests of Asia, to        Generate Data on Forest Dynamics and Species Demographies
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Peter Ashton, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/2001
* USD 189,637.00

9629601 Ashton The goal of this research is to recensus three large-scale (50
ha) demographic tree plots in tropical Malaysia and Thailand. The information
will be used to examine how species diversity and community structure vary
spatially and temporally in relation to habitat factors. The recensus
information will be used in conjunction with other studies on demography and
physiology. The mapping protocol will follow that used in the long-term
monitoring plots on Barro Colorado Island in Panama. Together this study, along
with the other large-scale plots in both new world and old world tropical
forests, will provide the baseline for regional and global analyses of tropical
forest diversity and dynamics. Data collected under this LTREB funding will be
made available for a wide range of hypothesis testing, monitoring,
experimentation, and modeling activities by the investigators, in-country
collaborators, and all other interested researchers. This project is well
established and has considerable host-country support. The data from these large
plots provide the most detailed information on long-term tropical forest
dynamics. By combining data from this study with other long-term forest studies,
it will be possible to assess regional and global trends in tropical forest
communities.