* 9629118
* 1996 National Engineering Faculty Forum:  An Interactive    Teleconference Series to Share Best Practices in            Undergraduate Engineering Education
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Lionel Baldwin, National Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 10/31/1997
* USD 191,190.00

A monthly series of interactive satellite teleconferences is delivered to
faculty who teach undergraduate engineering students. Each telecast features an
innovative "best practice" which can be adopted/adapted by participants. The
1996 DUE National Engineering Faculty Forum builds on a successful first year of
eight teleconferences which focused on undergraduate engineering education. A
total of 1299 colleges and universities and 8,932 individuals participated in
the first six of the 1995 series, the average number of institutions was 157
with a reported average attendance of 1,489 per seminar. The use of the WWW and
Internet to support the Faculty Forum Series has grown significantly. The Web
server now contains advance information describing upcoming seminars as well as
retrospective data to enable faculty to order videotapes of prior seminars.
Presenters solicit input via e-mail prior to broadcast and encourage electronic
dialog after their presentation. In 1996, NTU is building on this broad
acceptance to provide for electronic registration. FAX transmission and on-line
evaluation. The campaign to encourage attendance by instructors at transfer
institutions and community colleges is increasing. NTU works with the NSF/DUE
Program Directors to identify topics and presenters. NTU is producing,
marketing, delivering and evaluating seven one-hour, interactive teleconferences
in 1996, which are provided to faculty participants without charge. A license to
copy and reuse videotapes of the Teleconferences as well as the printed material
provided to each registered college/university is integral to this cost-
effective project.