* 9629047
* Presidential Faculty Fellows Program (PFF/PECASE):  Role    of Electrostatic Forces in Protein Stability and Functions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1997,09/30/2002
* Marilyn Gunner, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2002
* USD 500,000.00

9629047 Gunner Protein structures are determined by the protein's environment as
well as its primary sequence. Protein function often demands protein movement.
This can involve small, delocalized changes or may require several distinct, low
energy protein states. The relative energy of separable protein states is often
determined by the concentration of ligand. Binding the ligand can induce a
change in binding affinity (e.g. hemoglobin (( O2), catalysis rate (e.g. cell
surface receptors ( bound ligand), inter-protein association (e.g. calmodulin (
Ca+2), or proton binding (photosynthetic reaction centers ( electron transfer).
The objective of the research is to determine how binding of ligand or ion can
modify the free energy of different structures, focusing on the binding of
charged effectors such as phosphate, calcium, protons, and electrons. The goal
will then be to analyze the mechanism that controls vectorial proton transfer in
three proteins whose structures have been solved to atomic resolution: the
cytochrome oxidase, the bc1 complex, and the proton ATPase. Proteins are the
group of biological molecules that carry out chemical reactions to transform our
food to useful energy. This energy is then used by different proteins in the
organism to carry out work, such as building new molecules for cell growth. The
shape of the protein determines what it can do. By changing the shape, a process
can be turned on or off. While proteins are far too complex to be analyzed
completely with the basic laws of physics, computer modeling of proteins can be
used to ask what forces in nature are the most important for making the
structure that is seen. In many proteins, when a small group is bound, it's
structure changes between two distinct shapes. The goal of this work is to
explore how binding a charged group changes the structure.