* 9629822
* An Experiment in Evolution:  Rapid Life History Evolution   in Drosophila Subobscura
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1996,07/31/2000
* George Gilchrist, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2000
* USD 185,000.00

9629822 Raymond B. Huey and George W. Gilchrist Human activities have led to an
alarming increase in the number of species introduced into new areas.
Evolutionary changes in introduced species have received little attention,
although such changes may influence the persistence and impact of introduced
species. The fly Drosophila subobscura provides an opportunity for studying
evolutionary rates in response to new environments. This species is broadly
distributed in Europe. In the late 70's it was accidentally introduced into both
North and South America. It rapidly colonized broad geographic areas with very
different climates, and is now the most common Drosophila in some areas. This
project will investigate how temperature, a key climate factor, influences the
fitness of flies from climatically distinct populations in Europe, the
evolutionary "baseline", and from similar ones in North America. The amount of
differentiation among the North American populations, relative to the European
ones, will indicate whether introduced insects may be able to evolve rapidly in
nature. This project is important for understanding what limits the
distribution, spread, and persistence of introduced pests, as well as
understanding the effects of introduced species on native species and
ecosystems.