* 9629621
* Drainage Complexity, Nekton Populations and Production      Transfers Across a Marsh Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2003
* Ronald Kneib, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Kelman Wieder
* 02/28/2003
* USD 720,169.00

Kneib 9629621 Mechanisms by which materials are exchanged across boundaries
within landscapes are crucial to ecosystem functioning, yet are not well
understood. Flowing water is a powerful force that can shape spatial patterns
within landscapes and provides a medium for the transport of material across the
boundary between terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Flooding events, which
temporarily blur this boundary, enhance material fluxes not only through the
hydraulic movement of passive particles but also via the active migrations of
fishes and other aquatic organisms (nekton). Spatial patterns, such as those
defined by the complexity of drainage channels that direct the flow of water
through a landscape, may have profound effects on ecological processes that link
components of the environment. Drainages of freshwater rivers and tidal marshes
are similar in appearance, but marshes differ from freshwater lotic systems in
that their drainage channels experience a bidirectional flow of tidal water and
flood their banks more frequently -- as much as twice daily. These features of
the marsh environment make it an attractive arena in which to explore the role
of nekton in the movement of production between landscape elements, and to
determine if these fluxes are affected by complexity in the structure of the
landscape. The proposed research will show whether drainage patterns within a
marsh landscape influence the transfer of intertidal production to the subtidal
estuary via nekton populations. This will be accomplished by comparing species-
and size-specific nekton densities, growth, movements, diets and tidal dynamics
across a series of marsh sites representing a range of drainage patterns from
simple to complex. The research is guided by a conceptual model that links
spatial patterns in the landscape and temporal patterns of tidal dynamics with
nekton life histories, movements and trophic interactions across a range of
temporal and spatial scales. Findings will contribute needed empirical data to
the area of landscape ecology that deals with how spatial patterns affect
ecological interactions across boundaries within landscapes. The research
directly addresses a long-standing issue regarding the functional role of salt
marshes in trophic support of adjacent estuarine and coastal ocean ecosystems.
It also is directly applicable to questions involving the success or failure of
current efforts to create or restore valued functions of coastal marshes that
have been degraded or destroyed. Because marsh mitigation efforts frequently
involve the alteration of tidal drainage patterns, an understanding of how
drainage complexity relates to the role of marshes in providing trophic support
for fisheries species is needed to insure success in recovering some of the lost
functional value of these critical estuarine nurseries.