* 9629667
* Research Planning Grant: Function and Structure of Brain    Oxytocin Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Loretta Flanagan-Cato, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1998
* USD 22,500.00

The ovarian steroid hormones estradiol and progesterone are known to exert
genomic effects on the hypothalamic ventromedial nucleus (VMN), which in turn
promotes the display of sexually receptive behavior. Oxytocin receptor (OTR)
binding activity and transcripts are induced by estradiol in the VMN. Central
administration of exogenous OT facilitates female sexual behavior, but only in
animals pretreated with both estradiol and progesterone. Central antagonism of
OTRs, however, blunts this behavior in animals given both estradiol and
progesterone, without impairing the sexual behavior shown by animals primed with
estradiol alone. Thus, while estradiol is important for inducing OTRs, the
effect of estradiol on sexual behavior appears to be independent of OT. On the
other hand, the effects of progesterone on sexual behavior seem to involve OT.
To further elucidate the biological basis for these steroid-hormone effects on
behavior, it would be useful to examine the cellular functions of hypothalamic
OTRs. For example, the issue of whether or not increases in OTR binding activity
are associated with concomitant increases in second-messenger production remains
to be examined. This is especially interesting, given that estradiol-induced
OTRs appear to have little behavioral significance in the absence of
progesterone. In this regard, it would also be important to examine the post-
receptor mechanisms associated with brain OTRs, and whether or not they too are
regulated by gonadal steroid hormones. Under this Research Planning Grant,
methods will be established to investigate OT-induced second-messenger
production in rat-brain membranes. These preliminary studies will set the stage
for future experiments designed to investigate the post-receptor consequences of
steroid regulation of OTRs in the hypothalamus.