* 9629840
* Collaborative:  Mammalian Phylogeography in Regional Warm   Deserts of North America
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* David Hafner, New Mexico Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/2000
* USD 95,000.00

9629840 HAFNER The recent appearance of extensive regions of aridlands in
southwestern North America has led many to assume that pattersn of relationships
among the plants and animals adapted to these regions are also recent. Yet many
of the species are ancient, having persisted in scattered dry sites for many
millions of years. In collaborative investigations, David J. Hafner and Brett R.
Riddle, together with their collaborators, will investigate the possibility of
ancient structure among the regional deserts and reconstruct the sequence of
divergence of these deserts. They will examine, by means of sequence divergences
in mitochondrial DNA, the genetic relationships among four groups of rodents.
These rodents are currently restricted to regional warm deserts and neighboring
chaparral or thornscrub habitats, and have fossil records that indicate their
presence in the study area during the early development of the regional deserts,
up to 5.5 million years ago. Relationships among these rodents will serve as
indicators of relationships among other animals and plants in the deserts. Dr.
HafnerOs portion of the collaboration will involve collection and identification
of the groups of rodents, which include white-footed and pocket mice, antelope
ground squirrels, and kangaroo rats, targeted for examination of their
mitochondrial DNA. Expeditions will be made to up to 33 sites in the Chihuahuan,
Great Basin, San Joaquin, Sonoran, and Peninsular deserts of the southwestern
United States and northern Mexico, as well as the neighboring California
chaparral and Sinaloan thornscrub regions, and six islands off Baja California.
The island samples are expected to provide estimates of the geographic
distribution of the rodents on the Baja California peninsular mainland ca. 5,000
years ago, when the islands were separated from the peninsula. Participants
include Dr. Riddle and colleagues at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico
and the Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas de Baja Californi a Sur. The
research is expected to contribute to human understanding of how species, and
the distribution of species, change over time, and especially how such changes
in species may be influenced by changes in the topology and climate of the
regions in which the species live.