* 9629572
* Mechanisms Regulating Transcription of the Ldh-B Locus      in Populations of Fundulus Heteroclitus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* George Somero, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2000
* USD 203,000.00

9629572 Powers Differences in the expression of genes that encode intracellular
enzymes are a particularly important potential source of genetic diversity for
species; these differences may provide the kind of genetic plasticity that allow
adaptation to large changes in environmental parameters, like temperature,
salinity, and others. While studies documenting changes in gene expression in
relation to such environmental parameters are few, studies delineating the
mechanisms responsible for these changes are even fewer. The present research
project will provide one of the very few detailed studies of the molecular
mechanisms that differentially regulate the expression of one of these loci. Dr.
Powers and his colleagues take advantage of the well characterized model
teleost, Fundulus heteroclitus, and an equally well characterized gene system,
i.e., the intracellular enzyme common to heart and other aerobic red muscle
tissue, the lactate dehydrogenase-B gene (Ldh-B). Because the teleost model is
distributed along the east coast of North America, i.e., from Newfoundland to
Florida, populations at the extremes of the species range are exposed to very
different environmental temperatures. Since fish are "cold blooded" animals,
this temperature difference could have a profound effect on them, if there were
no compensatory adaptive changes. One such change already uncovered is a
difference in gene expression of Ldh-B between fish from the cold waters of
Maine and those from the warm waters of Florida. The proposed research will
delineate the detailed molecular mechanisms underlying this difference in gene
regulation of Ldh-B. Factors involved in the regulation of the Ldh-B gene will
be identified and variation in these factors and their functional consequences
will be examined using a wide variety of modern molecular techniques.
Identifying the molecular mechanisms underlying the variation in transcriptional
regulation between populations of this model teleost, is a first important step
toward a detailed understanding of the evolution of gene regulation, in general.
In addition to addressing the basic research issue of the molecular mechanisms
that underlie direct evolutionary change at the regulatory level, this research
will also provide important fundamental information about the regulation of a
critical enzyme system in intermediate metabolism that has not been previously
determined. The new knowledge uncovered about the details of Ldh-B gene
regulation will provide an important scientific basis for a better understanding
of the regulation of genes encoding metabolic enzymes. This knowledge can be
used to provide insight about other organisms, including humans. This study will
also provide gene regulation information that may eventually be useful in the
genetic engineering of disease-resistant, fast growing, environmentally safe,
fish for the aquaculture industry in the future.