* 9629793
* Character Displacement in Lizards as Revealed by Natural    Selection Experiments
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Barry Sinervo, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 07/31/1998
* USD 135,000.00

Character displacement describes an ecological pattern where populations of
competing species, morphologically similar when occurring in separate habitats,
diverge morphologically when occurring in the same habitat. Few studies have
experimentally tested the character displacement hypothesis. This project
provides a test of a prediction of the character displacement hypothesis by
measuring natural selection arising from ecological processes involved in
competitive interactions. The investigators will use natural arenas to measure
natural selection on body size in two co-occurring lizard species. Transplant
experiments will be performed that involve populations of these species that
occur in the same and separate habitats. Tests of ecological mechanisms, such as
prey size distributions and micro-habitat partitioning, will be integrated with
the transplant experiments. Understanding the heritable basis of important
traits like body size and growth rate in free-ranging animals is profoundly
important for many husbandry programs. This project will contribute to our
understanding of the amount of heritable variation in body size in natural
populations and how this variation is shaped by natural selection. Results of
this project are applicable to husbandry programs that involve two or more
species such as aquaculture programs, or free-ranging domesticated programs
where some selection might be expected to occur.