* 9629727
* Dissertation Research:  Investigationn of Basalt            Exploitation and Craft Production at Tres Zapotes, Mexico   During the Formative Period
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1998
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1998
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Mark Kruszczynski will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research in
the Tres Zapotes region of Mexico, an area which lies in the heartland of
prehistoric Olmec culture. The Olmec are best known for the production of
massive stone heads - several tons in weight -sculpted from basalt boulders.
Fieldwork in the region by Mr. Kruszczynski and others has also demonstrated the
presence of many other basalt objects such as manos and metates used to grind
food. Several potential raw material source areas and workshops have also been
located. In his research, Mr. Kruszczynski will reconstruct the organization of
the basalt production industry. He will address four questions: 1. Was there
substantial craft specialization in the production of both utilitarian and other
basalt items? 2. How was the production organized? 3 Did this production serve
to meet purely local needs, regional demand or pan-regional purposes? 4. If
there was such craft specialization and regional export, what role did elites
play in this production and export and how was this activity related to the
overall development of Tres Zapotes? To accomplish these goals, Mr. Kruszczynski
and colleagues will conduct a regional survey to locate both basalt outcrops and
workshop areas. In areas with dense remains both surface and subsurface samples
will be collected and three workshop areas will be extensively excavated.
Typological analysis of basalt objects as well as other cultural remains will be
conducted and basalts will be examined by thin section to relate objects to
source outcrop. The Olmec civilization was the first of a series which arose in
prehistoric Middle America and because of its early date represents a `pristine`
or independent development. Therefore archaeologists have focused considerable
attention on it. Researchers wish to learn what is responsible for the
development of this society in a relatively inhospitable Mexican coastline
region and several have hypothesized that it is related to the exploitation of
local basalt resources. Manos and metates formed an essential subsistence item
in Middle American since they were used to grind vegetable foods. However the
scale and organization of Olmec basalt manufacture is still not understood and
Mr. Kruszczynski's research should provide insight into this. This work is
important for several reasons. It will provide data on one of the New World's
best known civilizations and this will be of interest to both scientists and the
lay public. It will contribute to understanding the processes which lead to the
growth of cultural complexity and assist in the training of a promising young
scientist.