* 9629751
* Species Richness and Host Specificity of Leaf-Chewing       Insects Feeding on Rainforest Trees in Papua New Guinea
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Scott Miller, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1998
* USD 60,000.00

9629751 Miller Despite far reaching implications for rain forest conservation
and management, understanding of host specificity of plant-feeding tropical
insects remains more a matter of conjecture than hard data. The approach taken
here overcomes three major problems associated with previous studies: (1)
overlooking the importance of "transient" species that are not actually part of
the community under study; (2) inadequate sampling programs without rearing and
observation of live insects; and (3) need for "long-term" presence in the
tropics with sufficient sampling effort. A previous NSF project proved that a
thorough sampling of the leaf-chewing insects associated with 15 tree species
was feasible within one year. The field methodology of the present study
includes testing live insects to determine the plants on which they will
actually feed, which allows exclusion of transient species. The study also
builds on the solid infrastructure, technical assistance and relationships
developed with local villagers near Madang, Papua New Guinea. The specific study
goals are to (1) compare local faunistic composition, species-richness and host
specificity of leaf-chewing insects feeding on two unrelated plant families; (2)
compare species abundance distribution among the 30 communities of leaf-chewing
insects studied; and (3) explore relationships of local insect variables
(species richness, host specificity and abundance) to local host variables
(abundance, leaf production patterns, other physical and biological
characteristics). Formulation of forest management and conservation strategies
that maximize maintenance of insect diversity depend greatly on how that
diversity is distributed, including how dependent the insects are on specific
plants. In other words, how much of the host plant diversity must be preserved
in order to maintain the insect community. Besides the obvious conservation
importance, the same principles extend to management of forest insect pests and
biological control agen ts. This projects represents a significant example of
the integration of taxonomic expertise in answering essential questions in
community ecology and conservation biology, with links to training and resource
management.