* 9629133
* Presidential Faculty Fellows/Presidential Early Career      Awards for Scientists and Engineers (PFF/PECASE)
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Weinan E, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 03/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

9629133 E This work is supported by a Presidential Early Career Award for
Scientists and Engineers. The research component will focus on the understanding
and modeling of complex materials and complex fluids. This includes polymeric
liquids (of which liquid crystal polymers are one example), turbulent flows, and
flux flows in type-II superconductors, etc. The work on liquid crystals and
polymers includes two aspects: (1) the phase separation process and (2) the
hydrodynamics of liquid crystal polymers. The main issues for the first problem
are the dynamics and morphology for polymerization driven phase transition and
the interplay between phase separation and orientational order. For the second
problem, the role of defects in the hydrodynamics of large molecule liquid
crystals is of interest. The focus of the work on turbulent flows will be on
turbulence models and large eddy simulation. The understanding of macroscopic
instabilities of flux fronts and flux flows in type-II semiconductors requires a
macroscopic theory of flux flows. A macroscopic theory for thin films has been
developed by considering the hydrodynamics of interacting vortices in
combination with a novel interfacial boundary condition. The approaches to these
three problems involve similar steps: (1) establishing continuum models under
the guidelines of nonequilibrium thermodynamics, (2) developing effective
numerical methods, (3) using asymptotic analysis of simplified situations to
provide insight, and (4) identifying prototypical problems for rigorous
mathematical analysis. The investigator has worked toward enhancing the
curriculum at his institution through the development of special courses in
computational incompressible fluid mechanics and materials science and has been
actively engaged in summer programs to enhance interactions among different
groups (university faculty, high school teachers, students) in the mathematical
sciences community. The Presid ent Early Career Awards for Scientists and
Engineers (PECASE) were created to recognize demonstrated excellence and promise
of future success in scientific or engineering research, and the potential for
eventual leadership of the awardees in their respective fields. These awards are
designed to produce a prominent cadre of scientists and engineers and to
encourage their continued development.