* 9629180
* Presidential Faculty Fellows/Presidential Early Career      Awards for Scientists and Engineers (PFF/PECASE)
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* Charles Marcus, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/2000
* USD 260,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\num.doc 9629180 Marcus This experimental project will
advance the fundamental understanding of the mesoscopic scale behavior of
matter, and particularly the appearance of quantum-mechanical chaotic behavior.
The experimental research entails fabrication of semiconductor microstructures,
in the form of wires and dots, and the measurement of their electronic
properties at millikelvin temperatures. Universal statistics of conductance
fluctuations are connected to quantum manifestations of chaos. The educational
components of the project involve finding successful ways to use advanced
textbooks in the teaching of freshman physics, and the integration of
undergraduate students in laboratory research. %%% The research carried out
searches for understanding of changes in the performance of semiconductor
microelectronic devices that eventually will result from making the devices ever
smaller. Smaller devices are desirable in improving the speed and complexity of
computer chips such as the Pentium chip, but it is expected further advances in
the speed and complexity of computer chips will eventually be limited by the
onset of different physical rules for electron behavior. The present research
will contribute to our understanding of this transition in behavior. The work
may also suggest new device designs which may be superior in the desirable limit
of extremely small device size and high device density. The educational
components of the project relate to novel methods in teaching elementary college
physics and in giving undergraduate science students an earlier exposure to
laboratory research. ***