* 9630061
* Structure and Relaxation Processes in Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Richard Boyd, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2000
* USD 288,000.00

9630061 Boyd The general goal of this research is to develop a better
understanding of relaxation processes, especially at the molecular level. Two
approaches are to be used. One takes advantage of the impressive ability
developed recently for carrying out molecular level computer simulations of the
structure and dynamic processes in bulk, dense-packed polymers. The other
approach is experimental and employs the dielectric relaxation technique to
locate and characterize relaxation processes. Part of the simulation effort will
be directed toward developing a better molecular understanding of the melt to
glass transition process. Our recent research showed that as the glass forms the
dynamic processes become spatially heterogeneous. Molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations are to be used to characterize the local structure and relate it to
the chain dynamics. This will be done both in polymers that possess subglass
relaxations and those that do not. In a more practical vein, the simulations
will be used to develop structure- property understanding of the connection
between the glass transition temperature and chemical structure. In fact the use
of MD simulations to predict Tg values from the polymer chemical structural
formula will be pursued. Dielectric measurements will be used to generate better
data for comparison with the MD results. Liquid crystalline polymers (LCPs) are
an intermediate case between the broad classes of amorphous and crystalline
polymers. MD simulations are to be applied to main-chain thermotropic LCPs in
order to better understand the relaxation processes that occur in them. Another
class of LCP concerns the case where the mesogenic unit is incorporated in a
side-chain. Dielectric studies are to be carried out to characterize the
relaxations in side chain mesogenic LCPs. %%% Polymeric materials form one of
the cornerstones of modern technology. Amorphous polymers, both as glasses and
as elastomers, comprise an important compone nt of these materials. Their
behavior as materials, including differentiating between their glassy or
elastomeric behavior, is largely determined by the presence and associated time
temperature location of relaxation processes. In turn, relaxation processes have
their source in molecular motions of various types. ***