* 9630428
* Behavioral Interactions and Population Responses
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Godfrey Bourne, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/1997
* USD 35,000.00

Bourne, G.R. ABSTRACT Behavioral Interactions and Population Responses Between
Male Tr eefrogs Scinax rubra and Scinax garbei PI: Godfrey R. Bourne Proposal
Number: 9630428 This study was prompted by my observations that loss of their
closed-canopy, old second growth rainforest habitat to lumbering, has caused the
Neotropical treefrog Scinax garbei to move into open-canopy brushy, second
growth habitats occupied by a congener, S. rubra at Dubulay Ranch, Guyana. The
appearance of S. garbei in these new habitats coincided with declining numbers
of S. rubra. Males of these two species gather on vegetation at temporary ponds
and large puddles for advertisement calling. Vocal communication plays an
important role in establishing the structure and organization of frog groups or
communities. Advertisement calls of male frogs contain information about species
identity, location, and individual characteristics of the caller. In addition to
attracting females, vocalization mediates spacing among males. In assemblages
consisting of several species, interference from different species' signals
transmitted through the same communication channel is a potentially strong
evolutionary force shaping characteristics of call signals and structure of
communities. Interactions that solely involve resources of communication are
called acoustic competition. Acoustic interference may be reduced by: i)
spectral separation of calls by simultaneously signalling species; ii) spatial
separation of species; or iii) temporal separation of calling by species in the
same habitat. Spatial separation may involve differences in geographic range,
microhabitat or calling site. Shifts in species composition and the inclusion of
additional species into a frog community may depend on: i) the existence of vaca
nt acoustic niches; or ii) the ability of a species to modify its call
frequency, timing of calling, or use of space in response to other members of
the community. Although several studies have examined mechanisms of acoustic
competition among frog species, I am not aware of any studies that have
experimentally addressed their consequences for populations. Thus, I predict
that inhibition of calling by one species because of calling by another, is
likely to impact temporal and spatial use of habitat, and population size, of
the poorer competitor. The effect of S. garbei on contemporary frog communities
is largely unknown, although it may compete with other Scinax species at various
locations. Competitive effects are known for the Neotropical, island dwelling
whistling frog Eleutherodactylus johnstonei which impacts native and introduced
species during range expansion by accidental introduction. Here I outline a 12
month (1 September 1996-31 August 1997) field project to examine the effects of
invading S. garbei on the calling behavior and population densities of S. rubra
at Dubulay Ranch, and CEIBA Biological Center, Guyana. I will answer three
questions--1) Do males of the two species compete and what are the resources
competed for? 2) What are the consequences of competition to the populations? 3)
What are the mechanisms of competition? Using four large study plots with two
replicates and four large enclosures, and using a sophisticated statistical
design, I will examine the relationships of S. garbei and S. rubra behaviors and
population sizes to different levels of frog species removals, and stocking
densities. Data on the effects of a naturally occurring range expansion of a
congeneric species on the behavioral and population responses of a resident
member of a community are not available for mainland new world frogs. This study
is significant b ecause it is the first to experimentally examine the effects of
a naturally occurring range expansion of a congeneric species on the behavioral,
population and demographic responses of a resident member of an anuran
community. The immediate results should be relevant both to predicting effects
of invading species on existing groupings, and to elucidating factors that allow
coexistence of species in natural communities. This study should be an important
contributor to the fields of behavioral ecology, herpetology, and tropical
conservation biology. .