* 9630213
* Factor-Dependent Splicing of Chloroplast Group II Introns
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Alice Barkan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/2000
* USD 345,000.00

9630213 Barken Group II introns, found in bacterial and organelle genomes, are
ribozymes that catalyze their own excision via a mechanism that is closely
related to that of nuclear pre-mRNA splicing. In analogy to other enzymes
containing catalytic RNA moieties, proteins are required for efficient group II
splicing in vivo. However the identities of only two facilitators of group II
splicing have been reported and their biochemical roles are not understood.
Chloroplast genomes of higher plants contain numerous group II introns,
providing potential targets for nuclear-encoded splicing factors, Previous work
from this laboratory has identified two nuclear mutations in maize, crs1 and
crs2, that block the splicing of group II introns in the chloroplast.
Preliminary results suggest that the crs1 mutation blocks the splicing of just
one group II intron and of no group I introns. In contrast, crs2 blocks the
splicing of most group II introns in the chloroplast. These are the first
described mutations that block group II cis-splicing in chloroplasts. Four aims
of this work are,(1) Further characterization of the mutant phenotypes,
including a complete analysis of all 5' and 3'-splice junctions in the maize
chloroplast genome, the expression of the single putative chloroplast
"maturase", identification of additional alleles, double-mutant analysis and a
search for RNA-binding activities that are modulated by crs1 and crs2 gene
function, (2) Cloning of the crs1 and crs2 genes, (3) Analysis of the
developmental and genetic control of crs1 and crs2 expression correlated with
the splicing of their target introns, and (4) Identification of new nuclear
genes that modulate the splicing of group II introns in the chloroplast. %%% The
results of the study may have implications for the understanding of the
mechanisms and evolution of spliceosomal splicing and for RNA-catalyzed,
protein-facilitated reactions in general. In addition, this project will improve
our understanding of the role and mechanisms of regu lated RNA splicing in
chloroplast development. ***