* 9630042
* The Development and Application of Strategies for the       Preparation of Designed Supramolecular Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Frank Fowler, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 05/31/2000
* USD 382,000.00

This renewal award is made in the Office of Special Projects in support of the
collaborative research of Professors Lauher and Fowler. The research deals with
the design and synthesis of supramolecular structures using hydrogen-bonded or
metal ligated networks to serve as templates for further assembly into layered
or tubular structures or three-dimensional organic zeolites. Specifically, urea-
based hosts will be reacted with di- or triacetylenes bearing complementary
carboxylic acid groups to form binary hydrogen bonded networks in which the di-
or triacetylenes will be polymerized. Related strategies with macrocyclic
polyynes will lead to organic nanotubes. The general area of topochemical
polymerization will be explored and extended to vinyl monomers such as
substituted butadienes. With metal-ligated nanostructures, the novel two and
three dimensional nanostructures will be screened for unique chemical,
electronic or magnetic features. The development of new strategies for the
synthesis of hydrogen-bonded and metal-ligated networks to produce
supramolecular layered materials, nanotubes, and large channeled solids offers
the promise of crystal enginering new solid materials with controllable lattice
spacings. These materials are likely to find applications in size and shape
selective catalysis, separations, and optical and electronic systems.