* 9630898
* Distributive Justice Norms in Marriages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,09/30/2001
* Margaret Clark, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/2001
* USD 323,151.00

The goal of this research is to gain a better understanding of some processes
underlying the successful maintenance versus deterioration of marriages. Sub-
goals include: a) further development of a theoretical model of the giving and
acceptance of benefits in intimate relationships (Clark &amp; Mills, 1979;
1993), b) integrating the currently large and confusing literature on the use of
distributive justice norms in intimate relationships, c) forging ties between
work on communal exchange theory, attachment theory and interdependence theory,
and d) identifying personality characteristics of marital partners that predict
their marriages are at risk. Most partners begin marriage holding a norm of
mutual, unconditional responsiveness to needs (i.e. a communal norm) as their
ideal, striving to live up to that norm, and feeling moderately high
satisfaction. Over time some couples, particularly those whose members have
secure attachment styles, continue striving to meet communal norms and will
succeed much of the time. When their partners fail to meet their needs they will
be distressed but resilient and constructive. Their satisfaction is maintained
over time while their feelings of trust and security will grow. Other couples,
particularly those whose members have insecure attachment styles, will falter
according to one of two patterns. Both patterns begin with at least one partner
perceiving his or her needs to be neglected. This perception will be followed
with complaints, neglect of the other's needs and, importantly, loss of faith in
the communal norm. These couples then either: a) switch to exchange norms and
remain together less satisfactorily and without growing trust, or b) begin
behaving in primarily self-interested ways with lowered satisfaction and
declining trust. Depending upon factors such as investments in the relationship
and available alternatives their relationship will either break up or remain
together with low levels of satisfaction. This model will be tested in a
longitudinal study covering the period from engagement through the early years
of marriage. Data collection techniques will include behavioral observations,
daily diaries and standard survey methods. %%% The goal of this research is to
gain a better understanding of some processes underlying the successful
maintenance versus deterioration of marriages. A primary focus will be on the
rules marital partners follow for giving and receiving benefits in their
relationships, how use of such rules may change over the course of the
relationship and how use of such rules may relate to the success versus failure
of the relationship. Another important focus of the research is on how people's
past relationship histories influence the rules they implicitly follow in their
marriages. Most partners begin marriage holding an ideal norm of mutual,
unconditional responsiveness to the needs of their partner. They strive to live
up to this ideal, and they feel moderately high satisfaction. As time goes by,
some couples continue striving to meet this ideal and they succeed much of the
time. When their partners do fail to meet their needs they are distressed but
they are resilient and retain the ideal. Their satisfaction is maintained over
time and their feelings of trust in one another and security in the relationship
grows. Other couples will falter according to one of two patterns. Both patterns
begin with at least one partner perceiving his or her needs to be neglected.
This perception will be followed by complaints, neglect of the other's needs,
and loss of faith in a norm of mutual responsiveness to one another's needs.
These couples then either: a) switch to benefiting each other only in return for
receiving specific benefits in return, and as a result satisfaction drops and
trust does not grow or b) begin behaving in primarily self-interested ways with
even lower satisfaction and declining trust. Couples who switch to benefiting
each other only if they receive something in return may switch again to being
guided almost entirely by self-interest, and satisfaction may drop further.
Ultimately many of these relationships will break. Others may stay together (for
a variety of reasons including investments being high or alternatives not being
attractive) but these relationships will be characterized by very low
satisfaction. This model will be tested in a longitudinal study covering the
period from engagement through the early years of marriage. Data collection
techniques will include behavioral observations, daily diaries and standard
survey techniques.