* 9630454
* Transciptional Activation by Rhizobium meliloti DCTD
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Timothy Hoover, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 270,000.00

HOOVER 96-30454 The long term goal of this project is to understand be
mechanisms involved in transcriptional activation with (54 RNA polymerase
holoenzyme (E(54) ~n bacteria Although much is known at a phenomenological
level, many details concerning the mechanisms involved in this process need to
be elucidated. E(54 binds to the promoter to form a closed complex that is
unable to initiate transcription. The activator, which binds upstream of the
promoter, must make productive contact with E(54 through DNA looping and
hydrolyze ATP in order to activate transcription. Interactions between the
activator and E(54 are transient, and nothing is known about specific contact
sites between E(54 and any c~ dependent activator. Identifying these contact
sites is crucial for dissecting the mechanisms of transcriptional activation
with E(54, and the goal of this project is to identify these contact sites. The
(54 -dependent activator DctD) (C4 dicarboxylic acid transport protein D) from
Rhizobium meliloti will be used for these studies. DctD can be crosslinked to
(54 and the ,B subunits of RNA polymerase, suggesting that DctD may engage these
subunits of E(54 to activate transcription. A collection of DctD) mutants that
fail to activate transcription bas been generated, and some of these mutants are
likely to be defective in interactions with E(54. A search will be made for
alleles of ntrA (encodes (54) and rpoB (encodes the B subunit of RNA polymerase)
that suppress dctD mutants. Gene products of these suppressors u ill be purified
and examined for their ability to function with the DctD mutants in an In vitro
transcription assay, as well as their ability to interact with DctD mutants in
the crosslinking assay. A second research goal is to isolate (54 mutants that
are defective in protein-protein interactions with DctD:). Such (54 mutants are
expected to allow E(54 to bind to the promoter to form a closed complex, but
will not allow the isomerization of these closed complexes ~ open complexes that
are tr anscriptionally productive. A genetic screen based on the ability of E(54
to repress transcription from the phage P22 ant gene has been developed, and
will be used to isolate (54 mutants with these properties. The (54 mutants
isolated from this screen will be examined for their ability to recognize
promoter sequences, bind core RNA polymerase, and interact with DctD in the
crosslinking assay The results of these experiments will help define the contact
sites between DctD and E(54. Examination of how (54 -dependent activators
function is crucial, as it will contribute to our understanding of how many
important metabolic processes are controlled in bacteria. The occurrence of (54
-dependent genes in bacteria is widespread, and the products of these genes are
involved in such diverse processes as nitrogen fixation and metabolism,
degradation of environmental pollutants, and regulation of virulence factors in
plant and human pathogens. Understanding how bacteria control such metabolic
processes is essential for the control and exploitation of these organisms in
agriculture, environmental protection, and medicine.