* 9630411
* Selective Gene Regulation by Manganese and Iron in Bacillus subtilis
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1999
* John Helmann, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 12/31/1999
* USD 315,000.00

Helmann 9630411 Bacillus subtilis provides a genetically well-characterized
model organism ideal for analyzing the complexities of gene regulation. Previous
work has defined two sets of genes regulated by metal ion availability: (i)
genes involved in iron uptake which are repressed by a Fur homolog and (ii)
genes involved in protection against oxidative stress which are repressed by a
protein designated PerR in the presence of manganese, iron or certain other
divalent metal ions. In this project, the B.subtilis Fur protein will be
identified and characterized. The furA and furB genes, identified as part of the
B. subtilis genome project, encode proteins homologous to the Fur family of
metal-activated repressor proteins and are likely candidates for the fur and
perR genes. A genetic approach will be pursued to identify regulatory factors
influencing the Fur and PerR regulons. Biochemical characterization of Fur will
reveal the molecular basis of its DNA and metal-binding selectivity. The iron
specificity of the Fur regulon presumably results from an ability of this
metalloregulatory protein to discriminate against chemically related transition
metals. This contrasts with the relatively broad metal selectivity of DtxR and
E.coli Fur. The broad metal selectivity of the peroxide regulon is imparted by
PerR, which is hypothesized to be a relatively non-specific metal-binding
protein which acts as a molecular sensor of the simultaneous presence of redox
active metal ions and hydrogen peroxide. Metal ions are essential cofactors for
many of the chemical transformations required for life, including the processes
of respiration, DNA replication, and transcription. In particular, iron is of
vanishingly low solubility in the presence of oxygen and near neutral pH and
frequently limits the growth of bacteria both in the environment and, in the
case of pathogenic organisms, in the host. Bacteria have evolved a highly
sophisticated strategy to obtain iron from the environment by the synthesis,
excretion, and readsorption of iron specific organic chelators known as
siderophores. This process is highly regulated, since just as low iron can limit
growth, an overabundance of intracellular iron can lead to deleterious chemical
reactions that damage membranes and DNA. These harmful side reactions frequently
involve reactive oxygen species. There is an emerging realization that metal ion
homeostasis is frequently coordinated with systems designed to handle reactive
oxygen species. This research explores the genetic mechanisms which control iron
homeostasis in Bacillus subtilis, a gram positive soil micoorganism, and the
relationship between iron homeostasis and cellular defenses against oxidative
damage.