* 9630380
* Sperm Entry; Excitation and Activation of the Egg
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Edward Chambers, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2001
* USD 276,816.00

95-30380 Chambers The aim of the research is to identify the primary signals
that lead to the sperm-induced excitation and activation of the egg. The nature
of these signals is not understood. The specific ion fluxes responsible for
generation of the sperm-induced phase 1 and phase 2 membrane currents in the
voltage clamped egg will be investigated. The phase 1 current (~12 see) of
abrupt onset, coincides with excitation of the egg, when no morphological
changes can be detected. The phase 2 current (~18 see) coincides with
activation, when exocytosis occurs. Whether a surface sperm-ligand-egg-receptor
interaction has a role in initiating excitation of the egg will be investigated.
This will be done by applying a suspension of bindin (soluble phase in
equilibrium with the insoluble), or other sperm components, will be applied by
micropipette to the surface of the homologous unfertilized eggs clamped at
different membrane potentials. The ability of the applied bindin to initiate
changes in membrane conductance similar to that induced by a sperm during the
phase of excitation will be determined. Experiments will be conducted to
determine when, and if, cytoplasmic coupling, analogous to gap junctions,
between sperm and egg occurs relative to (a) the sperm-induced inward current
Ion, and (b) the actual fusion event of sperm and egg plasma membranes. Evidence
for the existence of gap junction type pores will be the passage of Lucifer
Yellow from egg to sperm prior to the detection by electron microscopy of
cytoplasmic bridge formation between the gametes at the site of their
apposition. While an increase of cytosolic Ca2+ i is generally associated with
activation, data obtained in the P.I.'s laboratory indicated that when this
increase occurs prematurely at the site of sperm-egg interaction, activation,
but not excitation, can be abrogated due to reversal of the sperm-egg fusion
event. The "target" for this effect of an increase of Ca2 i is likely the
mechanism responsible for dra wing the sperm into the egg. The possibility that
this mechanism is an actin based myosin I motor will be investigated. The
gametes of sea urchins will be used. The methods comprise a combination of
membrane potential measurements, voltage clamp analysis, quantitative
fluorescence imaging, microinjection, and electron microscopy.