* 9630264
* Development of User-friendly Graphical Interfaces for       Ecological Simulation Models and Spatial Databases
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* William Parton, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 07/31/1998
* USD 349,879.00

Regional to global-scale analyses of ecological dynamics is a crucial research
activity for assessing large-scale phenomena that are relevant to global change.
Large-scale modeling analyses require complex computational technology and
efforts. Both spatial databases and simulation models are critical components of
these analyses. Unfortunately, most simulation models as well as links with
spatial databases are complicated and used primarily by the ecologists who
developed them. We have identified three needs that must be met before this
technology is readily accessible to ecologists: (1) user-friendly, portable, and
easily accessible simulation models are needed that can represent numerous
interacting components of ecosystems; (2) user-friendly models are needed that
can represent spatial processes across spatial scales; and (3) user-friendly
simulation models linked with GIS software are needed. The overall objective of
our proposed work is to address these needs of the ecological community by
developing a modular, windows-based graphical user-interface (GUI) for four
different kinds of ecological simulation models and the GIS software, Arc/Info.
We propose to build upon and expand a prototype GUI called EcoVision that we
developed under prior NSF funding. We will expand EcoVision to be user-friendly,
portable, and easily accessible with three functionalities with different
software and hardware requirements: (1) runs of the 4 models either alone or in
linked combination on a PC; (2) simulation of grids of interacting plots using
one or more models to represent spatial processes on a UNIX workstation; and (3)
simulations for regional analyses on a UNIX workstation using Arc/Info. Our
product will be a menu- driven, user-friendly GUI that will allow input files
and parameters to be easily selected and changed, and visual display of input
parameters and output variables through time and space. Multiple graphs will be
viewed simultaneously using input and/or out put from one or more models.
Statistical analyses and on-line user documentation will also be included within
the interface. We will develop EcoVision for four specific models that can
represent vegetation dynamics of grasslands and shrublands (STEPPE), nutrient
cycling (CENTURY), soil water dynamics (SOILWAT), and trace gas exchange (NGAS).
The models can either be run alone or linked to allow for interactions and
feedbacks among various components of ecosystems. Spatial processes are
simulated using interacting plots. Using these four models, we can represent a
large portion of the earth's land resources as well as make important links with
Global Climate Models (GCMs) for global scale predictions of effects of climate
and landuse changes. In addition, our focus in developing EcoVision will be on
generality and flexibility to allow for additional or different models to be
used. We foresee a large national and international demand for user-friendly
versions of these models and links with Arc/Info. since a similar product is
currently unavailable. We will work in close collaboration with other ecologists
to ensure that our product will meet the current and future needs of the
ecological community. The software will be distributed at-cost, and user support
will be provided with a WWW home page.