* 9630029
* 1996 Chemistry at Interfaces Gordon Conference:             Interfacial Structure, July 21-26, 1996 Meriden, New        Hampshire
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1996
* T. Kyle Vanderlick, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1996
* USD 10,000.00

Vanderlick 9630029 This proposal requests funds in partial support of the
Interfaces Gordon Conference to be held 21-26 July 1996 at Kimball Union Academy
in Meriden, New Hampshire. The funds requested will be used to defray travel and
conference expenses for some of the speakers attending the conference and
principally for promising students and junior faculty attending the conference.
The purpose of the conference is to encourage the transfer of ideas at the
frontiers of chemistry at interfaces, among several groups of scientists,
including electrochemists, biophysicists and membrane biologists, chemical
engineers, and colloid and surface scientists, and to focus on the topic of
Interfacial Structure as it relates to liquid/air, liquid/liquid, and
liquid/solid interfaces. The spatial arrangement of interfacial molecules normal
and parallel to the interfaces is the key structural issue that will be focused
upon. This resolution will range from atomic scale to supramolecular. The
conference topic is an important focal point for examining physical pheomena
that occur in colloidal systems such as micellar solutions, microemulsions,
emulsions, dispersions, slurries, etc. This symposium will serve to summarize
our current understanding of interfacial structure in these systems, and the
relation of this structure to chemical and physiochemical phenomena. Simulations
and experiments are becoming complementary approaches to investigating the
structure of these interfacial systems, so the proposed conference is
particularly timely. In addition to papers that address our ability to resolve
structural issues, are papers that address chemistry occurring at these same
interfaces, and the relation of the resulting chemistry to the interfacial
structure. The format of the conference is built around invited speakers
detailing the scientific frontiers of their research. Half of the formal
conference time is devoted to discussion of topics addressed by the speakers and
by the discussion leade rs. The formal sessions are held in the morning and
after dinner in the evening. One afternoon workshop is scheduled, and two poster
session are scheduled in later afternoon time slots. Posters are contributed by
the various conferees, and afford a venue for additional contributions relevant
to the conference theme. ***