* 9630077
* Dissertation Research:  Agrarian Conflict and               Environmentalism in Oaxaca
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* June Nash, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/1997
* USD 9,508.00

This project involves the dissertation research of a cultural anthropologist
from City University of New York. The student will study the effect of the
international environmental movement on political activism, self-representation
and productive activities among people in the Chimalapa forest of Oaxaca,
Mexico. This area is home to a pristine forest which is endangered by logging,
infrastructure development (dams, highways, oil pipelines) and immigration. The
local peasant farmers have allied themselves recently with international and
national environmental activist groups to preserve the region. These effort is
also caught up in local and national politics about NAFTA and the agrarian
reform in Mexico. Using ethnographic techniques of intensive interviews,
participant observation as well as surveys of the involved organizations, the
project will investigate how the activity of the environmentalist groups impacts
on local peasant political activities, as well as how the gender division of
labor will be impacted by development projects. This research is important
because it will advance our understanding of how global and national processes
impact local communities. The specific case of forest conservation will provide
materials that can generalize to similar situations where local communities
organize to preserve a valued resource, and must learn to balance their
relations with NGOs as well as government agencies. In addition the project will
increase our society's expertise about this important area of the world.