* 9630674
* Adaptations of Cyanobacteria to High Solar Irradiance: UV Tolerance "Strategies"
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Richard Castenholz, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 311,834.00

9630674 Castenholz The goals of this project are to evaluate the negative
effects of ultra-violet (UV) radiation on photosynthesis, growth, and health of
cyanobacteria and to determine the methods used by these microorganisms to
survive UV stress. Cyanobacteria (also called blue-green algae) are the closest
living relatives of those oxygen-producing microbes that built the Precambrian
stromatolites (1 -3 billion yrs ago) and that accounted eventually for the high
oxygen values in the Earth's atmosphere. The investigators are asking the
question of what biological "strategies" these microorganisms use to tolerate
current UV stress levels and the higher levels which would have been prevalent
during this strictly microbial period of the Earth's history. They have been
working on avoidance responses by motile cells and also on the effect of UV
"sunscreen" pigments, one of which (scytonemin), is located in a sheath or
capsule surrounding the cells of many species. The investigators have been able
to characterize this yellow pigment and experimentally show its great
effectiveness in allowing cells to tolerate high UV levels. This pigment
enhances survival of cyanobacteria under the high solar radiation of their
natural habitats and may have provided the protection for their growth,
colonization, and evolution during the Precambrian. By leaming how specific
organisms protect themselves from this harmful short-wave radiation, we may also
better understand the nature of UV damage in other organisms. Basic research of
the type we are doing may lead to applications in human health as well. For
example, as a result of previous work by the principal invesigator, scytonemin
is now undergoing clinical tests in another laboratory as a compound with highly
effective anti-inflammatory properties. In the continuation of this work with
cyanobacteria the investig ators hope to further understand the role of
scytonemin in UV protection in both actively growing and dormant cells, and the
role of various environmental factors in the regulation of scytonemin synthesis.
In addition, the investigators intend to determine the extent of metabolic
repair processes required for UV tolerance in cyanobacteria that do not possess
UV screening pigments. In this line of experimentation the investigators will
also assay the degree of damage to cells caused by "reactive oxygen" (e.g.
singlet oxygen) which may also be produced in cells as a result of UV
absorption. If this secondary effect of UV is substantial, we will determine the
role of cell carotenoid pigments (e.g. beta-carotene) in quenching this form of
damage.