* 9630782
* Functional Analysis of a Novel Calmodulin-Binding Protein   from Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,12/31/2001
* Anireddy Reddy, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/2001
* USD 318,125.00

9630782 Reddy Calmodulin, a key intracellular calcium receptor, is believed to
mediate a number of calcium regulated processes by interacting with and
regulating the activity of a number of key enzymes and structural proteins.
However, little is known about the proteins that interact with
calcium/calmodulin complexes in plants. The lack of information on the
calmodulin-binding proteins and their identity has been a major limitation in
plants in elucidating calmodulin action at the biochemical and molecular level.
This laboratory recently isolated a full-length (4 kb) cDNA encoding a novel
calmodulin-binding protein (KCBP, kinesin-like calmodulin-binding protein) from
Arabidopsis by screening an expression library with biotinylated calmodulin. The
deduced protein is 1261 amino acids long, with a carboxyl-terminal region domain
of about 340 amino acids that has significant sequence similarity with the motor
domain of kinesin heavy chains and contained putative ATP- and microtubule-
binding sites typical of kinesins. By analyzing calmodulin-binding activity of
truncated proteins expressed in Escherischia coli, the calmodulin-binding region
mapped to a stretch of about fifty amino acid residues near the C-terminus of
the protein. This new member of the kinesin superfamily is the first protein
shown to be both a calmodulin-binding protein and a kinesin heavy chain. A
homologue of KCBP that binds calmodulin has been isolated from potato,
suggesting that this protein is ubiquitous in plants. The calmodulin-binding
domain in these two proteins is highly conserved and not present in any of more
than forty kinesins or kinesin-like proteins thus far characterized from
animals. Very little is known about either calmodulin-binding proteins or
microtubule motor proteins in plants. The proposed studies are aimed at
elucidating the function of this novel protein. KCBP binding to microtubules
under various conditions will be analyzed, using either full-length or truncated
proteins expressed in and p urified from E. coli. In vitro motility assays will
be used to analyze the motor activity of KCBP and selected domains, including
the effect of calcium and calmodulin (in collaboration with Dr. Sharyn Endow of
Duke University). KCBP will be immunolocalized in various plant tissues and
cultured cells at different stages of the cell cycle. The calmodulin-binding
domain will be analyzed by fine mapping and determination of the binding
affinity. The expression of KCBP will be manipulated, constitutively or in a
tissue-specific manner, using sense and antisense constructs. The long term goal
is to understand the function of KCBP and the regulatory role of calcium and
calmodulin in KCBP-driven motor activity. The proposed studies will enhance our
understanding of this unique protein in intracellular transport and help gain
new insights into calmodulin function. ***