* 9630142
* Field Workshop for Interdisciplinary Earth Science          Investigations in Mongolia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Sarah Fowell, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 01/31/1998
* USD 61,419.00

9630142 Fowell Central Asia represents a sizable gap in Quaternary paleoclimate
databases because relatively few sediment cores have been collected from this
part of the world. This is particularly unfortunate due to the growing need for
detailed records of terrestrial climate change and ecosystem evolution. High-
resolution climate data are already available from oceans and ice sheets, and
comparable continental records are necessary in order to further understanding
of global climate changes. Located in the interior of the Asian continent,
Mongolia is subject to the seasonal interplay of the Siberian and Indian-African
monsoons, home to numerous endemic species of fish and insects, and the site of
exceptionally well preserved Mesozoic and Cenozoic vertebrate fossils. Mongolia
is thus a natural field laboratory for paleoclimate research, and climate
records from this country have unique potential to elucidate relationships
between monsoonal circulation, glaciation, orbital forcing, tectonic uplift,
terrestrial climate change, and rates of evolution. As a prelude to in-depth
studies of Mongolian climate history, a planning meeting and field workshop for
ten U.S. scientists with research interests in paleoclimate, paleontology, and
global change will be held in Mongolia in the fall of 1996. During a recent NSF-
sponsored workshop on Mongolian research held in South Carolina during October
of 1995, all ten of these scientists expressed a keen interest in attending a
one-month reconnaissance trip to Mongolia. Since the October workshop, plans for
multidisciplinary field-based research projects have advanced rapidly to the
point where an exchange of results and ideas between U.S. and Mongolian
scientists has become instrumental to the success of future projects. In
addition to planning meetings and seminars, there will be visits to potential
field sites and collection of preliminary samples in order to eliminate the
difficulty and risk of remote site sel ection. The planning meeting will be held
in Ulan Bator during August of 1996, during which time U.S. scientists will
spend five days meeting with members of the Mongolian Academy of Sciences to
exchange information and discuss logistics of potential projects. Meetings will
be followed by a two-week expedition to Lake Khubsugul, with stops along the way
to survey glacial features, loess deposits, and shallow lakes or bogs suitable
for collection of short cores. Khubsugul has been selected as the destination of
the field trip so that short sediment cores for preliminary palynological,
paleomagnetic, and carbon isotope analyses may be collected from the lakeshore
and from nearby ponds. Furthermore, the trip to Khubsugul is intended to
ascertain the feasibility of a large-scale coring project designed to extract
and extended paleoclimate record from this central Asian lake basin. ***