* 9630488
* Structure and Function of the Multienzyme Complex           Responsible for Acetate Cleavage in Methanosarcina barkeri
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2001
* David Grahame, Henry M Jackson Fdn for Advmt of Military Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 09/30/2001
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract 9630488 Grahame In methanogens, the central reaction in the pathway of
acetate degradation is carried out by a unique multienzyme complex (designated
ACDS for acetyl-CoA decarbonylase/synthase) that brings about cleavage of the
C-S and C-C bonds of the acetyl group of acetyl-CoA. The metabolic function of
this key enzyme is based on inorganic, metal-based chemistry that is highly
unusual among most organisms and the enzymes they contain. Despite the global
importance of this enzyme complex, the reaction it catalyzes is still poorly
understood, very little is known about its 3-dimensional structure, and almost
nothing is known about the interactions between various subunits and coenzyme
components within the complex. The long range goal of this project is to obtain
a detailed understanding at the molecular level of the enzymatic and regulatory
mechanisms that operate in the metabolic pathway of acetate cleavage in
methanogens. The objective of this research is to provide a solid foundation for
understanding the structure and function of the M. barkeri ACDS complex -- the
centerpiece of this pathway. In order to accomplish this three specific aims
will be pursued, as follows: (1) a thorough determination will be made of the
physicochemical properties of the ACDS subcomponent proteins (2) a detailed
study will be carried out on the kinetics of acetyltransferase (a critical
partial reaction in the overall process of acetyl-CoA cleavage), and (3) a
three-dimensional model of the complex will be obtained showing the location of
all subunits and domains involved in coenzyme, cofactor, and substrate binding.
At the completion of this project the overall structure of the enzyme complex
will be at hand. In addition, a determination will be made of the chemical
reactivity of the critical acetyl-enzyme intermediate -- the actual, but yet
uncharacterized species that undergoes C-C bond cleavage. %%% Species of
methane-forming archaebacteria, such as Methanosarcinae, are extremely imp
ortant, terminal components in anaerobic microbial decomposition (major global
examples include ruminant digestion, decay in virtually all freshwater
environments, and various human uses such as biomass conversion processes and
waste treatment). In our society, methane poses potential problems as a
greenhouse gas, but at the same time provides an extremely useful clean-burning
fuel. In contrast, nature has selected methane (which is inert to further
anaerobic reaction) to serve as the ultimate repository for metabolically-
generated reducing power in anaerobic environments. Although methanogens are
able to utilize a variety of one-carbon compounds, the major biological pathway
for production of methane is via cleavage of the two-carbon substrate, acetate,
by overall fermentation as follows: CH3COOH(CH4 + CO2. Nevertheless, only a
rather limited number of species of methanogens are capable of growth on acetate
as a sole source for carbon and energy. This research project will directly
contribute to the understanding of anaerobic metabolism of acetate in nature.
Furthermore, the project will have substantial impact on progress in broadly
related areas such as the biochemistry of metalloenzymes, the regulatory
significance of redox states and equilibria of enzyme substrates and cofactors,
the chemistry of unusual carbon-carbon bond rearrangements and carbonyl
insertion reactions in biological systems, the structure and regulation of
multienzyme complexes in general, and the physiology of energy transduction in
the methanogenic Archaea and other organisms living in extreme or unusual
environments. ***