* 9630465
* Protein Folding Triggered by Electron Transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Jay Winkler, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1999
* USD 412,500.00

9630465 Winkler The basic requirement for experimental investigations of
protein-folding kinetics is some means of triggering the folding (or unfolding)
process. In this research program, a new triggering method that permits
measurements in the nanosecond-to-millisecond time range will be employed.
Electron-transfer (ET) chemistry can trigger folding reactions in many proteins,
and there are many well established techniques for rapidly injecting electrons
into proteins on timescales as short as a few nanoseconds. Specifically, laser-
initiated ET will be used to trigger the folding of three high-potential heme
proteins; cytochrome c, cytochrome b562 and cytochrome f. The complex process of
protein folding involves dynamics that span more than twelve orders of magnitude
in time (picoseconds to minutes). The power of ET-initiated protein folding is
that it lays open this entire time regime for direct examination; when coupled
with the techniques of protein engineering, it will permit evaluation of the
importance of individual amino acids in each step of the folding process. %%%
Proteins are heteropolymers (polypeptides) built from the twenty naturally
occurring amino acids, often in combination with one or more cofactors. The
three-dimensional structure - the fold - of a protein that defines its
biological activity is determined by the sequence of amino acids in the
polypeptide chain. The ultimate objective in proteinfolding research then, is
the ability to predict the three dimensional structure of a protein solely on
the basis of its amino-acid sequence. An essential key to the problem is
understanding the series of chemical events that transforms a randomly
configured polypeptide into a fully folded protein. There are many methods
available for studying protein-folding kinetics but, for the most part, they are
limited to measurement timescales longer than one millisecond. There is
compelling evidence, however, that in many proteins a substantial degre e of
secondary and tertiary protein structure can develop on faster timescales.
Therefore, new experimental methods are required to observe the earliest events
in protein folding. ***