* 9630841
* Neural Control of Proteolysis in Specific Muscle Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Lewis Jacobson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 06/30/2000
* USD 285,000.00

9630841 Jacobson The objective of this research is to investigate how signals
received from nerves control the breakdown of protein in muscle cells. These
studies will be carried out in the nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans, which has
relatively few muscle and nerve cells, and in which genetic experiments can be
done. For these experiments a reporter transgene has been introduced into the
organism, since the degradation of its protein product can be easily followed.
This investigator previously found that this protein is stable in well-fed
animals, but is broken down upon starvation. This instability is counteracted by
signals from nerves to the muscles. These experiments are aimed at understanding
the molecular basis of the protein breakdown, the nerve signals that control it,
and the mechanism by which nerve signals decrease protein breakdown. Earlier
studies (in a previous grant) showed that the signaling involves release of
acetylcholine by the nerves, reception of this signal at the surface of the
muscles, and the consequent release of calcium ions from storage inside the
muscles. The calcium ions act by stimulating the enzyme protein kinase C (PKC)
which slows the rate of protein breakdown. In this proposal additional evidence
for the role of PKC will be sought, the targets of PKC action will be
determined, and experiments will done to determine how PKC slows the rate of
protein breakdown. A distinct group of muscle cells in this animal, that
receives different chemical signals, will be examined to see whether the same or
different signaling systems are operating. The regulation of protein degradation
is an important question, which these experiments will help to answer. ***