* 9630805
* Neuronal Mechanisms of Behavioral Hierarchy
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Tigran Norekian, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonya K. Sobrian
* 07/31/2000
* USD 249,327.00

9630805 Norekian All animals are engaged in a wide variety of behaviors. Many
behaviors are mutually exclusive since they follow different goals and might
involve opposite movements of the same body parts. Given a choice between two or
more behaviors at the same time, one behavior usually takes precedence over the
others. This behavior is considered to be dominant over the other behaviors.
Unrelated and competing behaviors are organized in a priority sequence in each
animal, termed a behavioral hierarchy. Understanding of how a behavioral choice
is made, why switching between different behaviors occurs and what are the
neural mechanisms which reorganize the behavioral repertoire of all animals in a
hierarchical manner represents a central issue in behavioral neurobiology. Most
advantageous for investigation of this issue are preparations in which behaviors
are relatively simple and well defined and the underlying neural circuits are
identified and characterized. Invertebrate preparations were found to be
particularly useful for these neuroethological investigations. The pteropod
mollusc Clione limacina appears to be an excellent model system for such
neuroethological studies since it has a few basic, very well-defined, mutually
exclusive behaviors, such as feeding, withdrawal, escape swimming, egg laying
and mating, as well as relatively simple, well-studied neural circuits producing
them. The simplicity of the preparation, including its behaviors and underlying
neural circuits, makes it possible to draw direct connections between the
activities of individual neurons and behavioral outputs. This task is much more
difficult, if at all possible, in complex organisms such as vertebrates. A
focused investigation of one simple animal by the present project will enable an
integrated understanding of neural interactions and modulatory changes in the
central nervous system which underlie the behavioral choice and dominance of one
behavior over others. Knowledge of neural circuits producing specific behaviors
in Clione allows the timely description of interconnections between neural
networks, that determine the reorganization of the behavioral repertoire in a
priority sequence (behavioral hierarchy). The main principals of this
reorganization and the underlying neural mechanisms appear to be similar not
only among invertebrates including Clione, but also in vertebrate animals.
Therefore, knowledge obtained in the Clione preparation would have broad
theoretical value.