* 9630397
* Resource Acquisition, Allometry, and Growth of Individuals  within Competing Plant Populations
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Fakhri Bazzaz, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 06/30/2000
* USD 329,999.00

9630397 Bazzaz The central role of competition in the ecology and evolution of
plant is a widely accepted concept. Yet, our understanding of the mechanisms of
competition is quit limited, in part because it does not have a strong
mechanistic basis. This project proposes a novel, multi- level approach to the
study of plant competition. The approach combines a new method for
characterizing physiological aspects of resource competition with traditional
growth analyses and demographic techniques. The system chosen for the study is
competitive interactions in experimentally established field monocultures of two
birch species, (Betula alleghaniensis and B. populifolia), that differ in their
requirements for light, water and nutrients. Resource uptake and stand
development will be monitored for two years. A third year will be devoted to
processing plant and soil samples and to modeling and synthesizing data. The
results will allow us to assess the magnitude and relative importance of
competition for light and nutrients at various stages of stand development, and
to empirically test a number of current hypotheses regarding resource
competition among plants. The research will be an important step in bridging the
gap between well-developed phenomenological models of plant competition and
stand development, and the physiological mechanisms of competition.