* 9630116
* Middle School Intervention to Prepare all Students for      Algebra
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2002
* Robert Moses, Algebra Project Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn B. Chval
* 03/31/2002
* USD 2,503,748.00

9630116 Robert P. Moses The Algebra Project (AP) is a middle school project
designed to significantly increase the proportion of students who complete
algebra successfully in late middle school or high school, and who enter college
preparatory mathematics studies. This NSF project will engage approximately 500
grade 5-8 teachers over a four year period in 3 rural sites in the Delta area of
Mississippi, Jackson, MS, Cambridge, MA, and New York, NY. Teachers will
participate in a minimum of 128 hours of enhancement starting with a 2-week
summer workshop in the AP materials and pedagogy. These inquiry-based materials
are designed as a supplement to other standards-based middle school curricula.
Over the next two school years, teachers will participate in 34 hours per year
of follow-up workshops and mentoring from AP trainers in their own classroom.
The teacher development activities will be guided by a Site Professional
Development Team, which includes a mathematician/mathematics educator, AP
trainers, and site teachers. The AP activity at each site includes community
development work to deepen community commitment to mathematics education reform
for underrepresented students in the mathematics and science career education
path. The project will also begin to document and research the effects of
community development work. The project is funded at 4-year project is funded by
NSF at $2,503,748 with auditable cost-sharing of $1,739,699. This project is
connected to a $12,000,000 award from the Open Society Institute of the Soros
Foundations.