* 9630008
* The Numerical Simulation of Weather Modification By Cloud   Seeding
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1996,10/31/2000
* Harold Orville, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 10/31/2000
* USD 427,500.00

9630008 Orville This research continues ongoing investigations into the
numerical simulation of cloud seeding effects on the cloud scale and mesoscale.
The work is broad based, treating stratiform orographic clouds and hailstorms
over the northern High Plains. Models have been developed at the South Dakota
School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&T) that simulate the development of clouds,
rain, snow, and hail. Methods have been developed that treat the numerical
simulation of the seeding of convective and stratiform clouds. The simulation of
the seeding agent involves the release of the agent, the spread of the seeding
agent throughout the atmosphere, and the interaction of the seeding agent with
the supercooled liquid water in the cloud. Only in the past few years have these
methods been incorporated into fully three- dimensional, time-dependent models.
This allows, for the first time, the many hypotheses of the cloud seeding
community to be tested in the strongest scientific frameworks, although many
useful insights and greater understanding have resulted from lesser dynamic
frameworks. Studies of winter/spring situations will be carried out. In
addition, the pattern of summer convection, as detected by radar pattern
climatology leads to much different precipitation patterns than in the winter.
The Principal Investigators also will simulate those patterns. These summertime
cloud situations will allow testing of the effects of simulated seeding on the
merging of cloud cells, an important effect detected in field experiments in
previous research. The seeding of hailstorms has been simulated and is revealing
intriguing results. Whether or not the storms have an active coalescence process
and the lifetime of the cells determine the degree of response to the seeding.
Also, the timing and the placement of the seeding material are important for the
seeding to be effective. Further work is needed to strengthen the theoretical
basis. The m odel being used for this work simulates the formation and
development of the precipitating ice particle spectra. Such detail is necessary
if conclusions are to be drawn concerning the effects of cloud seeding on
hailstorms. The Principal Investigators also have developed models that simulate
the processes of atmospheric electricity in clouds. The numerical simulations of
seeding effects on the storm s microphysics will be applied to a vigorous
thunderstorm and analyzed as to their effects on the storm electrification.
Successful completion of this research should lead to increases in understanding
of the microphysical processes involved in precipitation production and storm
electrification.