* 9630779
* Plant Genes Involved in Agrobacterium-Mediated              Transformation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Stanton Gelvin, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/1999
* USD 360,000.00

9630779 Gelvin Agrobacterium tumefaciens causes the disease Crown Gall on many
species of plants. The molecular mechanism of Crown Gall tumorigenesis involves
the binding of bacterial cells to the plant cell wall, and the processing of a
region of the Ti-(tumor inducing) plasmid and transfer of this T-(transfer) DNA
to plant cells. Ti plasmid has been modified to be used as a vector for genetic
engineering in plants. As a result of two decades of research, we know much
about the contribution of bacterial genes and proteins to T-DNA transfer and
tumorigenesis. However, we know little about the role plant genes and proteins
play in these processes. In an attempt to identify host-encoded factors
necessary for Agrobacterium binding, T-DNA transfer and integration, and
phytohormone signal transduction, Dr. Gelvin has recently screened different
Arabidopsis thaliana ecotypes and T-DNA insertion mutants for susceptibility to
crown gall tumorigenesis, as well as the ability to express other T-DNA-encoded
functions both transiently and stably. In this research project, Dr. Gelvin's
proposes experiments to identify specifically the steps of crown gall
tumorigenesis that are blocked in Arabidopsis T-DNA insertion mutants that have
already been identified. The characterization of these host genes will not only
increase our understanding of crown gall tumorigenesis, but will also contribute
to our knowledge of basic plant cell biology. Finally, an understanding and the
isolation of the host genes involved in these processes may allow us to
manipulate these species so that they become more amenable to T-DNA-mediated
genetic transformation.