* 9630032
* Dissertation Research;  Social Fragmentation and Youth      Identity in Trindad Popular Music
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Paulla Ebron, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1997
* USD 3,483.00

This project supports the dissertation research of a cultural anthropologist
from Stanford University. The project is to study the role of popular music in
defining the self-identity of young people in Trinidad. Calypso music has always
played a central role in expressing popular social concerns in the country's
history, from independence through its current position as an underdeveloped
node in a transnational flow of people and resources. Using ethnographic
techniques of participant observation and intensive interviewing, as well as
drawing upon the results of a random survey of 850 households in Trinidad and
extensive demographic data on music listenership by location, age, gender,
socio-economic status and ethnicity, the student will document what music means
to the `oil boom` (1970s to early 1980s) generation of young adults. The project
will investigate the variation according to race, class and gender in how people
listen to and participate in popular music. The project will analyze changes in
the musical styles (some seen as more `escapist`, others as more `political` or
`roots oriented`), audience reactions, and the general social and cultural
antecedents to musical production. This project is important because is will
advance our understanding of how locally produced music draws on a global set of
sources to become meaningful to diverse communities. Given the enormous growth
in importance of popular music as a source of identity for young people in the
contemporary world, this case study will produce a valuable advance in our
knowledge about the meaning of music for young people. In addition this project
will add to our society's expertise about this important region of the world.