* 9630459
* Molecular Mechanism of Protein Transport into Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Kenneth Keegstra, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1999
* USD 335,000.00

9630459 Keegstra A significant unsolved problem in cell biology is the question
of how cytoplasmically synthesized proteins are targeted to the various
compartments of eukaryotic cells. In plant cells, chloroplasts offer an
excellent system for studying this problem. Most chloroplastic proteins are
encoded in the nucleus, synthesized in the cytoplasm as higher molecular weight
precursors, and imported posttranslationally across the two envelope membranes.
The long term goal of this research is to provide a detailed molecular
understanding of how this import process occurs. Significant process has been
made in recent years in identifying and characterizing the targeting signals
contained within precursor proteins, and in identifying and characterizing the
molecular components of the transport apparatus. The goal of this project is to
understand how precursor proteins interact with the components of the transport
apparatus to achieve proper targeting and translocation. To this end, three
specific objectives will be pursued. The first is to investigate the
supramolecular structure of transport components present in the outer membrane
of the chloroplast envelope and determine how their arrangement is altered by
precursors. The second is to investigate the formation of translocation contact
sites that bring together transport components present in the outer envelope
membrane, the inner envelope membrane and in the chloroplastic stromal space.
Both of these objectives will be pursued using chemical cross-linking strategies
to stabilize translocation complexes, followed by sensitive immunological and
biochemical techniques to determine the composition of each complex. The third
objective will be to investigate the topology of two components of the transport
apparatus present in the outer envelope membrane. These two proteins were chosen
for detailed study because they are thought to be important in the transport
apparatus and because they appear to have unusual properties for membrane p
roteins. Understanding how these proteins are situated in the envelope membrane
should eventually lead to new insights into how they mediate the transport of
precursor proteins across the envelope membranes. %%% Understanding protein
import into chloroplasts is important for at least two reasons. First, it adds
to our understanding of a basic cellular process, i.e., intracellular protein
trafficking. Second, many economically important functions within plants occur
in the chloroplasts, and therefore an increased understanding of protein
transport into chloroplasts will have practical significance for efforts to
employ genetic engineering to alter the metabolic processes inside chloroplasts.
***