* 9630105
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Diet and Habitat of        Australopithecus
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Carmel Schrire, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 11,470.00

Under the direction of Dr. Carmel Schrire, Mr Matt Sponheimer will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. His research will be both methodological and
substantive, the first aspect directed to improvement of the technique to
determine indigenous carbon isotope ratios in tooth enamel and the second
towards reconstructing prehistoric diet and environment. In a widely used
anthropological and biological technique, researchers determine the carbon 12-13
isotopic ratio in bone or tooth and use these data to reconstruct aspects of an
animal's diet. Because different categories of plants follow different
photosynthetic pathways they vary in carbon isotope ratio and this differential
is reflected in the animals which eat these plants. Through analysis of fossil
remains it is possible to gain insight into both diet and environment. While
this technique has produced intuitively reasonable results, a number of aspects
require refinement. One involves diagenesis - alteration of fossil material
after burial - and in individual analyses it is often uncertain whether all
measured carbon was incorporated before the organism's death or whether some
derives from surrounding soil. Mr. Sponheimer will conduct experiments to
investigate this question. He will also compare isotope ratios from different
teeth of modern day pigs fed controlled diets to determine whether between-tooth
variation exists. In the second part of his study, Mr. Sponheimer will analyze
both hominid and non-hominid mammalian remains from the South African site of
Makapansgat. This cave infilling is extremely important to paleoanthropologists
because the fossil-rich material contains abundant early hominid remains which
are classed in the species Australopithecus africanus. It is known that several
hominid species existed in southern Africa and paleoanthropologists wish to
understand the different adaptational strategies followed by each. While isotope
ratio data is available for one of these, no work has been done on A. africanus.
The data which Mr. Sponheimer collects will be of interest to many
paleoanthropologists. It will shed new light on early hominid adaptations and
the environment which they inhabited. This project will also contribute to the
training of a promising young scientist.