* 9630791
* Freeze-Thaw Cycles and Summer Drought:  Constraints on WaterFlow in Related Rhododendron Taxa across two LTER sites
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Erik Nilsen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 12/31/1999
* USD 168,585.00

9630791 Nilsen The water conducting ability of plant stems must be sufficient to
supply water to leaves for growth and other physiological processes. However,
thewater conducting ability of the stem can be reduced when air bubbles
formwithin the cells that normally conduct water. These bubbles can occur during
drought when the tension, which pulls water through the plant from the soil to
the leaves, becomes too great and the water column breaks. Also, during the
winter, freezing of the water inside these cells causes air dissolved in the
water to form bubbles which can expand and block water flow during periods of
thaw. We will be studying the impact of the frequency and duration of drought
and winter freeze-thaws on the water conducting ability of stems of related
Rhododendron species. We will be utilizing the natural variation in winter
freeze-thaw frequency and intensity of summer drought provided by two Long Term
Ecological Research (LTER) sites to evaluate these following objectives: 1)
determine the physical factors which control the maximum potential water flow
through these plants, 2) to examine possible limits to water transport in
relation to plant response to climatic patterns of water availability, and 3) to
determine the structural/physiological adaptations of these species which may
prevent or lessen the potential for the development of air blockages in their
water conducting cells. This study will provide a cross-LTER comparison of the
ecological physiology of closely related taxa, provide information of the
controls of water flow through plants, and provide information about the water
use of understory plants to be used in models of ecosystem water use budgeting.