* 9630809
* Structure-Function Relationships in E. coli Response        Regulators NarL and NarP
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Robert Gunsalus, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2000
* USD 297,000.00

9630809 Dickerson The goal of this project is to understand the molecular
mechanism of two-component regulatory systems of genetic expression, using the
NarQ/NarX/NarL/ NarP system that controls nitrate respiration in bacteria. In
this system, NarQ and NarX proteins sense the presence of nitrate or nitrite in
the surrounding environment, and activate response regulator molecules NarL or
NarP by phosphorylating a particular aspartic acid. The activated response
regulators then bind to specific sites on DNA, turning genes on and off as
appropriate. The project has begun with a successful crystal structure analysis
of NarL. Further projects planned are: (1) Completion of the NarL structure in a
different crystal environment, to examine crystal environment effect; (2) X-ray
structure analysis of the similar but independently-acting NarP; (3) Structure
analysis of the DNA-binding C-terminal domain of NarL in a complex with its
recognition sequence of DNA; (4) Examination of constitutive mutants of NarL and
NarP that resist dephosphorylation and bind strongly to DNA; and (5) X-ray
analysis of full NarL/DNA and NarP/DNA complexes. *** The significance of this
study is that it will be the first systematic investigation at the molecular
level of a two component sensor/response system, with results applicable to the
broad evolutionary range of bacterial two-component control systems. It will
also shed light on multi- component genetic control systems in higher organisms,
that also act by phosphorylating key effector proteins. Taken together the
NarQ/NarX/NarL/NarP family comprises a complex but flexible control system that
can adjust the relative expression of several genes in response to the relative
concentrations of nitrate and nitrite. The full logic behind this four-component
example of a molecular response network is not yet understood. An increased
understanding of how it works and why it must be so complex is the major goal of
this project. %%%