* 9630430
* Catalytic Mechanism of Acetoacetate Decarboxylase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Karen Allen, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 08/31/2000
* USD 313,982.00

9630430 Allen The formation of a Schiff base (imine) between a carbonyl group
and an amine nucleophile, with loss of water, is a prevalent reaction whose
importance as an intermediate in enzyme catalyzed reactions has become apparent
in the past five decades. The long-term objective of the proposed research is to
define the structural and chemical mechanisms utilized by enzymes to promote the
formation and reactivity of Schiff-base intermediates. A combination of the
complementary techniques of X-ray crystallography, protein chemistry and
kinetics will be used as tools. The proposed model system is the enzyme
acetoacetate decarboxylase (AADase) complexed with its substrates, products and
covalent intermediates or their stable analogs. The enzyme catalyzes the
decarboxylation of acetoacetate to acetone and carbon dioxide is a "simple"
decarboxylase, requiring no cofactors, instead using the -amino group of enzymic
Lysl 15 with a pKa_6.0 to form the reactive covalent adduct. The X-ray
crystallographic structure of the native, uncomplexed AADase enzyme will be
determined. The structures of several enzyme-ligand complexes will also be
solved: AADase will be complexed with 1) 2-oxopropane sulfonate, a substrate
analog, 2~ acetowruvate and acetoacetone, covalent intermediate analogs, and 3)
acetone, the product. These structures will act as "snap-shots" along the
catalytic pathway of the enzyme. Kinetic experiments to uncover the rate
limiting step(s) will be performed. These will consist of the measurement of
reaction rates with synthetic substrates and acylating agents bearing electron
donating and withdrawing groups. Intermediate trapping and solvent exchange
experiments will be performed on mutant K1 16R AADase (20% wild-type activity)
in which the pKa perturbing Iysine 116 has been mutated to arginine to assess
whether there has been a change in the rate-limiting step(s) and/or stability
ofthe Schiffbase. The information afforded by these studies will allow us to
assess the chemical and struct ural contributions of the enzyme to the stability
and reactivity of the essential Schiff-base intermediate. This approach could
ultimately be extended to the analysis of less well-defined enzyme systems. %%%
Underlying the proposed research is the understanding of the basic methods used
by enzymes to increase the rate of chemical reactions by as much as one billion
fold. The proposed studies will dissect the chemical steps used by one enzyme,
acetoacetate decarboxylase (AADase), to achieve such rate accelerations. The
chemical steps will be examined in two ways 1) by comparing the velocity of the
reaction of AADase with its substrate (the substance with which it normally
interacts) and chemically altered substrates and 2) by measuring the velocity of
reactions promoted by AADases in which the pieces of the enzyme which
participate in the chemical reactions have been altered using molecular biology.
These chemical studies will then be correlated with studies of the
threedimensional structure of the enzyme in atomic detail. Using the method of
X-ray crystallography, we can visualize the exact position of the atoms that
make up the protein AADase, thus obtaining a detailed picture of the shape of
the catalytic machinery. Such pictures will be determined for AADase, alone and
in the presence of substances called inhibitors, which resemble substrate, but
which cannot participate in chemical reactions with the enzyme. Also, the
interaction of AADase with the end-product of the normal chemical reaction can
be visualized by this technique. These structures will act as "snapshots" along
the pathway of the enzyme. Understanding of the relationship between structure
and J~nct~on for the enzyme AADase can ultimately be used to understand other
enzymatic reactions as well as to design enzymes with novel functions. ***