* 9630270
* Markets and Institutions:  A Matching Approach
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Garey Ramey, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1999
* USD 139,751.00

Ramey 9630270 Economists have long been concerned with the tradeoffs between
market and nonmarket institutions with respect to carrying out transactions. The
proposed research breaks new ground by explicitly analyzing the impact of market
interaction on the determination and performance of agent-specific trading
institutions, based on three key hypotheses: (1) forming productive
relationships requires that agents meet with other agents in a matching process
that reflects market interaction; (2) newly-matched agents make investments that
are specific to their relationship and that cannot be contracted upon
explicitly; and (3) productive relationships continue through time and require
ongoing effort that is also not contractible. The key insight is that market
forces shape trading relationships through their effect on the agents'
incentives to provide ongoing effort. The research develops a mathematical
general-equilibrium framework consisting of (1) models of bilateral investment
and trading under a variety of organizational forms; (2) a matching model
reflecting possibilities for asymmetries, search effort and inflow of new
agents; and (3) a model of the capital market in which agents obtain resources
needed for specific investment as well as creation of new productive assets.
This develops a preliminary version of the framework, and reports a range of new
analytical results illustrating the power of the approach. First, market forces
can counteract the underinvestment incentive deriving from incomplete
contractibility of investment, and first-best efficiency can emerge at a
positive level of market friction. second, reducing market friction can have
adverse short-run welfare effects by destabilizing existing trading
relationships, and such reductions can also minimize long-run welfare. Third,
market forces affect agents choice of integrated versus nonintegrated
organizational forms. The project studies organizational form, matching,
renegotiation and welfare in settings characteri zed by uncertainty and/or
incomplete information regarding the quality of productive relationships, as
well as applications to issues in macroeconomics, including economic growth,
policy propagation and nominal rigidity.