* 9630118
* Reconnecting the Academic and Industrial Analytical         Communities:  Summer Workshops on Identifying Common Ground
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Gary Blanchard, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 05/31/2000
* USD 60,000.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project,
supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, will enable two
workshops designed to bring together industrial and academic analytical
scientists for the purpose of increased interaction and intellectual exchange.
Under the aegis of this three-year standard grant, Professor Gary Blanchard of
Michigan State University, Dr. Bruce Chase of the DuPont Company, and Dr. David
Rothman of the Dow Chemical Company will organize these workshops that will be
held in off-years relative to the Gordon Research Conference on Analytical
Chemistry. These activities will bring together young analytical scientists from
academe and industry with the objective of enhancing understanding and
communication between these two groups so that training of analytical scientists
and their subsequent contributions to the field will be strengthened. There is a
clear need for better communication between `those that teach and those that do`
analytical science in academic and industrial settings. Two workshops will be
held that are designed to provide opportunities for young analytical scientists
from academe and industry to interact and explore areas of mutual and
complementary interests in research and education. These workshops are expected
to give rise to a network of analytical scientists across these two communities
that facilitates the mutually beneficial exchange of ideas and information as
the science and technology of analytical chemistry evolves.