* 9631063
* Protonation and Conformational Control of Photosynthetic    Reaction Center Function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Colin Wraight, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1999
* USD 330,000.00

9631063 Wraight The photosynthetic reaction center (RC) provides an almost ideal
system for studying the roles of internal electrostatics and conformational
mobility in protein function, and this project focusses on two important topics:
(1) intra-protein proton transfer, which plays a crucial role in almost all
catalysis, and (2) conformational relaxations in response to internal charge
generation and displacement, also of universal importance in catalytic function.
Specific experiments are proposed for RCs from Rb. sphaeroides and Rps. viridis,
both of which have known atomic structures. (i) Site-specific mutagenesis of
selected residues in the L, M and H subunits of the bacterial RC, chosen to
probe their role in proton transfer coupled to the reduction of QA and QB.
Charge movements will be monitored by electrochromic effects on the RC pigments,
by direct electrical measurements on membrane systems, and by infra- red
spectroscopy (ii) Studies of osmotic pressure and solvent isotope effects to
probe the role of internal waters as a reservoir of protons inside the protein,
and of bulk water in the exchange of quinone and quinol at the QB site. Both
effects will be assayed by measurements of multiple turnovers of the RC, driven
at high light intensity, to reveal limiting steps in the steady-state turnover.
(iii) Studies of P+ QA - charge recombination as a function of temperature and
pre-illumination, using the charge recombination kinetics as an assay of the
energentics, and spectral responses of the pigments as an assay of the internal
electric field. The research will probe the nature of the important conformation
events by controlling the RC ground state through the ionic milieu and the pH,
and by using selected mutants. This work will be extented to P+ QB-
recombination, over the temperature range that it works. %%% All aspects of
protein structure and function depend on the myriad of electrostatic
interactions between atoms and groups inside the molecule. Almost all aspects of
protein function require movement of the molecule, at all levels of organization
from individual atoms to coordinated motions of sections of the macromolecule.
Such movements respond to and generate electrostatic effects, so that the two
are intimately entwined., have been increasingly recognized in recent years.
Although of very general importance, experimental systems suitable for studying
these processes are extremely limited and, especially with respect to dynamic
events, they are essentially restricted to light activated protein reactions.
This project utilizes the photosynthetic reaction center (RC) from a bacterium
as an ideal model system for studying these fundamentally important processes.
The light-driven reaction of the RC generates charge movements inside the
protein, which initiate molecular motions (conformational relaxations) which
then modify the subsequent behavior of the charges. These events can be
disentangled by selective modification of the structure of the RC by
mutagenesis, and by restricting the time-evolution of the RC states by cooling
to low temperatures. Conformational motions are also necessary to allow small
molecules in and out of a protein, as part of the protein's functional cycle.
This, too, will be studied in terms of how protons pass through the protein to
reach their site of reaction, how water inside the protein is involved in this,
and how water comes and goes as other molecules enter and leave their active
sites. ***