* 9631347
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG:Infrastructure Needs for Preparing Students for the Industrial and Business Workforce
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2002
* John Lowengrub, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2002
* USD 1,017,497.00

Abstract 9631347 In response to the shrinking academic job market for
mathematicians, the School of Mathematics at the University of Minnesota has
developed new educational programs to train mathematics students for nonacademic
positions and an active industrial research program to provide mathematics
faculty with new research opportunities. The Minnesota Center for Industrial
Mathematics (MCIM) and the well-established faculty in Numerical Analysis
propose to join forces to enhance further these existing educational and
research activities. The MCIM, established in 1993, is devoted to conducting
research in partnership with industry and to providing career training and
opportunities for students seeking employment in business, industry and
government laboratories. The industrial/business student internship is the
cornerstone of this program. The program in Numerical Analysis and Scientific
Computing is devoted to conducting multi-disciplinary research primarily with
university based scientists. The educational program serves to train mathematics
students for both academic and industrial employment as well as to provide
service training for many engineering students. Partnership with Industry is
being developed through the MCIM. In fact, the two groups, MCIM and Numerical
Analysis, have an overlapping membership. A common goal of these groups is to
improve the quality of education, research and career opportunities for students
bound for the industrial, business and scientific workplace. This award will
expand and strengthen these educational and research programs through support
for graduate students, an experimental computing laboratory and career
development services. This award is consistent with the GOALI activity, in that
the funding awarded is centered on the activity of graduate students who will be
in real industrial settings.