* 9631236
* Thermal Transport in Copper and Manganese Oxides:  Lattice  Interactions and the Superconducting and Magnetic Phase     Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Joshua Cohn, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 235,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9631236 Cohn This research involves systematic
experimental studies of lattice and electronic transport in doped transition
metal oxides of perovskite-like structure. The goal of these studies is to
elucidate and model the role of lattice vibrations in determining the
superconducting and magnetic phase behavior in these materials, particularly in
the copper and manganese oxides. Thermal conductivity and thermopower will be
employed as probes of interactions between the lattice and the charge and spin
degrees of freedom. The evolution of these interactions with charge-carrier
doping and their dependence on temperature and magnetic field are a central
focus of this research. Analogue systems with similar crystal structure, but
with transition metals other than copper and manganese, have been selected as
"controls" in these studies. These include ruthenium and nickel oxide compounds
for which the strength of electron-lattice and electron-electron interactions
appear to be very different %%% This research focuses on the physics of
electronic and thermal conduction in transition metal oxides, a broad class of
materials that have attracted considerable attention in recent years both for
the novel physics their properties manifest, and for their potential use in
future technologies. Of particular interest in this study are the interactions
which control the superconducting and magnetic phase transitions in the copper
and manganese oxides, respectively. These transitions vary with charge-carrier
concentration in systematic ways within each class of materials. Signatures of
the mechanisms underlying these phase behaviors will be sought in the
temperature and magnetic field dependencies of the thermal transport properties,
where some anomalies have already been identified. ***