* 9631485
* Foldase Catalyzed Protein Folding and Molecular Biology     Workshops for K-12 Students
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Robert Noiva, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2002
* USD 396,000.00

9631485 Noiva Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is a "foldase" located in the
lumen of the rough endoplasmic reticulum where it facilitates several of the
reactions required for the folding, assembly, and posttranslational modification
of secretory and membrane proteins. A site on the PDI molecule which recognizes
unfolded and misfolded nascent polypeptides has been identified and demonstrated
to be involved in PDI-facilitated folding. In this proposal, the role of this
peptide binding site in PDI activity will be further characterized. The
technique of oligonucleotide-directed site mutagenesis will be used to generate
mutants of PDI lacking the peptide binding site or containing single amino acid
substitutions in that site. Wild type and mutant PDI will be expressed in both
E. coli and Pichia pastoris expression systems to generate the highest yield of
enzyme. The effect of loss of peptide binding activity on PDI activity will be
assessed on both the activity of the soluble enzyme and its ability to catalyze
properly folded proteins in dog pancreas microsomes. Preliminary evidence
indicates that PDI has little or no substrate sequence preference, but is
hypothesized to recognize a stretch of 6 amino acids in the polypeptide chain.
Substrate preferences for the PDI foldase activity will be further characterized
by determining length and sequence requirements for peptide binding by PDI using
a combination of site-directed mutagenesis, affinity chromatography, and
affinity panning techniques. The role of calcium in PDI function in the cell
will also be assessed. Calcium does not have any direct effect on PDI-
facilitated folding or peptide binding activity in vitro, but may be involved in
localization of PDI to the lumen of the rough endoplasmic reticulum. This
calcium-mediated localization of PDI will be further characterized using the
techniques of pulse-chase labeling, western blotting, and confocal microscopy. A
series of summer workshops in Modern Techniques in Experimental Biology for K-12
students and teachers will be developed. Workshops will be composed of a series
of experimental modules presenting techniques used in the modern molecular
biology laboratory and will be tailored to the level of junior/senior high
school students. Modules will be interchanged between workshops depending on the
abilities and prior experiences of the students. The workshops will use a
recently completed Molecular Biology Laboratory teaching facility funded by the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute. %%% Current technology allows scientists to use
bacterial cultures to produce recombinant human proteins of clinical and
pharmaceutical importance. However, bacteria lack chaperone and foldase proteins
required to fold these mammalian proteins efficiently. In this proposal, protein
disulfide isomerase (PDI), one of the foldases which assists protein folding in
humans, will be studied. In order to assist proteins in folding, PDI must
recognize a motif on the newly synthesized protein which identifies that protein
as requiring assistance for proper folding. In this proposal, the role of
protein binding by PDI in assisted folding and the motif that is recognized by
PDI will be characterized. Furthermore, the role of intracellular calcium in
directing PDI to the area in cells where protein folding occurs will also be
studied. This information will strengthen our understanding of the cellular
function of PDI and lead to the better use of PDI in improving yields in the
production of recombinant human proteins in bacteria. A series of summer
workshops in Modern Techniques in Experimental Biology for K-12 students and
teachers will be developed. These workshops will provide opportunities for
students from Native American reservations and rural communities with limited
educational resources to have access to current technology used in experimental
biology. Students will be encouraged to learn biological techniques at the
molecular level such as electrophoresis, PCR, and cloning recombinant DNA.
Experimental module s offered at the workshop will reinforce science at their
own schools, present new and exciting concepts and hopefully motivate students
to pursue further opportunities in Biology and the Biomedical Sciences. ***