* 9631980
* Nature's Ingenuity in Stereoselective (Phenol) Coupling
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Norman Lewis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 192,000.00

9631980 Lewis One of the most important yet poorly understood biological events
in nature is that of bimolecular phenoxy radical coupling. Surprisingly, phenoxy
radical coupling reactions have long been imperfectly characterized, and are
frequently described as lacking stereoselectivity based on their catalytic
properties in vitro. Yet even a cursory analysis of such reactions in nature
indicates that some mechanism for conferring stereospecificity must exist, since
the products are stereospecific. Seeking to understand how this
stereoselectivity is produced, the investigators examined the coupling of two
achiral molecules of E-coniferyl alcohol to give (+)-pinoresinol, one of the
simplest dimeric lignan products known in nature. They established that a 78kDa
protein is necessary to confer both regio- & stereospecificity on the products.
This stereoselective coupling only occurs when auxiliary oxidative capacity is
provided through the addition of either an oxidase or a free-radical initiator,
such as ammonium peroxydisulfate or FMN. This investigation will seek to define
the biochemical mechanism of this unique mode of control. The relationships
between the 78 kDa protein, the substrate and an auxiliary oxidase/oxidant will
be studied. That is, does the operative mechanism involve initial binding of two
E-coniferyl alcohol molecules to the 78 kDa protein, or is the substrate for
binding actually the free-radical species obtained via one electron oxidation? A
third possibility is that some charge-transfer mechanism is in place, although
the absence of any detectable active site (prosthetic group) makes this
unlikely. The investigators will conduct a detailed kinetic anaylsis of the
coupling reaction as well as defining the substrate specificity for
binding/coupling and the effect of putative inhibitors. In this way the
mechanism for conferring stereoselectivity in phenoxy radical coupling will be
determined and will serve as a starting point to determine the generality of
this m echanism in nature. %%% One of the most important, and yet most poorly
understood, biological events in nature is that of bimolecular phenoxy radical
coupling, the joining of two molecules containing phenol moieties. It is highly
significant, since it eventually leads to the formation of woody and cork
tissues, insect cuticles, fungal fruiting bodies, aphid pigments, and a host of
defense molecules, particularly in plants. Taken together, phenolic coupling
reactions account for roughly 35-40% of all organic plant material. Two phenol
moieties can often be joined in numerous ways, with the individual products
being mirror images of each other. Before the advances by these investigators,
in vitro reactions only yielded mixtures of various mirror image products. In
vivo reactions, however, often yield only one product and in one mirror image
form. How is that specificity attained? The investigators have isolated a
protein, which they have called a "specifier", which confers such specificity on
the reactions. The goal of this project is to define the biochemical mechanism
of this novel protein. ***