* 9631243
* MPWG:  Developing Gender-equitable Science Activities for   Girls through University-based Service Learning for Women
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Andrea Zardetto-Smith, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/1998
* USD 97,867.00

This program will design, implement, evaluate, and disseminate a unique model
program for: (a) presenting science activities that will interest and challenge
elementary school girls in extracurricular settings while providing them with
role models; and (b) helping female undergraduate and graduate students improve
their scientific/technical expertise and self esteem by giving a worthwhile
outlet for their technical knowledge. The project is co-sponsored by the
University of Iowa Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) Program and the
Association of Women in Science- Eastern Iowa Chapter, with the cooperation of
the Iowa City Community School District, and the Iowa City Area Sciences Center,
Inc. Three teams, each with one female faculty, staff, or post-doctoral
scientist or engineering, one female representative from the science center,and
4-6 female undergraduate and graduate students, will design science curriculum
packets. Science teachers will serve as educational consultants. Each curriculum
packet will include and integrated set of gender-equitable science activities
developed around a different multi-disciplinary theme. The science themes will
complement, not duplicate, the classroom curriculum. Activities in each
curriculum packet will include: (a) short, exploratory activities that can be
completed in 15 minutes or less; (b) longer activities that require at least 30
to 60 minutes to complete; and (c) extension activities that can be completed by
students at home with or without parental involvement. Activities will use
gender-free language, require hands-on experience in small groups, develop
research skills, relate to daily life, be non- competitive, and support more
than one correct outcome. Such activities are appropriate for use with both
girls and boys, are more effective for girls than traditional science curricula.
The science curriculum packets will include: (a) edible chemistry (for grades
K-1), (b) brain power (for grades 2-3), and (c) genetics (grade 4-6). Each team
will present these activities to elementary school-aged girls and boys in extra-
curricular settings (e.g., before and after school day care programs;
neighborhood centers that serve low- income families; elementary school science
clubs; clubs such as Girls Scouts, Campfire,and 4-H; and community science
programs) in Iowa City and surrounding school districts. The design teams will
evaluate the effectiveness of each activity and make appropriate modifications.
The program will benefit three groups: (a) elementary school girls (and boys),
(b) female college students, and (c) female professional scientists and
engineers. The program will increase the awareness of parents and educators of
gender issues in SEM; place science education in a community context; extend the
scientific and technical resources of the university into the community; and
increase the visibility of female scientists and engineers.