* 9631944
* The Welfare State, the Labor Market, and the Stability of   Family Income:  A Comparison of the U.S. and Germany
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Thomas DiPrete, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1999
* USD 96,395.00

This is a study of the stability of family income in the United States and
Germany. It compares the relative importance of labor market and welfare state
institutions in accounting for or controlling temporal instability in living
standards. A substantial body of research has arisen in recent years to assess
the impact of rapid technological change and the globalization of markets on
work careers, earnings, and the structure of inequality in society. It is now
clear that the impact of structural change on these outcomes depends both on the
institutional characteristics of labor markets and on state social welfare
policy, and scholars have addressed a number of important aspects concerning
these linkages. Two important issues, however, have received relatively little
attention. First, little research has focused on the dynamics of family income
as opposed to individual earnings. Second, little is known about the relative
importance of labor market institutions, welfare state policies, and changes in
family composition in creating or damping turbulence in the financial situation
of families. A comparison of the United States and Germany will be valuable for
three reasons. First, the institutional character of both Germany's labor
markets and Germany's welfare state policies are quite different from those of
the United States. Second, family structure is more stable in Germany than in
the United States. Third, there exist high quality longitudinal data that allow
comparable measures of the relevant variables for the two countries. The
research utilizes data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and from the
German Socio-Economic Panel to measure the level of fluctuation in overall
family income and in its principal components (labor income, asset income,
private transfers, taxes, and government transfers) for the period from 1983
until the very recent past. Fluctuation in these components of income and in
overall income will be decomposed using standard methods, and the decomposition
s for the United States and Germany will be compared in order to establish the
amount of cross national differences, and the explanation for these differences.
The findings will be valuable for several subdisciplines of sociology and
economics, as well as for understanding the effect of government policies on
families. This research addresses key questions concerning human capital,
especially the ways that alternative labor market and welfare state institutions
affect family income and well-being.