* 9631061
* Genetic Analysis of Eukaryotic DNA Mismatch Repair Pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* R. Michael Liskay, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 334,908.00

9631061 Liskay Genetic stability in eukaryotic cells requires the proper
functioning of a number of DNA replication, repair and recombination processes.
One such repair process, DNA mismatch (DMR), plays major role in preventing
mutations and in the correction of mispairs that from during genetic
recombination. Therefore, a defect in DMR leads to higher rates of spontaneous
mutation, a "mutator" phenotype. Several lines of evidence indicate evolutionary
conservation of DMR. Conservation of DMR is also illustrated by the isolation
and characterization of mutS and mutL homologs in yeast and mammals that appear
to be functionally as well as structurally conserved. Studies with the yeast S.
cerevisiae has have identified at least five genes DMR genes: three mutS
homologues, MSH2, MSH6 and MSH3, and two mutL homologues, PMS1 and MLH1.
Although information on the mechanism of eukaryotic DMR is now emerging,
mechanistic insight into the process is limited. For example, one significant
unanswered question in eukaryotic DMR is "What determines 'strand-choice', i.e.,
the preferential repair of the newly synthesized strand" As a first aim to
extend the studies of yeast DMR, the interactions between the MLH1 and PMS1
proteins will be characterized. The portions of each protein that are
responsible for heteromer formation will be determined. The regions of these
proteins that are likely to interact with other proteins involved either in DMR
or interacting process will be determined. As a second aim, proteins that
interact with the known DMR proteins MLH1 and PMS1 will be identified. Such
interacting proteins will represent candidates for other DMR proteins or,
alternatively, proteins that function in process that "cooperate" with DMR, e.g.
proteins of the DNA replication apparatus. In summary, the characterization of
the MLH1 and PMS1 proteins, and identification of additional proteins for DMR,
and/or other pathways, will increase our understanding of DMR and related
cellular processes. Ever y time a cell divides its genetic material must be
duplicated with a minimum errors. Insuring such fidelity is a daunting process
because the genetic material is comprised of many millions of building blocks
that must be assembled in specific order. Cells use a variety of processes to
insure this fidelity. One of the mot important is a process termed "DNA mismatch
repair". This repair process directed by a group of proteins that act in a
manner analogous to a spell checker on a word processing program on one's
computer. If "spelling" errors are not detected in fixed before a cell
replicates again the errors become a part of that cells genetic program, namely
a mutation. Such mutation can alter a cell's behavior dramatically.
Understanding fully the process of DNA mismatch repair and each of the proteins
involved is therefore of importance. The goal of the research described here is
to better understand the DNA mismatch repair process in a model system, namely
yeast cells. ***