* 9631024
* An Accretive Model of Land and Water use for the Ancient    Maya of Northwestern Belize.
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Vernon Scarborough, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2000
* USD 249,514.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Vernon Scarborough, Nicholas
Dunning and colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological and
ecological research at the site of La Milpa, located in Northern Belize. The
site, which contains a number of house mounds, is relatively small and typical
of many lowland prehistoric Mayan communities. It also was occupied for a
considerable length of time and spans the interval from early through Classic
periods. Therefore it has the potential to shed light on the development of the
Mayan civilization. La Milpa includes within its boundaries two `bajos` or
lowland swampy regions and the focus of this project is on the agricultural
utilization of these areas and how this changed over time. Evidence to date
indicates that Mayan peoples altered bajos by channeling water and constructing
raised fields to create fertile agricultural surfaces with appropriate moisture
levels. Drs Scarborough, Dunning and colleagues wish to understand how these
field systems developed over time. To accomplish this goal they will first
utilize SPOT satellite imagery and black and white aerial photographs to locate
sites and identify surface features. The resultant maps will provide the basis
for an extensive surface survey. Specific areas will be targeted, fields and
terraces will be mapped in detail and soil core samples will be collected to
identify field use. Soil phosphate mapping and phosphate fraction analysis will
be employed. Excavation of both housemounds and potential field and terrace
locations will be conducted. Radiocarbon dating of soil and sediment humates and
midden debris as well as information derived from stylistic analysis will be
employed to determine absolute chronological age. Finally backhoe trenches will
be cut to permit stratigraphic correlation and interpretation. Archaeologists
have long recognized that a tie exists between levels of social complexity and
techniques of agricultural production. It is obvious that a certain degree of
productivity must be reached to permit people to live together in large groups
and to allow a segment of the population to devote themselves to non-subsistence
activities. However there is a second relationship between subsistence and
social organization as well. Many agricultural systems, especially ones which
require large public works and distribution of limited resources such as water,
require carefully coordinated actions among individuals and by their very nature
foster development of social stratification. Archaeologists wish to understand
the details of this process and Scarborough and Dunning's work focus on this
issue. They wish to learn whether the development of complex water management
systems which characterize La Milpa occurred relative slowly by accretative
means or whether they developed over very short periods of time. The social
implications of these alternative courses of action differ. This research is
important for several reasons. It will shed light on how complex state level
societies develop. The lowland Maya flourished in tropical areas which today
have very low population densities and this prehistoric group developed a
successful agricultural system which was sustainable for a long period of time.
This research will shed new light on the subsistence and social practices
involved.