* 9631420
* Reconstruction of Quaternary Climates Using Stable Isotopic Analyses of Packrat Middens
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Valery Terwilliger, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 07/31/2000
* USD 211,250.00

SBR-9631420 Valery J. Terwilliger U. Kansas This award funds a project to study
the climate variations at a regional scale by measuring the stable oxygen,
hydrogen and carbon isotopic ratios of plant remains in packrat middens found in
two mountain ranges in the western U.S. To constrain the variables that affect
the isotopic compositions in plant materials, the PI also propose to grow plants
in a greenhouse under controlled conditions. From a climatic study point of
view, the 40,000 year-old long plant remains in packrat middens are very
valuable samples for stable isotope work. The possibility of comparing leaves
and stems provides further advantage to examine the isotopic variations due to a
change in source water versus a change in the atmospheric conditions (e.g.
humidity). Such isotopic analyses of plant remains are widely used to interpret
climate. This project pushes interpretations to address more directed questions
about climate at a finer scale than has previously been attempted. To interpret
the isotopic records, it is important that the contemporary leaves and stems be
studied and compared between the two species and two locations. The controlled
experiments proposed are useful for understanding the physiological pathways of
oxygen, hydrogen and carbon isotopes. Climatic processes that operate within
regional scales are poorly understood. This limited knowledge is the primary
reason that predictive models of climatically induced environmental change are
least rigorous for small areas. Reconstruction of environmental developments in
the climatically changeable Quaternary period is considered to be the most
promising source of information for improving the sophistication of these
models. This requires not only efforts to answer more directed questions about
past environments but also efforts to improve the resolution of climatic
inferences that can be made from proxies. This project should contribute to
these wider needs for knowledge about environmental development s within small
areas.