* 9631519
* MPWG:  Model Projects for Women and Girls
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Gayle Slaughter, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 05/31/1999
* USD 95,330.00

This project will provide women college juniors, who have an interest in science
and/or engineering with an extensive research and mentoring program to stimulate
their interest in SE careers, improve their opportunities for achievement,
accelerate their advancement, and enhance their success for entering excellent
graduate programs and then progressing to productive careers. Project components
include: (1) a mentoring-career counseling program by women faculty and graduate
students; (2) a ten week summer research program; (3) an option to work in a lab
during the academic year; (4) seminars featuring women speakers; (5) a
communications workshop; (6) attendance at a national scientific conference; and
(7) GRE performance evaluation and preparation. The program will be coordinated
by the Graduate School of Baylor College of Medicine (BCM). Undergraduate campus
partners include Rice University, Texas Southern University, and the University
of Houston. The proposed project will capitalize on resources of the existing
SMART Program by including the participants in its summer activities. The impact
of the 10 week summer experience will be extended and enhanced through
additional formal mentoring and coordinated follow-up events at BCM and the home
campuses. Women scientists or engineering faculty from several disciplines on
each campus have expressed enthusiasm for helping young women reach their career
goals. The undergraduate women will be incorporated into a mentoring/research
program during their junior year. Each participant will be matched to a women
faculty member and a graduate student mentor who shares her scientific
interests. Students will participate in a 10 week summer research program
between the junior and senior years of college. Preference will be given to
placing participants in the labs of women scientists. Participants will be able
to work part-time during their senior year in the same lab or in a lab on their
home campus. Students wi ll broaden their knowledge of science through exposure
to research topics in summer seminars and on their own campuses. A monthly
seminar series featuring women scientists from the participating institutions
will be rotated among the undergraduate campuses and open to the public.
Students will develop communication skills through formal training and practice,
discussing their research in groups and attending a national conference.
Diagnostic exams for the GRE will be given to participants during the summer and
a plan developed for improvement of performance when needed. Special tutoring
sessions or formal review courses will be available. Counseling regarding
graduate school applications will be provided by mentors.