* 9631006
* Nitrate Respiration of the Hyperthermophile Pyrobaculum     aerophilum
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Imke Schroeder, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 07/31/2000
* USD 260,000.00

9631006 Schroder The objective of this project is to study the mechanism of
denitrification under extremely thermophilic conditions. The focus of the
research will be the enzyme of the first step of denitrification, nitrate
reductase. The hyperthermophile archaeon which has an optimal growth temperature
of 100 C will be Pyrobaculum aerophilum studied as the model system. The
objectives of this project include: (1) the improvement of cell culture
conditions for P. aerophilum. This will be done using pressurized vials and/or a
fed-batch fermentor to prevent the toxic accumulation of nitrite during nitrate
respiration. It is anticipated that the cell yields can be increased once the
nutritional needs of the organism are better known. We will attempt to identify
additional carbon sources, electron donors, and trace elements which may improve
cell yields. (2) the purification and physiological characterization of the
nitrate reductase will give insight into the biochemistry of a high temperature
enzyme. Besides the already existing enzyme assay using artificial electron
donor, additional enzyme assays involving quinones as electron donor will be
developed to characterize the membrane-bound enzyme. The enzyme will be
extracted from the membrane with detergents and purified using appropriate
techniques. The biochemical properties of this high temperature enzyme will be
examined: Is the high temperature nitrate reductase a molybdenum containing
enzyme like the known mesophilic bacterial nitrate reductases? Alternatively,
does it contain tungsten as do other metallo-enzymes from thermophilic archaea?
What is the nature of electron transfer to the enzyme? (3) to gain further
structural, regulatory and evolutionary information, the nitrate reductase genes
will be cloned and sequenced. A gene library will be prepared and the nar genes
will be cloned using reverse genetics or PCR probing. The DNA sequence should
reveal considerable information as to the relatedness to mesophilic
counterparts. This res earch project will contribute to our understanding of the
energy metabolism in extremely thermophilic organisms and widen our knowledge as
to how energy metabolism has evolved. %%% This project is concerned with
understanding unusual bacteria known as archae that grow at very high
temperatures. Pyrobaculum aerophilum grows best at 100 C and can also grow in
the absence of oxygen using nitrate instead. In this work the enzyme nitrate
reductase, a key enzyme for using nitrate, will be studied. The enzyme will be
purified, and its properties will be determined. This will provide new and
interesting information about life at high temperatures and may lead to
biotechnology applications that make use of high temperature enzymes. ***