* 9631441
* The Roles of Zinc, Metallothionein, and Female-Specific     Zinc-Binding Protein
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Christer Hogstrand, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/2000
* USD 183,000.00

9631441 Hogstrand Every living organism needs minute quantities of zinc.
However, female squirrelfish (Holocentridae) accumulate massive quantities of
zinc in liver and ovaries. This zinc seems to be used for reproductive
processes. In response to estrogen, zinc is transported from the ovaries where
it may be required for egg development. Female squirrelfish liver have at least
two proteins that handle zinc. One of these proteins, metallothionein, is found
in the cell nucleus. Nuclear localization of metallothionein is unusual and in
mammals it has been associated with rapidly dividing cells, such as tumor cells.
The other major zinc-binding protein in female squirrelfish liver has not been
observed anywhere else and its function is unknown. Thus, in many aspects
squirrelfish present an entirely new view of zinc in biological systems and
demonstrate the ability of zinc in biological systems and demonstrate the
ability of some animals to handle this essential, but potentially toxic,
element. The long-term goals of this project are to (1) identify novel aspects
of the role of zinc in reproductive biology, to (2) determine the role of
metallothionein in reproduction, and (3) characterize the novel female-specific
zinc-binding protein (FZnBP).