* 9631581
* An Interdisciplinary Information Model for Biodiversity     Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Allen Allison, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 08/31/1997
* USD 152,199.00

The biological exploration of the earth has resulted in enormous museum
collections. Museum specimens and their associated data document biodiversity
and provide vital infrastructure supporting the missions of systematics. Access
to collections data is crucial for the rapid progress of systematics and
ultimately for the assessment, analysis, and management of biotic resources.
U.S. collections are held by more than 150 museums and botanical gardens, and
the highly partitioned distribution of collections data among autonomously
managed databases impedes their effective use. The unmet need is for technology
that enables users to assemble data from distributed sources, while hiding the
complexity of data distribution, and the heterogeneity among local systems and
schemas. The federated databases model architecture has repeatedly been
identified as appropriate for developing information interoperability within the
biological sciences. Establishing a federation of collections databases imposes
a minimal set of requirements for cooperation within a community. While
technical solutions for enabling database interoperability will be developed in
the computer science community, the required semantic data standards can only
result from efforts arising within and carried out by the collections community.
This project is being conducted under the auspices of the Association of
Systematics Collections (ASC) Committee on Computerization and Networking, and
represents a continuation of an effort on behalf of the systematics community
(museums and similar institutions) to develop an information model for
biological collections. The model will encompass all disciplines, not just
plants or single animal groups, and all taxa, not just endangered or threatened
species. The goal is to develop a unifying, consensus-based, implementation-
independent (conceptual) schema for collections information, down to the level
of the atomic data concept. This project does not propose to build a collections
database management system, but rather, to establish a semantic data standard
that will enable specimen data to be combined across systematics disciplines to
address pressing resource management needs and to test complex research
questions.