* 9631386
* MPWG:  Engineering Summer Camp for Middle School Girls
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Denise Nicoletti, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 09/30/1998
* USD 73,165.00

HRD-9631386 Worcester Polytech Inst. Nicoletti, Denise "Engineering Summer Camp
for Middle School Girls" The goal of the proposed effort is to create a
residential summer camp for seventh grade girls that will generate interest and
excitement about engineering and technology and the ways it can be used to help
individuals, organizations, and society. This camp will address a need for an
intervention program in Central Massachusetts that will reach girls at an early
enough age such that they develop self-esteem and self-confidence in the areas
of math and science and realize the importance of taking four full years of
mathematics in high school. The central and unique feature of the camp
experience will be a community service design project in which teams of students
solve a problem for a "customer" in the Worcester community using teamwork and
an engineering design process. Other program activities will include hands-on
experiential workshops and field trips. The administrative structure of the camp
will be designed to expose girls to a broad spectrum of female role models along
the "pipeline," from female high school students to engineering faculty and
practicing engineers. Several strategies will be used to ensure long-term
effects of the camp experience, as well as to magnify the camp's sphere of
influence. Follow-up activities will be planned during the school year, and
wherever possible, participants will be funneled into math and science
intervention programs for high school students. Outreach to parents will be an
important aspect of the intervention program, and middle school math and science
teachers will be part of the camp's administrative staff, learning about
engineering and career opportunities along with the girls. A unique and
potentially powerful aspect of this project is that summative evaluation of the
camp will be conducted using a control group of girls with similar backgrounds
who did not experience the intervention program. T hus, the effect of the
intervention program on girls' interest in technology and their progress and
educational planning for the remainder of middle school and high school will be
measured relative to the effects of other variables. ***