* 9631751
* Travel Support to Attend the Seventh Conference on Mesoscale Processes; University of Reading, United Kingdom; September 9-13, 1996
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Richard Hallgren, American Meteorological Society
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/1997
* USD 12,375.00

9631751 Hallgren This award is to provide support to help defray travel expenses
incurred by select U.S. graduate students and those in post-doctoral positions
that will allow them to attend and present papers at the 7th Conference on
Mesoscale Processes, jointly sponsored by the American Meteorological and Royal
Meteorological Societies. The conference will be held 9-13 September 1996 on the
campus of the University of Reading. Endorsement and co-sponsorship for this
meeting has also been obtained from the World Meteorological Organization's
Commission on Atmospheric Sciences. The conference will host sessions on a
number of phenomena and research programs of interest internationally, including
mesoscale aspects of fronts and frontal cyclones (with emphasis on the upcoming
joint U.S.- European Fronts and Atlantic Storm Tracks Experiment), orographic
flows and gravity waves (including work relevant to planning for the Mesoscale
Alpine Project, tropical convection (the Tropical Ocean-Global Atmosphere
Coupled Ocean - Atmosphere Response Experiment), and related modeling and
forecasting activities. The setting on the campus of the University of Reading
will not only allow for desirable reduction of per diem costs, but also affords
ready access to such notable facilities as the European Center for Medium-Range
Weather Forecasting, the United Kingdom Meteorological Office, and Oxford
University. Support provided under this proposal will be distributed to a
limited number (approximately 12-15) graduate students or beginning post-docs
who meet the following eligibility requirements: (1) is a U.S. citizen, (2) has
a paper accepted for oral or orally- introduced poster presentation at the
Conference, and (3) agrees to cost share their travel costs. The selection
process and actual distribution of funds will be administered by the executive
office of the American Meteorological Society. ***