* 9631394
* Design, Construction and Optical Response Properties of     Dye/Superconductor Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* John McDevitt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/1999
* USD 343,922.00

9631394 McDevitt This research focuses on the design, fabrication and study of
dye-superconductor assemblies. These dyesuperconductor systems are sensitive to
the influence of light, making cryogenic optical switching processes possible.
Initial work has shown that molecular dyes can be used to sensitize
superconductor junctions to specific wavelengths of light. Optically sensitive
assemblies which display rapid response time, high sensitivity and selective
wavelength response characteristics have been prepared. The spectral response
behavior of such systems correlate well with the absorbance properties exhibited
by the dye layer. Since a large number of dyes with different spectral and
photophysical properties can be incorporated into such systems, it is possible
to prepare a plethora of structures which are tailored from the molecular level
so as to suit a variety of different applications. Depending on the
photophysical properties of the dye, systems which foster rapid and direct
energy transfer between the dye and the superconductor can be fashioned. Other
systems can be prepared which function through the propagation of thermal waves
from the dye to the superconductor. Moreover, injection of "hot" (i.e.
nonequilibrium) electrons can also be envisioned as an alternative method to
induce a measurable electrical response in the superconductor. Interesting
issues related to the efficiency of energy and electron transfer phenomena
between excited dyes and superconducting interfaces can be explored for the
first time with the use of highly oriented thin film structures. Important
information related to the chemical compatibility between the molecular dye
components and the cuprate compounds can be acquired through an evaluation of
the superconductor interfacial properties before and after dye deposition. From
the proposed studies, the following information is anticipated: 1.) Reliable
methods to construct dye-superconductor assemblies will be identified. 2.) Che
mical compatibility of molecular layers and high-Tc superconductors will be
explored. This information will be useful not only for the development of the
optical devices, but also will contribute to the more rapid development of
traditional high-Tc thin film devices. 3.) The initial information related to
dye-superconductor energy transfer processes will be obtained. 4.) The
efficiencies of thermal wave, hot electron injection and direct dipole coupling
energy transfer processes will evaluated. 5.) Systems which incorporate
luminescent (fluorescent and phosphorescent), nonluminescent, photoconductive,
electrochromic and photochromic dye structures will be evaluated to identify and
to explore the various molecule/superconductor communication channels. 6.) This
highly interdisciplinary program will not only target the development of a
knowledge base in a novel new field of science, but will also serve as an
excellent training grounds for future scientists in a strategically important
area. %%% A broad program which targets the design, fabrication and
characterization of dye/superconductor assemblies is described. Work completed
in the Investigator's laboratory has already demonstrated that a number of dye
systems can be used in combination with superconductor thin film elements to
produce a variety of optically sensitive assemblies that respond selectively to
different wavelengths of light. The utilization of the superconductors yield
structures where very efficient energy transfer between the light harvesting dye
layer and the superconductor occurs. The use of various molecular systems
affords the opportunity to prepare a plethora of optical!y sensitive structures
that can be tailored from the molecular level for a variety of applications.
Studies of the dye/superconductor assemblies will yield useful information
related to more effective processing methods that can be used for the more rapid
commercialization of high-Tc devices. Moreover, the dye/superconductor platform
should provide a convenient means to explore dye/dye and dye/superconductor
energy and electron transfer phenomena. The ability of a hybrid superconducting
assembly to sense different wavelengths of light in a controllable fashion may
have important consequences for future application of superconducting sensors
and devices.