* 9631093
* Topology of Archaeal Transcription Pre-Initiation Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Robert Scott, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 08/31/2000
* USD 240,000.00

Scott 9631093 Biophysical and biochemical methods will be employed to study the
structure and assembly of protein and DNA components of the transcription pre-
initiation complex of the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus. The
single archaeal transcription system exhibits more homology to the eucaryal than
the bacterial transcription apparatus, suggesting that an ancestral archaeal
system evolved into the three eucaryal transcription complexes that synthesize
rRNA, mRNA, and tRNA, using RNA polymerase (RNAP)I, II, and III, respectively.
The resulting understanding of the molecular topology and mechanism of archaeal
basal transcription is expected to shed light on eucaryal transcription as well
as providing evolutionary information related to the divergence of the three
eucaryal systems. The P. furiosus transcription system was chosen for study
because: (a) little is known about archaeal transcription and its regulation;
(b) the archaeal system is expected to be less complex than the eucaryal
descendants; (c) the transcription complex components and their interactions are
expected to be more robust given their hyperthermophilic source. In eucaryal
basal transcription of protein-coding genes using RNAPII, the assembly of the
PIC starts with recognition by the TATA-binding protein (TBP) of TATA-containing
promoter sequences ca. 25 bp upstream of the transcription start site. Then,
transcription factor (TF)IIB binds to the TBP/promoter complexes and recruits
RNAPII and other transcription factors to the complex to initiate transcription.
This proposal focuses on archaeal homologs of TBP and TFIIB. Structural data are
available on the interaction of eucaryal TFIIB with TBP/promoter; they indicate
that the ca. 200 residue C-terminal core of TFIIB binds to TBP and DNA sequences
both up- and downstream of the TATA box, which interacts with TBP. No structural
information is available on the disposition of the N-terminal ca 100 residues of
eucaryal TFIIB . Our work has elucidated the NMR solut ion structure of a 50
residue N-terminal fragment of P. furiosus TFB (homologous to eucaryal TFIIB),
which is shown to adopt a "zinc ribbon" structure very similar to that displayed
by the C-terminal domain of human TFIIS, a transcription elongation factor. The
DNA-binding ability of the C-terminal portion of TFIIB suggests that the
N-terminal domain of TFIIB may interact with the DNA downstream of the TATA--
box, perhaps near the transcription start site. Point mutations in the
N-terminal domain of eucaryal TFIIB are known to affect the location of the
transcription start site. This unique structural information will be put to use
in studies designed to probe the structure, interactions, and function of the
N-terminal portion of TFIIB. NMR will be used to characterize structurally a
larger (125 residue) N-terminal fragment of P. furiosus TFB, to provide the
context to assemble a structural model for the full-length protein. NMR will
also be used to solve the solution structure of the N-terminal fragment of human
TFIIB for comparison with that of P. furiosus TFB. This is important since
higher eucarya have putative (Cys, His, Cys, Cys) zinc binding residues compared
to four Cys in archaea (and yeast). A sensitive method will be developed using
tethered Fe(EDTA) as a local artificial nuclease to probe the region of DNA
contacted by the N(and C-)terminal regions of P. furiosus TFB. A functional
transcription assay will be developed using an established hybrid cell-free
system from Methanococcus thermolithotrophicus transcription components. This
and the nuclease-probe method will be used to study the effects of targeted
mutations in the N-terminal domain of P. furiosus TFB. Of particular interest is
the requirement of zinc binding for proper functioning of TF(II)B in
transcription initiation. Finally, several strategies will be used to identify
other required components of the P. furiosus transcription apparatus, including
the RNA polymerase. Ultimately, a functioning in vitro basal transcription
complex will allow the study of transcriptional regulation in P. furiosus. %%%
Production of proteins from the genes that encode them consists of transcription
of the DNA (gene) to messenger RNA, then translation of the mRNA into protein. A
detailed picture of the proteins involved in transcription and the regulation of
this process is expected to provide, for example, targets for therapy of genetic
diseases. The archaeal domain of life was discovered in the past decade as a
separate group of microorganisms distinct from bacteria as well as from
eukaryotes. The transcription system of archaea appears to be more closely
related to that of eukaryotes, rather than that of bacteria. This project will
study the topology (arrangement of protein and nucleic acid components ) of the
archaeal transcription complex to discover: (a) more details of the functioning
of the archaeal complex, about which little is known; (b) whether the archaeal
transcription complex is unique in being able to produce all three types of RNA,
(mRNA, rRNA, tRNA); and (c) how the transcription system of he hyperthermophilic
marine archaeal Pyrococcus furiosus can carry out its function at the optimal
growth temperature of 100 degreeC. We will build on structural work already
available on components of the eukaryotic transcription complex to study the
arterial components. Of particular interest is the possible interaction of the
N-terminal domain of transcription factor IIB with promoter DNA near the
transcription start site and several sets of experiments are targeted at
elucidating these interactions. *** ??