* 9631589
* STTR PHASE I:  High Performance Optical Modulators Based on Organic Salts Deposited on a Silicon Optical Bench
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,10/31/1997
* Vladimir Ban, PD-LD, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 10/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9631589 Ban PD-LD, Inc. in cooperation with the ATC/POEM (Advanced
Technology Center/Princeton Opto Electronic Materials) of Princeton University,
has recently developed a totally new method for the growth of thin films of
complex organic compounds, called Organic Vapor Phase Deposition, OVPD. This new
method was successfully used to deposit thin films of chemically pure DAST, a
material with optical nonlinear properties among best reported. On the basis of
these results, PD-LD, Inc. with its President, Dr. Vladimir S. Ban as the
Principal Investigator and ATC/POEM with its Director, Professor Stephen R.
Forrest as the Chief Adviser, propose to develop a prototype fiber optic
modulator, based on thin films of DAST deposited by OVPD on a silicon optical
bench configured for efficient coupling to optical fibers. This proposal
addresses for the first time the integration of waveguides of highly non linear
organic materials with silicon optical benches, which might be populated with
standard fiber optic components, such as laser diodes, detectors, optical
fibers, etc. Thus, this proposal represents an important step toward the fully
integrated optoelectronic integrated circuits (OEIC), where different materials
will be combined for the optimal performance of various functions, such as light
generation, light guiding, light modulating and light detection. ***