* 9631064
* Photoprotection During Winter Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* William Adams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 200,486.00

9631064 Adams The proposed studies will examine the low temperature acclimation
of a photoprotective process facilitating the harmless dissipation of excess
excitation energy in plants that retain leaves during the winter. Excess
excitation energy can be removed directly within the chlorophyll/carotenoid-
binding pigment complexes in a process requiring the carotenoid zeaxanthin and a
low pH within the chloroplast membrane. On warm days, under otherwise favorable
conditions, zeaxanthin accumulates during midday when light is excessive and is
reconverted to its precursor by the end of the day as light levels become
nonexcessive. During the winter large amounts of zeaxanthin can be retained
throughout cold nights, ready to become engaged in energy dissipation the
instant chlorophyll absorbs light in the morning. In the proposed studies the
mechanisms underlying the nocturnal retention of this pigment, and its continued
engagement for energy dissipation, will be examined. The first mechanism
involves the hypothesized maintenance of a pH gradient across the photosynthetic
membrane of leaves exposed to winter conditions which results in the sustained
engagement of zeaxanthin in energy dissipation, primarily in the minor, proximal
chlorophyll-binding proteins. The second mechanism to be tested involves the
hypothesized synthesis of zeaxanthin from beta-carotene in the core antenna
proteins that may accompany acclimation to the conditions of excess light during
the winter. To test this hypothesis the carotenoid composition of specific
chloroplast proteins will be determined from leaves acclimated to favorable
temperatures in the summer as well as low temperatures in the winter. Ultimately
the information gleaned through these studies may prove useful in improving the
tolerance of agricultural species planted in areas th at experience lower
temperatures than those experienced by the plants during their evolutionary
history.