* 9631146
* Significance of Natural and Anthropogenic Changes in        Ultraviolet Radiation to the Development of Anurans in      Temperate South America
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Stanley Fox, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 123,759.00

9631146 Fox Ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation is known to elicit strong selective
pressures on life on earth. UV-B radiation has been increasing worldwide, and
the Southern Hemisphere has experienced stronger increases in biologically
active ultraviolet radiation than comparable latitudes in the Northern
Hemisphere. The greater increase there is exemplified by the severe ozone hole
that occurs over Antarctica each austral spring. The southern cone of South
America provides a unique opportunity for studying the biological impacts of the
austral spring ozone hole because it is the only land mass of significant size
to reach the high latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere. Life there has been
experiencing recent, severe, anthropogenically-elevated levels of UV-B
radiation. The southernmost extent of any amphibian species in the world occurs
in Patagonia, in the southern tip of South America. This is of particular
significance in light of recent evidence of the lethal effects of ambient UV-B
radiation on amphibians in North America, and the potential link of
stratospheric ozone depletion to the proposed global decline in amphibian
populations. UV-B field exposure experiments will be performed with eggs/larvae
of South American anuran species (using a similar protocol to that of North
American experiments) at high and low elevations in the mid to high latitudes of
South America. Teratogenesis, growth inhibition, mortality, and DNA damage of
larvae under different UV exposures will be quantified. This approach will allow
us to accomplish the following objectives: (1) examine the ability of anuran
species that lay their eggs in open water near the surface to mitigate the
harmful effects of UV-B radiation across latitudinal and elevational gradients
of UV-B radiation, and (2) determine if the large increase in biologically
active UV-B radiation in the Southern Hemisphere is having a negative impact on
early life stages in high latitude anuran species.