* 9631143
* The Allosteric Mechanism of Fructose 1,6-Bisphosphatase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Evan Kantrowitz, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1998
* USD 64,000.00

9631143 Kantrowitz The long term objectives of this project are to acquire an
understanding of the relationship between structure and function of a critical
component in the regulation of cellular metabolism. More specifically, we are
studying one member of a class of enzymes that both catalyze a metabolic
reaction and, at the same time, control the rate of that metabolic pathway.
These allosteric enzymes sense the level of the metabolic intermediates and use
this information to regulate their own activity. Allosteric regulation, in its
broadest sense, underlies all biological regulation; however, our understanding
of its molecular basis is very limited. The particular system selected for study
is the enzyme fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, an allosteric enzyme that exerts
metabolic control over gluconeogenesis by a combination of mechanisms also found
in many other systems. Gluconeogenesis is the metabolic pathway involved in the
biosynthesis of glucose, the primary energy source for the brain. Detailed
structural data are currently available only for the fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase
from pig kidney. Therefore, during the last grant period we cloned the cDNA for
pig kidney fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, determined its DNA sequence, developed a
purification procedure for the enzyme overexpressed in E. coli, and began our
studies of its allosteric mechanism. Our work has involved both the creation of
single amino acid substitution mutants at sites that could provide molecular
details of its function, as well as structure determination of these mutant
enzymes by X-ray crystallography to provide the data necessary to correlate
structure and function. This renewal proposal builds upon the groundwork we have
achieved, and now concentrates on determining the mechanism by which binding of
the cellular signaling compounds triggers inactivation of the enzyme. The
behavior of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase is like that of a molecular machine
which has two states, "off" and "on". In the "off" state cata lysis is severely
hindered, while in the "on" state catalysis is very efficient. In addition to
these two states, the rate of the machine is variable and is controlled by
sensors. In order to develop a unified scheme to explain the mechanism of
cellular control exerted by fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, we will apply a
structure/function based approach to: (1) probe the subunit interfaces for
residues critical to signal transduction, (2) examine the effects on the
transition between the "on" and "off" states when the interface is altered, and
(3) analyze both functionally and structurally mutant enzymes that have
alterations in residues critical to allosteric control. We will use a
multifaceted approach concentrating on the determination of the relative
importance of direct conformational changes on the allosteric mechanism. Our
ability to generate the mutant enzymes, characterize them by biochemical and
biophysical methods, and also to determine their three-dimensional structures
provides us with a unique opportunity to learn how this complex regulatory
enzyme functions on the molecular level. %%% In order for us to survive, there
are enzymes within our cells that speed up biochemical reactions that would
occur too slowly if they were absent. These enzymes are involved in all the
functions that our cells perform. Some enzymes, the allosteric enzymes, take on
two jobs, they not only speed up a biochemical reaction but they also control
the rate of an entire biochemical pathway. Allosteric regulation, in its
broadest sense, underlies all biological regulation; however, our understanding
of its molecular basis is very limited. When little food is available, a series
of enzymes go to work to make glucose, the sugar required by the brain via a
biosynthesis pathway call gluconeogenesis. One of the enzymes involved in the
control of this pathway is the allosteric enzyme fructose- 1,6-bisphosphatase.
When the control of gluconeogenesis and the related pathway glycolysis goes
wrong diabetes results. Th e behavior of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase is like
that of a molecular machine which has two states, "off" and "on". In the "off"
state catalysis is severely hindered, while in the "on" state catalysis is very
efficient. This project involves experiments to understand the mechanism by
which this enzyme exerts control over the gluconeogenesis pathway. It is also
our hope that this information well lead to an understanding of how
gluconeogenesis is controlled, and that these data can be applied to the general
problem of cellular control and signal transduction in other biological systems
as well. ***