* 9631601
* Characterization of Metargidin, A Cellular Disintegrin      with an RGD Integrin Binding Sequence
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Carl Blobel, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1998
* USD 200,000.00

9631601 Blobel The proposed studies aimed at understanding the role of the
membrane-anchored cellular disintegrin protein metargidin (metalloprotease-RGD-
disintegrin), which contains the integrin binding sequence RGD in its
disintegrin domain, in cell-cell and cell-matrix intera6tions. Cellular
disintegrins are a family of cellular proteins that are closely related to
soluble snake venom integrin ligands and metalloproteases. Metargidin is the
first known cellular disintegrin protein to contain the RGD sequence in a
position analogous to RDG-containing snake venom disintegrins. Since snake venom
disintegrins are high affinity integrin ligands, the presence of the RGD
sequence in metargidin strongly suggests that it is also an integrin ligand.
Since most known cellular disintegrins contain a membrane anchor, they may
function as membrane anchored integrin ligands and thus mediate important cell-
cell interactions. The cellular disintegrin metargidin also contains a
metalloprotease domain, and is therefore likely to have an additional role as a
protease. This project focuses on the biochemical characterization of the
disintegrin domain and the metalloprotease domain of metargidin. There are two
specific aims. The first is to determine whether the metargidin disintegrin
domain binds integrins. This will be done using affinity purified metargidin,
and metargidin protein domains expressed in COS-7 cells. As sources of RGD
binding integrins, platelets and cell lines with known integrin receptors will
be employed. The second aim is to determine whether the metalloprotease domain
is functional. Again, purified metargidin and expressed domains will be used in
protease assays. If the protease is active, the potential regulatory function of
the pro-domain through a cysteine switch mechanism will be investigated by site
directed mutagenesis. It is anticipated that the proposed studies will shed
light on the structure and function of this intriguing protein, will serve as a
model for the st udy of other cellular disintegrins, and will contribute to the
understanding of how members of this new protein family contribute to cell-cell
interactions. ***