* 9631365
* Analysis of a Regulatory Pathway for Transcriptional        Regulation by Intercellular Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Ronald Gill, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9631365 Gill Myxococcus xanthus is a Gram negative bacterium that undergoes a
simple cycle of multicellular development. These studies will focus on one
mutant group, bsgA, which is defective in producing one of the required cell-
cell interactions occurring early in development. The primary defect in these
mutants is loss of an ATP-dependent protease. As a result of the protease
defect, these strains fail to transcribe any of the known developmentally
induced genes, and fail to form fruiting bodies or spores. One of the components
of the regulatory pathway through which the BsgA protease regulates
transcription, and a putative substrate of the protease, has been identified. It
bears significant homology to the NtrC family of response regulators of two
component regulatory systems. These regulators are phosphorylated by their
cognate histidine protein kinase in response to a specific input signal, and in
their phosphorylated form bind to DNA in a sequence specific manner at promoters
which are transcribed by a particular minor form of RNA polymerase. When bound
to these promoters, these proteins stimulate transcription in an ATP-dependent
fashion. The objective of this project is identify the components of the
regulatory pathway through which bsgA-dependent cell-cell signaling regulates
transcription and to determine the specific role of the BsgA protease in the
pathway. The substrate of the BsgA protease which is critical for regulation
will be identified among a collection of suppressor mutants which bypass the
requirement for the protease. Candidates will be cloned, and expressed as fusion
proteins in E. coli. The fusion proteins will be purified by affinity
chromatography and used to produce antibodies. Immuno-blotting will then be used
to assess whether the protein is degraded by the BsgA protease in vivo. A
genetic approach may be attempted to identify additional components of this
regulatory pathway. Mutants will be isolated which interfere with the BsgA
dependent gene expression. The genes identified in this way will identify
additional component involved in sensing and responding to BsgA signaling. The
ultimate goal of this project is to understand the means by which this organism
coordinates the behavior of individual cells during multicellular activities.
The problem of multicellular coordination is a fundamental problem in
developmental biology. The information provided by this work may help to provide
a framework for thinking about cell interactions within tissues in more complex
organisms. ***