* 9631618
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Graduate Fellowships in          Interdisciplinary Research in Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Joseph Keller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 03/31/2001
* USD 196,242.00

DMS-9631618 Golub The award will permit the creation of a graduate fellowship
program in applied and computational mathematics which fully integrates
mathematics with a variety of application areas. In particular, students in the
program will be expected to actively participate in the experimental laboratory
whose results provide the impetus for the mathematical modelling, analysis and
computation that the student will engage in. The program will be built upon the
existing Program in Scientific Computing and Computational Mathematics (SCCM).
The goal of merging applied mathematics with an application area will be
achieved in a variety of ways: the student will be jointly advised by two
people, one with interests in applied mathematics or numerical analysis, and a
second with interest in a specific scientific or engineering discipline; after
passing written qualifying exams in applied mathematics and numerical analysis,
the student will be integrated into the laboratory of the external input to, as
well as evaluation of, the interdisciplinary training can be achieved. The
technical area around which the program is organized is that of constitutive
modelling for complicated nonlinear phenomena arising in science and
engineering. In particular the areas of turbulence modelling, non-Newtonian
fluids (such as polymers), the biomechanics of growth, and computational
chemistry form the primary areas of application. This activity is being funded
by the following programs: New Technologies (CISE), Office of Multdisciplinary
Activities (OMA), MPS,and the Division of Mathematical Sciences.