* 9631755
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Applied Mathemaatics for Systems of Oscillators in Biology and Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2002
* John Baillieul, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2002
* USD 1,099,569.00

PROJECT SUMMARY This award will establish the infrastructure of a new
interdisciplinary group to tackle questions concerning systems of nonlinear
oscillators and their applications in biology and engineering. The senior
scientists involved form a focused, multi-disciplinary team consisting of
applied mathematicians, neuroscientists, biomedical engineers, and mechanical
engineers. Each team member has extensive experience studying systems of coupled
oscillators, with fields of expertise including nonlinear dynamical systems,
nonlinear control, animal locomotion, robotics, fluid mechanics,
neurophysiological oscillators, circuit models, asymptotic analysis, and partial
differential equations. Moreover, the mathematical modeling continues to be
closely intertwined with experiments. This new group was formed to conduct
research in three classes of coupled oscillator systems: neural, mechanical, and
neuro-mechanical. The specific questions addressed for each class aim at
understanding coupling-induced phenomena-such as synchronization, energy
transfer, localization, resonant mode coupling, oscillatory control, and chaotic
oscillations. In addition, the specific problems arise in a variety of
applications: memory and learning, control of chains, strings and shafts,
compressors, interacting gas bubbles, robotics, quadruped motion, fish swimming,
and salamander locomotion. Funds will provide training in interdisciplinary
research for postdoctoral fellows and graduate students. A well-publicized
seminar series will occur each year. Finally, technology transfer will be
fostered by a technical report series and direct discussion with industrial
collaborators.