* 9631565
* Regulation of Retinal Functions by Light and a Circadian    Clock
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Barbara-Anne Battelle, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Linda M. Kennedy
* 07/31/2001
* USD 483,128.00

It is still unclear how the combination of an internal clock and environmental
light regulate the well-known daily circadian changes in activity of both
vertebrate and invertebrate animals. Molecular mechanisms are being discovered
in many laboratories, but little is known about the biochemical and
physiological mechanisms in the eye and brain. Clock function prepares the
photoreceptors in the retina of the eye to function optimally in different
backgrounds of daylight, dusk, or night; in turn, visual input from the eyes
help modulate the correct timing of the running clock in the brain. This project
uses the horseshoe crab, Limulus, as a model system that is amenable to
extensive biochemical analysis. Molecular, biochemical and immunochemical
approaches are used to see how the clock may produce and modulate
(phosphorylated) particular proteins in the retina. One protein in the
photoreceptors is known to have both structural and enzyme properties, and
experiments test how its functions are modulated by the clock input from the
brain to the eye. The biochemical nature of how the clock input to the eye can
prime the photoreceptor response to light is studied by testing the role of the
clock and the role of light in driving gene expression in the eye, separately or
in combination. These studies will provide new insights into the biochemical
processes underlying the day-to-night changes in the retina that are critical
for normal vision. The impact extends beyond visual neuroscience to the analysis
of circadian behavior, and potentially to how human daily cyclic activity may be
modulated.