* 9631222
* Reconstructing the Past 1000 Years of Climate Variability   in Equatorial East Africa with Decade-Scale Resolution,     from the Sediment Record of a Submerged Crater Basin (ESH)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Kathleen Laird, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/1999
* USD 80,985.00

9631364 H. Wright The proposed research will investigate the nature and timing
of climatic transitions in the Northern Rocky Mountains while assessing the
reliability of small lakes in mountainous regions to record regional climate.
The study is aimed at refining the scope and chronology of climatic events
described in earlier glacial and pollen studies by identifying annual to
century-scale variations that were previously too fine to be described. To do
so, the project will use a high-resolution, multi-proxy approach, with emphasis
on two innovative techniques for the region: stable-isotopic composition of bio-
induced carbonates and dating with varved sediment. The research strategy
includes calibrating proxy data from single varves to the instrumental climate
record, interpreting and dating short-term climatic variations for the last
12,000 years, producing a detailed time series to analyze frequencies of change,
and comparing a small varved site (Marl Lake) with a larger lake (Flathead) to
assess the ability of small lakes in complex climatic regimes to record a
regional signal. Climatic interpretations from Marl Lake will rely principally
on the stable-isotopic composition of authigenic carbonates, changes in diatom
assemblages associated with salinity changes, sediment characteristics, and
trace-elements of ostracodes. A pollen profile will be constructed for
correlation with regional vegetation studies. Climatic interpretations from the
larger Flathead Lake will rely on isotopic- and lake-level fluctuations. The
combined sediment-core and seismic records will be used to infer the timing and
duration of drought. Synthesis of effective-moisture estimates and drought
frequency for the two lakes will be beneficial in the assessment of long-term
water yield of major rivers, such as the Columbia, which are critical sources of
irrigation. A secondary benefit from the seismic survey of Flathead Lake is the
opportunity to reconstruct the history of Glacial Lake Missoula in the Mi ssion
Valley region. The results will provide guidelines regarding the regional
accuracy of data collected from small basins and can be used to test the
fidelity of a new generation of climate models. ??