* 9631635
* Sociopolitical Determinants of Perceived Risk
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 08/31/1999
* USD 149,946.00

Numerous studies have found that the level of perceived risk is higher for women
than for men, across a wide range of hazards. Many explanations for this finding
have been proposed, focusing upon biological factors, socialization, and
differences in knowledge about risk. A recent study by Flynn, Slovic, and Mertz
found, however, that the difference between men and women was primarily due to
white males, who exhibited very low levels of perceived risk. Among persons who
were not white, there was no difference between men and women. Moreover,
nonwhite persons held perceptions of risk that were similar to those of white
women. These results and other findings lead Flynn et al. to hypothesize that
sociopolitical factors such as status, power, alienation, and trust play a major
role in perception and acceptance of risks. The present research tests this
hypothesis. The research plan includes the development of a survey instrument
designed to assess sociopolitical constructs such as power, control, influence,
alienation, social class, and trust, along with other variables predictive of
risk perceptions (such as worldviews). Demographic information pertaining to
race, gender, age, occupation and income will also be obtained. Respondents will
be members of targeted groups varying on race, gender, and social status.
Standard multivariate analyses and structural modeling will be used to determine
the extent to which the effects of race and gender on risk perception can be
explained by the sociopolitical constructs measured in the survey. Finding that
sociopolitical factors play a major role in determining perception and
acceptance of societal risk would have enormous implications for risk
communication and risk management. On the communication side, it would indicate
why traditional approaches based on translating and disseminating technical
information have had so little success. No form of message `framing` is likely
to overcome alienation and distrust. On the management side, a number of recent
proposals have called for better technical risk assessment and expert oversight
as the key to conflict reduction and better risk management. However, conflicts
due to incompatible values, pervasive distrust, alienation, and other social and
political factors would be unlikely to be reduced by technical analysis. Trying
to address such risk controversies with more science, in fact, would be likely
to exacerbate conflict.