* 9631340
* RUI:  Biochemistry of Nitrogen-Limited Growth of Wood       Decaying Fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Walt Lilly, Southeast Missouri State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 12/31/1999
* USD 245,689.00

9631340 Lilly The overall goal of this research program is to understand the
regulation of cellular autolysis in basidiomycete fungi. Under natural
conditions, nitrogen is the limiting nutrient in the growth of wood-decaying
fungi. The wood-decaying basidiomycete Schizophyllum commune is a tractable
model system for the study of autolysis as a response to the limited supply of
nitrogen found in wood. Autolysis of older mycelia and subsequent relocation of
nutrients to the expanding mycelial margin occur during nitrogen starvation.
Increased proteolysis is an integral part of the general autolytic activity.
Proteolytically released amino adds have been shown to be incorporated into
proteins in the growing mycelial margin. This research focuses on the regulation
of proteolytic activity as a model for the regulation of autolysis in general.
Two putative vacuolar proteases, ScPrA (a serine protease) and ScPrB (a
metalloprotease), appear to be most important in general proteolysis. The
research has two main objectives: the first objective is to develop means to bst
rigorously the hypothesis that the metalloprotease ScPrB is critical to
autolysis and amino acid recycling. ScPrB will be purified and partially
sequenced. Using ths sequence inforrnation, the gene for ScPrB wiU be cloned and
charactereed. Constructs containing the ScPrB gene inbrrupted by a phleomycin
selectable marker gene will be prepared. Gene replacement via transformation of
S. commune protoplasts will be used to generate ScPrB mutants. These mutants
will be charactereed using molecular techniques. The second objective is to
initiate experiments to assess the role of the serine protease ScPrA in
nitrogen-limited growth and study its properties. ScPrA is the second most
active mycelial protease during nitrogen starvation. ScPrA' will be pyrified and
partially sequenced. The sequence data will be used to construct probes for
screening S. commune DNA libraries for the ScPrA gene. The demonstration that
these enzymes are critical fo r nitrogen-limitation induced proteolysis would
provide a model system for studying the regulation of the transition to mycelial
autolysis. In addition, creation of mutants lacking these proteases will provide
a system for defining the role of the vacuole in many physiological and
developrnental processes in filamentous fungi. %%% The wood-decaying fungus
Schizophyllum commune is a model system for the study of mycelia growth and
development. When nutrients are limited, the older cells in the center of the
fungus break down, releasing nutrients that are transported to the cells at the
growing margin. This mechanism allows for the continued expansion of the
mycelium in the nitrogen-poor environment provided by wood. In this project two
major enzymes re'sponsible for breaking down proteins in the older cells will be
purified and studied. The gene for one of them will be isolated, and mutant
fungi will be constructed with a modified fomm of this gene. These mutants will
make it possible to study the role of this enzyme in nutrient recycling.
Understanding mechanisms of fungal growth may provide insight into means for
control of fungal decay of wood, which has a rnajor economic impact. This
project was,submitted under the Research in Undergraduate Institutions program.
In addition to its sdentific significance, the research will provide
opportunities for experiential leaming and scientific training of undergraduate
students. ***