* 9631931
* Workshop on Mathematical Psychology, Irvine, California,    July 6-25, 1997
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* R. Duncan Luce, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 07/31/1999
* USD 63,997.00

9631931 LUCE A number of decades have passed since the initial lines of research
in mathematical psychology were charted out and the first generation of
scientists were trained. This three-week, parallel track workshop will bring
together 10-12 senior mathematical behavioral scientists and 20 junior ones
(advanced graduate students and young postdoctoral scientists) to reflect on and
synthesize these developments, and to lay out the ground work for future
research. The workshop will focus on six areas, each involving two senior people
and all of the junior ones. The modeling areas will include (1) perception and
psychophysics, (2) learning and memory, (3) information processing, (4)
measurement, (5) judgment and decision making, and (6) general modeling and
testing issues. The profession will benefit in two major ways. First, because
much of the existing work is scattered throughout many journals and books and
because many of the younger scholars, who are trained primarily in one area, are
located in more-or-less isolated settings without senior colleagues, it is
difficult for them to become fully aware of state-of-the-art mathematical
modeling approaches arising in other areas but potentially useful in their
research. In a broad sense, then, the workshop is designed to consolidate past
research of the field and to nurture the next generation of scientists. Second,
by doing this systematically and providing ample time for interactions, it is
possible that new lines of research will be initiated. Materials prepared in
advance, during, and after the workshop will be made available to a much wider
audience on the World Wide Web. Depending upon the outcome of the several
sections, edited volumes may appear. Though the goal of such work is deeper
scientific understanding of various aspects of human behavior, there is great
potential for direct benefit to society. In the past, such developments have,
among other things, led to better ways t o measure student's accomplishments
(first, IQ testing which evolved into a large industry and now, newer, more
multi-faceted approaches that are reaching schools), models to describe quite
accurately decision making in situations of uncertainty, which has led to the
profession of decision analysts, and vastly improved research on visual and
auditory systems, which has been used to improve the performance of people in
various human-machine interfaces. New modeling work can be expected to greatly
improve these existing applications, as well as to provide the possibility for
additional applications. ***