* 9631326
* Mathematical Sciences:  Developing a Bispectral-Based Test  for Gaussianity and Linearity of a Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Jane Harvill, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/1998
* USD 17,962.00

Correct model specification is arguably the most critical aspect of reliable
time series analysis. In the past decade, significant advances have been made so
it is now possible to analyze a time series as non-gaussian or non-linear.
Therefore, it is desirable to have reliable tests for determining linearity or
non-linearity and to have comprehensive tools for performing proper analysis. An
initial investigation of existing bispectral-based tests for gaussianity and
linearity of a time series revealed many areas for study. Examinations of
different functions of the bispectrum and normalized bispectrum for various
types of non-linearity will be conducted. A second area of investigation is the
development of a test statistic that will not result in vastly different values
when different smoothing procedures are used in estimating spectral quantities.
It is the hope of the principal investigator that after such examinations are
conducted, a test statistic will be developed that not only reliably tests for
linearity, but will aid in diagnosing the type of non-linearity when rejecting
the null hypothesis. A second goal of this research is to continue to develop a
time series analysis package in S-Plus which will include devices for analyzing
non-linear time series. The package will have functions that may be used for
linear and non-linear time series analysis. Since the package is in S-Plus,
graphical examination of relevant time series quantities is a "built-in
feature." Documentation will also be developed. When complete, the package,
along with documentation, will be submitted to statlib for public use.