* 9631575
* Studies of the Molecular Structure and Local Ordering in    Conducting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Michael Winokur, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 234,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9631575 Winokur This project investigates the
structural properties of conducting polymers. These polymers exhibit an enormous
diversity of interesting and technologically important physical behavior. X- ray
and neutron scattering techniques will be used to determine the local atomic
structural characteristics which influence the structure/property relationships
in these materials. These experimental methods will be complemented by modeling
methods which generate physically accurate molecular structures. Finally,
methods will also be developed for studying the evolution in situ so that subtle
and transient effects can be discerned and analyzed. The knowledge and
techniques developed through the course of this research will provide basic and
accurate answers to many fundamental questions that currently exist concerning
structure and its evolution in conducting polymer hosts. The project is co-
funded by the Condensed Matter Physics Program and the Polymers Program. %%%
This project investigates the structural properties of conducting polymers.
These polymers exhibit an enormous diversity of interesting and technologically
important physical behavior. X- ray and neutron scattering techniques will be
used to determine the local atomic structural characteristics which influence
the structure/property relationships in these materials. These experimental
methods will be complemented by modeling methods which generate physically
accurate molecular structures. Finally, methods will also be developed for
studying the evolution in situ so that subtle and transient effects can be
discerned and analyzed. The knowledge and techniques developed through the
course of this research will provide basic and accurate answers to many
fundamental questions that currently exist concerning structure and its
evolution in condu cting polymer hosts. The project is co-funded by the
Condensed Matter Physics Program and the Polymers Program. ***