* 9631442
* Identification of the Vb Gene Which Confers Sensitivity to  the Host-Selective Toxin, Victorin
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Thomas Wolpert, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9631442 Wolpert Victoria blight of oats is caused by the fungus Cochliobolus
victoriae. This fungus is pathogenic because it produces the host-specific
toxin, victorin. In the host, sensitivity to victorin, and thus, susceptibility
to the pathogen, is conditioned by the dominant allele at the Vb locus. It has
been hypothesized that the Vb gene conditions susceptibility by coding for a
toxin "receptor" (site of action) which is functional in toxin-sensitive lines
(susceptible lines) and either absent or altered in toxin-insensitive lines.
Biologically-active, labeled derivatives of the toxin have been used to identify
and 100 kDa protein that binds victorin only in toxin-sensitive (susceptible)
genotypes of oats and a 15 kDa protein that binds victorin in both susceptible
and resistant genotypes. The 100 kDa victorin-binding protein (VBP) has been
identified as the P-protein component of the nuclear-encoded, mitochondrial
multienzyme complex, glycine decarboxylase. Results have also indicated that the
15 kDa H-protein component of the glycine decarboxylase complex (GDC) is a VBP.
This research will test a biochemical model that toxin specificity is regulated
by the interaction of the two victorin binding proteins, the P- and the
H-protein components of the GDC. The results will provide new information about
the nature of Host-specific toxin dependent plant disease, which may lead to a
new crop protection strategy.