* 9631188
* Collaborative Research: (ESH) Late Paleocene and Early      Eocene Nonmarine Climates in the Gulf of Mexico Basin,      Texas
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Jack Wolfe, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2001
* USD 130,934.00

9631188 Wolfe This project aims to develop an initial framework for nonmarine
climates from the mid-Paleocene (ca. 60 Ma) through the end of the early Eocene
(ca. 49 Ma). The early Eocene (ca. 49-53/54 Ma) was by consensus the warmest
period during the Tertiary, except possibly for a brief period after the
Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary. The climatic developments preceding the early
Eocene thermal optimum need to be studied in order to understand whether the
optimum represented an abrupt change in climate or was a culmination of
previously established trends. Further, unlike the marine records of climate
change, the nonmarine record provides evidence of changes in seasonal
temperatures and changes in precipitation regimes. Such data are necessary to
fully evaluate predictions based on General Circulation Models, especially if,
as has been suggested, the early Eocene thermal optimum resulted from high
amounts of atmospheric CO2. Some assemblages of fossil leaves have been
previously reported from the Wilcox Group (ca. 49-60 Ma) of the Texas part of
the Gulf of Mexico (Mississippi) Embayment, but many more have been observed in
the field and remain to be collected. These leaf assemblages can be related
strategically to the intertonguing marine planktic sequence and, as well,
related to the generally accepted sea-level curves. In some instances,
palynological correlations will need to be made between nonmarine sections that
cannot be directly traced into marine sections. The Texas Wilcox vegetation was
a paleolatitude of ~30oN and will provide the first long record of nonmarine
climate and climatic change during the Paleocene and early Eocene at such a low
latitude. The vegetation represented is that of a floodplain. The assemblages
all represent low altitude vegetation, and thus the variable of paleoaltitude is
held constant. Further, rain shadows, which are problematic in leaf assemblages
from the Western Interior, would not have been a factor. Traditional methods of
pale obotanical/palynological analyses for paleoenvironmental interpretations
involve determination of fossils in terms of their nearest living relatives and
the questionable assumption of unchanging climatic tolerances for plants through
time. This procedure would represent a very time-consuming effort of many years'
duration, and, even then, the inferences could be questioned on a theoretical
basis. In contrast, collection, curation, and assignment of the Wilcox leaves to
individual species can be done in a comparatively short time. Instead of using
the nearest living relative method of paleoclimatic inferences, the leaf
assemblages will be analyzed by means of CLAMP (Climate-Leaf Analysis
Multivariate Program). This method was first proposed in 1990 and is, in some
respects, still in a developmental stage, to which the proposed research will
contribute. The method analyzes 31 rigorously defined physiognomic character
states of leaves by means of Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA), a
multivariate program increasingly and widely employed in ecological studies.
Analysis of modern samples collected proximal to stations where meteorological
data have been recorded allows estimates derived from CLAMP to be calibrated
with various meteorological parameters, including mean annual temperature, mean
cold-month and warm-month temperatures, growing season length, growing season
precipitation, relative humidity, and seasonal drought. Preliminary analyses
suggest that mean annual temperatures in the Texas Wilcox showed an increase
during the mid- to late Paleocene. The analyses also indicated that, whereas the
mid- to late Paleocene in Texas was characterized by very abundant
precipitation, by the end of the early Eocene thermal optimum the climatic
regime had pronounced seasonal drought. ??