* 9631627
* Imperfect Play in Games of Incomplete Information:  Theory  and Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1996,09/30/2000
* Richard McKelvey, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2000
* USD 347,815.00

McKelvey 631627 This project continues research on a class of statistical models
of equilibrium behavior in games called Quantal Response Equilibria (QRE).
Besides providing new insights into behavior in games, this approach provides a
potentially useful tool for the econometrics of game theory. Under this renewal
grant, the investigators: 1) further develop and extend the theory in a number
of different directions; 2) investigate its implications for several
applications, including bargaining, public good provision, spatial competition,
and oligopolistic competition; and 3) continue experimental work in game theory,
as it relates to the QRE model. The basic idea of this theory is that, from the
point of view of an outsider, each player's behavior is subject to statistical
variation. Regardless of the source of such variation, this variation will
generally have systematic effects in equilibrium, even if the sources of the
variation are non-systematic. This induces systematic changes in the responses
of the other players. The basic hypothesis about the statistical process
governing individual behavior is that, given a set of alternative choices,
individuals choose probabilistically, choosing better alternatives more often
than worse alternatives. In a game, the available choices to a player are give
by his or her strategy set. The expect utility of each strategy for a player is
determined by the probability distribution of the strategies of the other
players of the game. The choice probability function in the model is called a
Quantal Response Function and is assumed to be continuous and positively
responsive to the expected payoff of each strategy. A Quantal Response
Equilibrium is a fixed point of the quantal response function, just as a Nash
Equilibrium is a fixed point of the best response correspondence. The Nash
equilibrium model thus corresponds to an extreme limiting case of this model, in
which the probability of choosing an optimal alternative is equal to one. To
appl y this to specific games, the investigators use a particular class of
response functions associated with the logit model of choice. Each individual is
assumed to have the same logit response parameter (which indexes how close it is
to the standard best response model). Under the previous grant the investigators
established a number of properties of the logit equilibrium correspondence,
illustrate these properties in some special games, and analyze the data from
simple experimental 2-person games. The analysis of the experimental games
consists of fitting the data for these different experiments to the logit model,
by obtaining maximum-likelihood estimates of the logit parameters. Under this
grant, the investigators extend the estimation models to allow for heterogeneity
and learning, and also to test the logit specification against alternative
parametric quantal response models. ??