* 9631858
* Future-Event Schemas and Attributional Inferences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Gifford Weary, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2000
* USD 203,398.00

The purpose of the proposed research is to examine the possible automatic
influence of stored knowledge structures on the initial stages of the social
inference process. Of particular interest is the effect of future-event schemata
which have been shown to typify moderately and severely depressed perceivers and
to result in pessimistic predictions of event occurrences. The theoretical
framework developed in this proposal argues that previous researchers have
failed to find the depression-related differences in dispositional and
situational inferences for others' outcomes because they have failed to employ
more recent and sophisticated models of and more appropriate investigative
methods for examining the inference process. More specifically, it is argued
that previous failures to find depressed-nondepressed differences actually have
resulted from the (unexamined) interactive effects of behavior characterization
and inferential correction stages of the inference process. %%% The proposed
research will examine the idea that moderately and severely depressed people try
to compensate for their negative views when making judgments about other people.
At first, depressed people are thought to develop unfavorable explanations for
other people's positive and negative accomplishments. However, by engaging in
additional thought, depressed people are sometimes able to correct for this
bias. As a result, such people often give the appearance of making unbiased
inferences about others' actions. If confirmed, this bias-correcting process
could have important implications for the promotion of human potential. In
everyday situations, people are often distracted or otherwise engaged in
thought, and therefore unable to engage in inferential correction. As a result,
their social interactions and evaluations may be colored by their negatively-
biased characterizations of others' behaviors. This, in turn, can have very
large negative consequences. For example, in educational and other work-related
settings, numerous stressors and other mental health problems (notably
depression) have been identified. In such settings, teachers and supervisors may
well be unable to correct their negatively-biased, automatic attributions for
and evaluations of others' performances. The social and economic consequences
may be very significant for students and employees.