* 9631274
* STTR PHASE I:  Polarization-Independent Liquid-Crystal      Fabry-Perot Tunable Filter for Wavelength-Division-         Multiplexing Network Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Jian-Yu Liu, Macro-Vision Communications, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 99,695.00

*** 9631274 Liu This STTR Phase I project focuses on developing the polarization
insensitive liquid-crystal Fabry-Perot (LC-FP) optical filter for wavelength-
division-multiplexing (WDM) communication systems. It is well known that LC-FP
is a high-performance filter due to its large tuning range, high finesse, and
low voltage operations. However, because the modulation is based on the optical
anisotropy, only the extra-ordinary wave can be modulated in the FP resonator.
This results in a polarization sensitive filter that greatly reduces its "field
application" in the WDM networks. Although polarization-diversity has been
proposed and demonstrated to overcome this problem, it required polarization
splitting/combining at the input/output ports and resulted in what effectively
constitutes two FP cavities. This increases packaging and production
difficulties, making high-volume commercial device manufacturing impractical.
This project will use polarization optics to manipulate the arbitrarily
polarized light in the FP cavity. By positioning the liquid crystal phase
modulator in between crossed quarter-waveplates within the FP resonator, the
filter becomes polarization independent. The device structure is simple and mass
producible. Successful completion of this STTR program can resolve the
polarization-sensitive drawback of the LC-FP filter and widen its application in
the WDM networks. The primary applications for this filter are in cable TV
broadcasting, fiber-in-the-loop WDM networks, long distance telecommunication,
and all-optical networks. This filter can also be applied to spectroscopic
analysis and fiber-based environmental sensor applications. ***