* 9632149
* Analytical and Materials Applications of Redox-dependent    Hydrogen Bonding
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Diane Smith, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 12/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

This Research Planning Grant project is concerned with the chemistry of redox
dependent hydrogen bonding. As such, there are potential applications in
materials chemistry and in analytical chemistry. The work will be carried out by
Dr. Diane K. Smith and her students at San Diego State University. The project
is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Special
Projects Office in the Chemistry Division. Since hydrogen bonds have substantial
electrostatic character, the change in charge produced by a redox reaction can
substantially affect the strength of a hydrogen bond involving an atom at the
charge site The goals of this research are to identify donor-acceptor pairs
which fit this description, and to exploit the findings in a number of ways
including new approaches to derivitization reactions on electrode surfaces, the
use of electrocrystallization for self assembly on electrode surfaces, and
control of the liquid crystal film character of a surface film. Among the aims
of these investigations are sensor development, control of supramolecular
structure, and redox controlled filtration systems. This research seeks ways to
control the strength of hydrogen bonding by manipulating the charge on one of
the atoms involved in the hydrogen bond. The PI will use oxidation-reduction
reactions to accomplish the change in charge. By focusing on chemistry at
surfaces, it may be possible to develop devices and materials whose properties
can be rapidly changed by simple changes in oxidation state. This would lead to
a number of possible applications in analytical and materials chemistry.