* 9632154
* Biogeographic, Molecular Genetic, and Field-Experimental    Analyses of Plant-Herbivore Interactions in Oak Hybrid      Zones
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Richard Spellenberg, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 07/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9632154 Boecklen Over the past twenty years, the study of hybrid zones has grown
from a backwater of systematics to one of the most dynamic areas in evolutionary
biology and ecology. Hybrid zones are centers of genetic diversity, and so
represent ideal experimental systems in which to investigate evolutionary
processes, including natural selection and interactions between hosts and
parasites. Despite the renewed interest in hybrid zones among ecologists, the
influence of hybrid zones on plant-insect interactions is poorly understood. The
proposed research will examine hybrid zones of Madrean and Southwestern oaks,
and will use a combination of biogeographic, molecular genetic, and field
experimental approaches to investigate the effects of host plant hybridization
on herbivore population dynamics and community structure. In addition, the
influence of plant hybridization on the outcome of antagonistic interactions
between endophytic fungi and interactions between endophytes and herbivores will
be tested using field inoculations of fungal species onto oak hosts. The
proposed research will contribute to our understanding of plant-herbivore
interactions, and will help identify factors that influence plant susceptibility
to herbivore attack. By understanding how herbivores respond to genetically
novel host plants (i.e, hybrids), results of this research will provide
important insights into developing new strains of pest-resistant crop plants. In
addition, the results of this research will provide background data on the
potential use of endophyte fungi as biocontrol agents against insect herbivores.