* 9632970
* Second International Conference on the Learning Sciences to be held July 25-27, 1996 in Evanston, IL
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Daniel Edelson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 01/31/1997
* USD 14,900.00

9632970 Edelson The Second International Conference on the Learning Sciences
(ICLS 96) is scheduled for July 17-24, 1996 on the campus of Northwestern
University in Evanston, IL. The objective of this conference is to bring
together an inter-disciplinary community of researchers and practitioners to
focus on the issues of learning and instruction. The conference's theme
"Learning for the Real World" emphasizes the conference's goal of creating a
community that is capable of developing theories and designs that account for
the complexity of learning and teaching in real world settings. The audience for
this conference is researchers in the fields of education, psychology, and
computer science and practitioners from formal education, informal education,
and training. Anticipated topics at ICLS '96 include: Design. Design of learning
and teaching environments, including innovative curricula, multimedia,
artificial intelligence, and telecommunications technologies, and classroom
activity structures for supporting learning and teaching. Cognition. Models of
the structures and processes of learning and teaching by which organized
knowledge, skills, and understanding are acquired. Social context. The social,
organizational, and cultural dynamics of learning and teaching across the range
of formal and informal settings. ***