* 9632054
* A Critique of Discretionary Monetary Policy and an Analysis of Alternative Institutional Arrangements
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Varadarajan Chari, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2000
* USD 200,051.00

Chari 9632054 This project consists of research on the transmission mechanism
linking monetary policy to outcome. The first part quantifies the extent to
which fluctuations in output and inflation in postwar US data are due to the
fact that monetary policy is conducted under discretion. This issue is addressed
in a class of dynamic, quantitative, general equilibrium models with purposeful
policy makers. These models are sued to determine how much the conduct of
monetary policy can be improved by alternative feasible institutional
arrangements. The preliminary models described here convey interesting insights
about the characteristics of economies in which monetary policy is conducted
without commitment. One such insights is that discretion can exacerbate
volatility and increase instability in the economy. Another is that delegating
monetary policy authority to a central banker who dislikes inflation more than
the benevolent planner may also increase instability. These insights suggest
that episodes like the great inflation of the 1980s were an inevitable
consequence of discretion. The models imply that various institutional reforms
limiting the flexibility of policymakers would lead to more desirable outcomes.
The second part of this project consists of two types of quantitative models of
the monetary transmission mechanism. One consists of models of wage contracting
which rest on secure microeconomic foundations,. The other studies staggered
price-setting. Both types are designed to address the short-coming of existing
models that monetary disturbances do not lead to large, persistent fluctuations
in output. The project also studies the sources of the vast inequality of
incomes among countries.