* 9632040
* Sub-Decadal Reconstruction of Drought Patterns in North     American's Arid Interior: The Last 2000 Years
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Sherilyn Fritz, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 124,892.00

Abstract ATM-9632040 Fritz, S.C. LeHigh University Title: Sub-Decadal
Reconstruction of Drought Patterns in North American's Arid Interior: the last
2000 years Recent paleoclimatic studies from several regions of western North
America suggest that the climate of the last century may not be representative
of long-term patterns of climate variability. Paleolimnological work from
southeastern North Dakota suggests that intervals of severe multi-decadal
drought have been common during the last two millennia. This award supports a
study to reconstruct at sub-decadal intervals the frequency, duration, and
magnitude of major drought in the northern Great Plains of North America and to
examine how these moisture patterns are manifest in vegetation, hydrology, and
geomorphic processes. Reconstructions will be based on analysis of Kettle Lake
in northwestern North Dakota, which has laminated, probably varved sediments.
This site has the potential to provide an absolute chronology of drought in the
north-central grasslands of North America that can be linked to records
elsewhere to reconstruct broader scale atmospheric circulation patterns in the
past. The project is part of the PEP-1 transect for western North America and is
essential for characterization of the east to west structure of the climate
system.