* 9632186
* MPWG:  The WISER Research Program to Retain First Year      Women in Science and Engineering Majors
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Richard Devon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1998
* USD 22,579.00

The objective of this proposal is to conduct a multi-phased evaluation of an
experimental,multi-disciplinary coordinated program (WISER) that pairs first-
year female students with faculty in research environments. First-year students
are mentored and given duties and instruction in an on-going research project
over two semesters. The program is united through its common objectives and a
common recruitment process that leads to freely chosen, interdisciplinary
parings. Faculty and staff at Penn State will construct an evaluation instrument
which will allow them to refine the program to better retain or support three
groups of participants: WISER interns themselves, graduate students who
supervise them, and faculty who have accepted first year students into their
research labs and who provide essential training, mentoring and role modeling.
The project will demonstrate how this program can be disseminated to two-year
institutions that are crucial in the SEM pipeline for women. A two-year urban
campus on Penn State at Abington-Ogontz will begin a WISER program to test the
model. They will use the faculty-student matching which is a key attribute of
this program. Participating at both institutions are faculty and graduate
students from the colleges of earth and mineral sciences, engineering,
agricultural sciences and health science, a majority of whom are female. Based
on the results of the evaluation, the proposers will present the WISER program
(modified by the result of the evaluation) to 400 affiliated colleges and
universities that form the 52 NASA Space Grant Consortia in every state, the
District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. The final goal is to impact communities
by sponsoring WISERs to present descriptions of their experiences with research
in the sciences and engineering to the K- 12 students at their former middle or
high schools.