* 9632164
* STTR PHASE I:  Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition       Growth on Plasic for Low-Voltage Electroluminescent Displays
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Stanley Vernon, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 99,925.00

*** 9632164 Vernon This Phase I STTR project will develop thin film
electroluminescent displays on plastic substrates. The zinc gallate (ZnGa204)
phosphor host will be grown by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) at
~425 C on a high-temperature Kapton substrate. Luminescent centers will be
introduced by ion implantation, and a pulsedlaser anneal of the phosphor without
damaging the substrate. Phase I will demonstrate that oxide phosphors can be
deposited by MOCVD at temperatures compatible with Kapton, a plastic usable up
to ~450 C. Because Kapton, and other polyimide materials, are not optically
clear, structures having light emission from the top (nonsubstrate) side will be
developed. Substrate temperature will be controlled by water cooling during ion
implantation of luminescence centers. Dopant activation and crystal enhancement
will be by pulsed ultraviolet (UV) laser annealing, so as not to degrade the
plastic substrate. Development of the proper UV anneal, using an excimer laser,
will be conducted at the University of Florida. Glass substrates will be
included as experimental controls. Spire will compare the quality of MOCVD-grown
ZnGa204 films on plastic and glass substrates by x-ray diffraction and electron
microscopy, and photoluminescence and cathodoluminescence tests will be
performed on annealed ZnGa2O4 films. The University of Florida will then
fabricate and test electroluminescent devices on both glass and plastic
substrates. Phase II will include optimization of phosphor growth, luminescence-
center implantation, and laser annealing on plastic substrates. Low-temperature
MOCVD of high-dielectric ceramic films will be developed to achieve lower
voltage operation and higher luminescent efficiency. Spire's MOCVD oxide reactor
is set up to deposit phosphor as well as high-dielectric materials, and Spire
will also attempt to improve electroluminescent efficiency and lower fabrication
costs by rapid deposition of multilayer dielectric-phosphor-dielectric stacks in
the same reactor. This research will result in the capability to fabricate flat-
panel EL displays on plastic substrates for rugged, bright, lightweight,
handheld information terminals to provide better graphical communication to
personnel in demanding environments. ***