* 9632403
* A Workshop:  Management Guidelines and Computerization      Standards for Invertebrate Paleontology,                    the Smithsonian Institution
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Douglas Jones, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1997
* USD 35,536.00

9632403 Allmon Invertebrate paleontological collections are among the largest of
US systematics collections and provide most of the empirical evidence for the
history of life on earth. In order to fully utilize these collections, the
invertebrate paleontological community needs to adopt a set of comprehensive
guidelines for standards and prioritization in collections management, including
curation, conservation, accession, deaccession, inventory and disposition of
orphaned and endangered collections, risk management, collections access, the
role of amateur collectors, and the relative value of different types of
collections. In all these areas, the priorities of collection improvement and
growth must be balanced against available resources as well as legal and ethical
responsibilities. This proposal seeks funds to support an invertebrate
paleontology workshop, the goals of which are 1) to discriminate problems and
key issues related to collection curation and propose guidelines for their
resolution, 2) to encourage and facilitate computerization of US collections,
and 3) develop a common data model and set of common data standards for
computerized record capture and management. The workshop will be held June 6-15,
1996 in association with the North American Paleontological Convention at the
Smithsonian Institution. This workshop clearly addresses an important issue
regarding data storage, computerization and management for both pure and applied
research. The results of the workshop will be published in an edited volume.