* 9632918
* Conference and Workshops on the Properties of Quasicrystals; Iowa State University and/or Ames Laboratory; Ames, Iowa;  August 19-23, 1996
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Patricia Thiel, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 05/31/1997
* USD 6,000.00

9623918 Thiel Quasicrystals are structures which have recently become an
important topic of research because of their potential technological importance,
for example, as wear-resistant, corrosion resistant, low friction coatings.
However, little work is done to understand the surface interfacial phenomena
that determine these exciting properties. In addition the properties of the bulk
materials still remain elusive. A Conference and Workshops on the properties of
quasicrystals will be held at Iowa State University, August 19-23 1996. The
conference will discuss (1) existing and potential applications of
quasicrystals, (2) surface interface properties of quasicrystals, and (3)
potential new quasicrystalline materials. The objective of the conference is to
bring leading scientists from France and Japan and stimulate national and
international collaborations necessary for further growth of this important
field of research in the US. %%% Quasicrystals are structures which have
recently become an important topic of research because of their potential
technological importance, for example, as wear-resistant, corrosion resistant,
low friction coatings. However, little work is done to understand the surface
interfacial phenomena that determine these exciting properties. In addition the
properties of the bulk materials still remain elusive. A Conference and
Workshops on the properties of quasicrystals will be held at Iowa State
University, August 19-23 1996. The conference will discuss (1) existing and
potential applications of quasicrystals, (2) surface interface properties of
quasicrystals, and (3) potential new quasicrystalline materials. The objective
of the conference is to bring leading scientists from France and Japan and
stimulate national and international collaborations necessary for further growth
of this important field of research in the US. ***