* 9632772
* Mathematical Sciecnes: Graduate School Application          Process Workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* William Velez, Society for Advancement of Chicanos & Native Americans in Sci
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1999
* USD 92,952.00

This project incorporates a one and one-half day Graduate School Application and
Process Workshop into the National Conference of the Society for Advancement of
Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS). This project is tied to the
goals of the Society, one of which is to increase the number of Chicano, Latino
and Native American students pursuing advanced degrees in science, mathematics,
and engineering fields. This new dimension to the National SACNAS Conference
will directly impact the entrance of Chicano, Latino and Native American
students into graduate programs in science, mathematics, and engineering fields.
The Goal of the Program: To increase the number of Chicano, Latino and Native
American students gaining entrance to graduate programs. Faculty and graduate
student advisors will assist undergraduate students in developing a well written
statement of purpose leading to a complete graduate school application. The hope
is that every senior student who attends this workshop to leaving having
completed both a graduate school application and a funding agency application.
The Rationale for Pursuing this New Direction: A significant number of students
who attend SACNAS conferences and others who could be attracted to these
conferences are not aggressive in pursuing graduate opportunities. Some simply
never apply to graduate schools while others who may apply, but are denied
admission, choose to give up on seeking admission to a graduate program. Program
Format: The workshop will contain workshops, panel discussions, scientific
symposia, small group discussions and faculty advising sessions. Funding agency
representatives and graduate program recruiters will be on hand to discuss
opportunities with the students and will be available to provide information on
their respective institution's programs. All of the workshop's programs,
discussions, and social sessions are deigned to encourage a national support
network of people interested in en couraging Chicano, Latino and Native American
students to have a greater participation in science, mathematics, and
engineering fields. This workshop will bring together a group of highly talented
undergraduates and offer them the personal attention and advice necessary to
complete an excellent graduate school application.