* 9632745
* Mathematical Sciences:  Estimation in Mixture Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Robert Jernigan, American University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/1997
* USD 17,970.00

Mixtures distributions have been used extensively as models in situations where
data are viewed as arising from a population that is comprised of several
subpopulations mixed in varying proportions. In this context, model
identification can be thought of as obtaining estimates for the unknown
parameters which in the most general situation will include the number of
components, $k$, the mixing proportions and the parameters from the component
distributions. The purpose of the proposed grant is to enable the Principal
Investigator to extend her previous work on minimum distance estimation for
mixture models and to become more familiar with the existing research on model
selection in the context of mixture models. The research will focus on two
areas. First, it will extend the work of the PI on minimum Hellinger distance
estimation for univariate mixture models to the multivariate case. This will
involve investigating and deriving an appropriate multivariate density estimator
for mixture models as well as considering the computational aspects of it. The
advantage of this method is that it produces estimates that are both efficient
and robust to the presence of data contamination unlike maximum likelihood
methods. Second, the PI will consider the case when the number of components is
unknown. In this case one can obtain estimates for the other parameters for a
reasonable range of $k$'s and then choose from among those models using a model
selection criterion. Investigation of the use of existing criteria in this
situation as well as application of a new criterion using Bayesian Restoration
Minimization method for computing posterior distributions will be considered.