* 9632207
* Dissertation Research: Socio-Economic Determinants of Risky Behaviors in Uganda
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Leslie Lieberman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1997
* USD 12,111.00

This award supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student at the
University of Florida. The project is to study the determinants of risky
behaviors by adolescents in Uganda which facilitate the spread of HIV. A
stratified sample of 260 adolescents aged 13-19 will be drawn from three areas
and an extensive survey administered on demographic and personal behavior. A
saliva test will determine the total number of positive HIV cases in the sample,
and test the central research hypothesis that school status is a protective
factor against risk-based diseases. Eighty persons from the total sample will be
randomly selected for individual interviews and focus groups. The correlation of
epidemiological data with qualitative responses to the demographic and survey
data and interviews will allow a powerful analysis of the actual influence of
the socio-economic context on adolescent vulnerability to risky diseases. This
research is important because a good part of mortality across the world can be
attributed to risky behaviors (e.g., smoking, over-eating, under-exercising,
sexual promiscuity, etc.). Major advances in human well being will depend on
behavior changes which are not well understood at present. This project will
advance the base of knowledge of adolescent behavior research, as well as enable
the final Ph.D. training of a student who will contribute of the nation's base
of scientific investigators and our store of expertise about this important
region of the world.