* 9632989
* Domain Walls and Phase Boundaries in Ferroelectric Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,06/30/1997
* I-Wei Chen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 06/30/1997
* USD 145,094.00

9632989 Chen The proposed research will study the dynamics of ferroelectric
domain walls and phase boundaries, which, in perovskites, are nearly atomically
sharp with a thickness of the order of one to two atomic layer spacings. For
such sharp interfaces, the mechanism of interfacial steps (in analogy to
dislocation jogs and kinks) along with interactions of interfaces and obstacles
(in analogy to dislocation pinning and bow-out) is central to the understanding
of interfacial dynamics. These characteristics will be directly probed by
measuring the migration energy, formation energy, and activation volume of the
interfacial steps in expressly designed experiments under a stress field or an
electrical field and will be complemented by additional structural and
simulation studies that focus on the atomistics of the step mechanism for domain
walls and phase boundaries. Three families of prototypical ferroelectrics with a
perovskite structure, BaTiO3, Pb(Zr1-xTix)O3 (PZT) and Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3 (PMN),
along with their various compositional and microstructural modifications, will
be investigated. For BaTiO3 and PZT type of ceramics, which have a sharp
transition at the Curie temperature, Tc, the interest is primarily on the
dynamics of domain walls below Tc. For PMN type of ceramics, which have a
broader permittivity peak with the actual transition diffuse and well below the
temperature of maximum permittivity (Tmax), the studies will be directed to the
dynamics of phase boundaries below Tmax. Relaxation spectroscopy will be used to
measure activation energy and activation volumes of mobile interfaces, which can
be conveniently performed using polarization relaxation at small field and
stress relaxation at large field. To lend further insight into the atomistic
mechanisms that affect polarization reversal and interface mobility, synchrotron
x- ray absorption spectroscopy (EXAFS) studies and Monte-Carlo lattice
simulations will be conducted. These investigations will be carried out for both
model ferroelectrics and their modifications to delineate the broader effects of
chemistry, defect, and nanostructure that can influence interfacial dynamics by
either providing obstacles to interface motion or by altering the mobility of
the interface itself. The goal of the research is to provide a unified and
detailed understanding, from the viewpoint of interface dynamics, of various
interface-controlled ferroelectric, ferroelastic and piezoelectric phenomena
that have broad implications to the performance and long-term reliability of
ferroelectric ceramics as devices. %%% The goal of the research is to provide a
unified and detailed understanding, from the viewpoint of interface dynamics, of
various interface-controlled ferroelectric, ferroelastic and piezoelectric
phenomena that have broad implications to the performance and long-term
reliability of ferroelectric ceramics as devices. Three families of prototypical
ferroelectrics with a perovskite structure, barium titantate, lead zirconium
titanate, and lead magnesium niobate, long with their various compositional and
microstructural modifications, will be investigated. These materials are used in
many types of sensors, actuators, and electronic devices. ***