* 9632997
* Vibrational Control of Bimolecular Reactions in Gases and   Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* F. Fleming Crim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 07/31/2000
* USD 511,000.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Crim will continue studies of the influence of vibrational excitation
on the course and rate of bimolecular chemical reactions. The current work will
extend the investigations from the gas into the liquid phase in the expectation
of demonstrating selective control of the course of a bimolecular reaction by
preferentially breaking a chosen bond. In the proposed gas-phase studies visible
or infrared photons will excite vibrations of bonds which then react with
photolytically created atoms to form products. Measuring the quantum states of
the products helps identify the pathways of the reactions accelerated by the
vibrational excitation. In favorable cases, one can cleave a bond
preferentially. Vibrationally driven bimolecular reactions in liquids and
supercritical fluids require ultrafast excitation of reagents and detection of
products. Nonlinear light generation will provide the excitation and absorption
or coherent Raman scattering will be used for detection. Collaborations with a
theoretician will allow tests of dynamical theories and potential energy surface
calculations. In this research the outcome of a chemical reaction between a
polyatomic molecule and an atom is directly controlled by exciting the molecular
vibration of the bond which is expected to break in the course of the reaction.
This expectation is based on the fact that the geometry change that occurs in
going from reactants to products first requires the stretching of bonds similar
to that which occurs during molecular vibrations. The results of this research
are expected to have an impact in atmospheric chemistry, combustion, and the
understanding of plasmas