* 9632130
* Implementation of a Molecular Biology Computation Resource  Server
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Daniel Davison, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/1999
* USD 129,966.00

A variety of new initiatives in computational structural and molecular biology,
along with the Human Genome Project, have brought computation and computer-based
information systems to the forefront of medicine, genetics an biotechnology.
However the majority of publicly accessible computational tools are
underutilized because they are complex and difficult to access. The mission of
this project is to create a publicly accessible, centralized, directory for
molecular biological software and data. The project will further develop the
"Yellow Pages of Molecular Biology Software" server and make it available on the
Internet via the World Wide Web. The prototype of the system, developed with a
planning grant, is accessible via the URL http://www.bchs.uh.edu/Server. The
Bio-Access Guide to the Internet Yellow Pages, or "Yellow BAGI", will let the
users look for software by operating system, keyword, author, or site. Each
index is cross-indexed to another, and one can download the selected software
(from any site indexed) by clicking on the name of the program of interest. In
the prototype we have indexed two sites, ftp.bio.indiana.edu and
ftp.bchs.uh.edu. In this project we will collaborate with the (somewhat similar)
European Bioinformatics Institute's Biocatalog project. We will divide areas of
responsibility and share data on a daily basis between the two projects. Our
automatic Netnews and FTP site surveys will complement their journal screening.
We will also provide a replacement for Pedro's Biomolecular Research Tools Web
pages, which have not been updated in recent times. The primary focus of our
work will be to implement the Yellow BAGI project and develop a trial relational
schema for the BAGI data bank. We will also incorporate lessons from the
Biocatalog project, which has different strengths and weaknesses from this work.
Using other sources of information such as journals not covered by Biocatalog
staff scanning we will add information t o BAGI and the Biocatalog. The final
goal of this project will be to determine scalability of the data collection
mechanisms we have developed. Most importantly, we will measure the biological
community's interest and feedback on the project, to decide whether to proceed
into a maintenance phase.