* 9632155
* STTR PHASE I:  A Fiber-Optic Probe for In-Situ Measurement  of Thin Film Deposition
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Edward Johnson, ION OPTICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 99,989.00

*** 9632155 Johnson This Phase I STTR project will combine laser and white light
sources in a single diagnostic instrument compatible with high temperature
processes, immune to electromagnetic noise (a byproduct of rf wafer heating),
and free of the requirement for precise optical alignment. The basic concept of
the fiber-optic monitor has been demonstrated I in rudimentary pulsed laser
experiments on a silicon nitride reactor at Brown University; Ion Optics Inc.
has successfully extracted real-time layer composition from white-light
reflectance spectra. Phase I will extend this earlier work to a practical dual-
source configuration that is fast and accurate enough to track thin-film growth
at rates typical of advanced devices. The performance of virtually all modem
opto-electronic devices depends critically upon the ability to grow multi-
layered, thin-film structures whose composition and thickness is precisely
controlled. In production-scale deposition processes, monitoring and adjustment
cannot be done in real time. Ion Optics Inc. will overcome the problem with a
dual-light-source, fiber-optic, thickness and composition monitor operating
simultaneously as an interferometer (measuring growth rate) and as a
reflectometer (measuring composition and total thickness). A major advantage of
such an instrument is its ability to provide the data needed to make
instantaneous composition changes during growth to compensate for the effects of
diffusion. Diffusion is an important factor when very thin adjacent layers of
dissimilar composition must be deposited at relatively high temperature, as is
the case for multiple quantum well devices. This project will result in
reasonably priced, easy to use thickness and composition monitors. Another
version of these optoelectronic devices would compete with quartz deposition
gauges. ***