* 9632398
* Dissertation Research: Translinguistic Analysis of          State-Local Community Relations in Rural Colombia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Bruce Mannheim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1998
* USD 6,307.00

This award supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Michigan. The project is to study how the Colombian national
state represents itself in relations with rural peasants through a linguistic
analysis of videotaped encounters between the peasants and officials. The
particular organization studied will be an agrarian credit bank which makes
loans to local farmers. The analysis of conversations will reveal deep-seated
expectations, assumptions and understandings of each side about the other.
Methods include a survey of 80 households eligible to apply for loans from the
credit bank, and repeated long interviews with a sub-sample of 30 of the
households to assess their understanding of the national level state. These
interviews will provide context for an in-depth analysis of videotaped
interactions between peasants and state officials, done in the credit bank,
which will reveal the individual and social memories of the community as they
form the image of the state.. This research is important because `the state` or
the `government` is a cultural construction embedded in narratives and
conversations (witness the news accounts in current US society about the
government's dealings with local peoples). This study will provide comparative
information about how the state is culturally constructed in this Latin American
context, which.will be valuable for comparisons and theory building about local
perceptions of national issues.