* 9632556
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center:          The Mesoscale Interface Mapping Project
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,05/31/2001
* Gregory Rohrer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carmen I. Huber
* 05/31/2001
* USD 3,056,258.00

9632556 Adams The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at
Carnegie Mellon University supports research on the study of crystalline
interfaces at a mesoscopic scale. The effort concentrates on grain and subgrain
boundaries in two-component polycrystals and is complimentary to investigations
at the atomic and continuum scales. The seminal concept of the project is that a
bridge can be constructed between the character of grain boundaries and certain
of their intrinsic properties. This bridge will encompass the very large space
of all physically distinctive grain boundaries, known as fundamental zone. The
mission is to construct mappings using automated microscopy which link the
intrinsic materials properties of individual grain boundaries to their character
and chemistry over the entire fundamental zone. The mesoscale of interest lies
approximately between 100 microns and 100 nanometer. The anticipated progress is
likely to accelerate the world-wide effort towards a unified structure-
properties theory, linking structure-properties relations from the atomic scale
upwards to the continuum scale. The MRSEC supports the development, operation
and maintenance of shared experimental facilities for materials research. It
fosters research participation by undergraduates and pre-college students, and
is developing strong industrial relationships. The Center currently supports 8
senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral research associates, 8 graduate students,
and 4 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor Brent L. Adams. %%% The
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Carnegie Mellon
University supports research on the study of crystalline interfaces at a
microscopic scale, also known as mesoscale. The seminal concept of the project
is that a bridge can be constructed between the character of grain boundaries
and certain of their intrinsic properties. The anticipated progress is likely to
accelerate the world-wide effort towards a unified structure-properties theory,
linking structure-properties relations from the atomic scale upwards to the
continuum scale. The MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance
of shared experimental facilities for materials research. It fosters research
participation by undergraduates and pre-college students, and is developing
strong industrial relationships. The Center currently supports 8 senior
investigators, 3 postdoctoral research associates, 8 graduate students, and 4
undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor Brent L. Adams. ***