* 9632086
* MPWG:  Apprenticeship Program for Women in Science as       Applied to Public Policy
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Nina Roscher, American University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 08/31/1997
* USD 94,737.00

Little has been done to learn why many bright, well-prepared young women do not
see the fields as people-oriented. Their vision of a scientist is as an isolated
and remote researcher, dealing with concepts rather than with people. This
project is designed to alter this narrow view of science and mathematics. The
goal is to present these areas, not only as exciting, fundamental research that
alters the way in which we see the world, but as essential knowledge on which to
base policy decisions affecting the way we live. To present scientists as doing
interdisciplinary research that has easily identified policy impact, and to show
that they do not work in isolation, will help, recast the image of science and
attract more women to its disciplines. The format of the program includes a
seminar course on topics in science that are fundamental to certain policy areas
(e.g., the environment, law, education, criminal justice, informatics. It will
be followed by a two-months summer research apprenticeship, working with
scientist who are focusing on policy areas, and with those engaged in the
formulation of science policy-on campus and in government agencies an nonprofit
research institutes in the Washington area. Participants would be recruited
primarily from first year women students who have taken Advanced Placement
calculus in high school but who have not indicated that they intend to major in
mathematics or science.