* 9632472
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* Robert Chang, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carmen I. Huber
* 08/31/2001
* USD 12,366,687.00

9632472 Chang The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at
Northwestern University supports interactive research in five interdisciplinary
groups. The unifying theme of the research is the design and characterization of
structured materials with unique properties for potential technological
applications. One group investigates electroactive and magnetoactive molecular
materials by designing molecular materials for specific electroresponsive or
magnetoresponsive properties. A second group studies narrow bandgap strained-
layer semiconductor materials and focuses on the synthesis, stability, and
properties of these materials. Strain and/or ordering is used to tailor the band
structure, and hence the optical properties. This work has high potential impact
on the area of room temperature infrared lasers and improved infrared detectors.
Other applications include optical communications and optical computers which
take advantage of the highly non-linear optical constants of these materials. A
third group investigates optically functional polymers and molecular assemblies,
bringing to bear a combination of synthesis, materials characterization, and
theoretical approaches on problems of fundamental and applied significance in
the area of polymers with optical nonlinearities. A fourth group studies
ultrahard coatings with the goal of stabilizing and/or nucleating normally
unstable phases, specifically certain nitrides, epitaxially on carefully chosen
substrates. A fifth group working on functional electroceramic thin films will
synthesize and characterize thin ceramic films for advanced dielectric and
nonlinear optical applications and will extend the deposition and
characterization techniques to novel transparent conducting oxides. The MRSEC
supports the development, operation and maintenance of shared experimental
facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding for exploratory
research and fosters research participation by unde rgraduates. The Center
supports an educational outreach program aimed at pre-college science education
through development of the Materials World Modules, and a program featuring
research experiences for science teachers. The Center also administers an
industrial outreach program. The Center currently supports 35 senior
investigators, 5 postdoctoral research associates, 7 technicians or other
professionals, 34 graduate students, and 16 undergraduates. The MRSEC is
directed by Professor R.P.H. Chang. %%% The Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Northwestern University supports interactive
research in five interdisciplinary groups. The unifying theme of the research is
the design and characterization of structured materials with unique properties
for potential technological applications. One group investigates electroactive
and magnetoactive molecular materials. A second group studies narrow bandgap
strained-layer semiconductor materials. This work has high potential impact on
the area of room temperature infrared lasers and improved infrared detectors.
Other applications include optical communications and optical computers which
take advantage of the highly non-linear optical constants of these materials. A
third group investigates optically functional polymers and molecular assemblies,
while a fourth group studies ultrahard, specifically certain nitrides. A fifth
group working on functional electroceramic thin films will synthesize and
characterize thin ceramic films for advanced dielectric and nonlinear optical
applications. The MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance of
shared experimental facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding
for exploratory research and fosters research participation by undergraduates.
The Center supports an educational outreach program aimed at pre-college science
education through development of the Materials World Modules, and a program
featuring research experie nces for science teachers. The Center also
administers an industrial outreach program. The Center currently supports 35
senior investigators, 5 postdoctoral research associates, 7 technicians or other
professionals, 34 graduate students, and 16 undergraduates. The MRSEC is
directed by Professor R.P.H. Chang ***