* 9632016
* RUI: Characterization of Arabidopsis Mutants with defects inan Essential Gene Involved in Auxin Response and Early      Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Lawrence Hobbie, Adelphi University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 02/29/2000
* USD 214,750.00

9632016 Hobbie The plant hormone auxin plays an important role in virtually all
aspects of plant growth and development, including formation of shoots and roots
and responses to gravity and light. Auxin affects these processes through
regulation of cell elongation, cell division, and cell differentiation. However,
exactly what auxin does and how it does it at the molecular level are still
poorly understood. Only a few genes that act in the auxin response pathway have
been identified. This research is designed to increase our knowledge of the
function and mechanism of action of auxin by means of characterization and
anlysis of two Arabidopsis mutants with defects in a previously-unknown gene
called AXR6. Heterozygous axr6 mutants are auxin-resistant, dwarf, and bushy,
consistent with a general reduction in auxin sensitivity. Homozygous axr6 plants
show a novel phenotype for an auxin-related mutant: they arrest growth as young
seedlings, with defects in both shoots and roots. These preliminary observations
of the mutants' phenotype suggest that AXR6 is an essential gene involved in
auxin response and regulation of development. This research should bring us
closer to a complete understanding of plant physiology and development at the
molecular level, and especially of the role of auxin. Such an understanding is
fundamentally important, and should also enhance our ability to regulate plant
development in desirable ways.