* 9632181
* STTR PHASE I:  Electro-Optic Field Sensors for Far-Infrared Imaging Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Kevin Stewart, Molecular OptoElectronics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 99,932.00

*** 9632181 Stewart We propose to investigate and develop an imaging system
based on ultra-wideband electric-field sensors. The proposed device will be
based on a new optoelectronic design which is capable of timedomain far-infrared
spectroscopy across a frequency range extending from near DC to several THz.
Fundamentally, the electric-field sensor system is based on the linear electro-
optic effect (Pockel's effect) in electro-optic crystals where a pulsed
microwave signal acts as a transient bias to induce a transient polarization in
the sensor crystal. This polarization is then probed by a synchronously pulsed
laser beam, and the spatial and temporal electric-field distribution is
projected onto a CCD camera by the laser. Our previous studies of these imaging
sensors has demonstrated a sub-wavelength spatial resolution, femtosecond
temporal resolution, near DC-THz bandwidth, sub-mV/cm field sensitivity, up to
100 Hz scan rate, and a signal-to-noise ratio better than 10,000:1. The electro-
optic detection has a flat (nonresonant) spectral responsivity (from near DC to
several THz), a large detector area (> 1 cm2), and an extended dynamic range (>
1,000,000). The simplicity of the detection geometry, capability for optical
parallel processing, and excellent signal-to-noise ratio make this system
suitable for real-time, 2-D coherent far infrared imaging applications. ***