* 9632763
* Long-Term Ecological Research on the Antarctic Marine       Ecosystem:  An Ice-Dominated Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/1996,09/30/2004
* Robin Ross, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/30/2004
* USD 4,472,364.00

9632763 Smith This proposal continues, for a second six year period, the Palmer
Long-Term Ecological Research program which focuses on the marine ecosystem in
the western Antarctic Peninsula region. A central tenet of this research is that
the annual advance and retreat of sea ice is a major physical determinant of
spatial and temporal changes in the structure and function of the Antarctic
marine ecosystem, from total annual primary production to breeding success in
seabirds. We are currently evaluating a number of testable hypotheses linking
sea ice to: the timing and magnitude of seasonal primary production, the
dynamics of the microbial loop and particle sedimentation, krill abundance,
distribution, and recruitment, and the breeding success and survival of apex
predators. The overall objectives are to: (1) document the interannual
variability of annual sea ice and the corresponding physics, chemistry, optics,
primary production and the life-history parameters of secondary producers and
apex predators within the area, (2) create a legacy of critical data for
understanding ecological phenomena and processes within the Antarctic marine
ecosystem, (3) identify the processes that cause variation in physical forcing
and the subsequent biological response among the representative trophic levels,
(4) construct models that link ecosystem processes to environmental variables,
which simulate spatial/temporal ecosystem relationships, and employ such models
to predict and validate ice-ecosystem dynamics. Since 1991 the program has
included spatial sampling during annual and seasonal cruises in portions of our
regional grid in the region and temporal sampling from spring through fall
(October to March) in the area adjacent to Palmer Station. The program was
designed to sample at multiple spatial scales within one regional scale grid,
permitting repeated sampling on both seasonal and annual time scales, thus
addressing both short and long -term ecological phenomena, as well as providing
a basis for specific mechanistic studies. To date, there have been seven
regional cruises and two additional cruises emphasizing microbial dynamics
(Tables 1 and 2). Core variables routinely sampled and monitored from shipboard
during annual cruises. Documentation and data storage are organized through an
electronic hub at the Institute for Computational Earth System Science at the
University of California at Santa Barbara which also serves as a data archive as
needed. There are on-line definitions of core data, datasets and metadata,
organized to facilitate rapid information exchange and on-line data
documentation. This multidisciplinary project, sited in a climatically sensitive
region, has the potential to detect, against a background of natural
variability, long term trends in the Antarctic ecosystem.