* 9632124
* Theoretical Studies of the Circular Dichroism of Peptides   and Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Jonathan Hirst, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1999
* USD 270,000.00

9632124 Hirst This research will provide the theoretical underpinning for the
calculation of the circular dichroism (CD) of a protein given its structure. CD
is fundamentally an electronic molecular property, and so the first component of
the work involves the application of state-of-the-art quantum chemistry methods
to characterize the various chromophoric groups in proteins. Once these groups
have been modeled, the semi-empirical matrix method for calculating the CD of
proteins will be used. Dr. Hirst will use the developed methods to investigate
the influences on the CD of helices. In collaboration with Professor Jeffery
Kelly at Texas A & M he will investigate the CD of (-sheet peptidomimetics. CD
calculations and MD simulations (from Professor Charles Brooks at The Scripps
Research Institute) will be used to model the time-evolution of CD during
protein folding. %%% Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy is a widely used probe
of protein structure from early experiments to determine the handedness of
(-helices to recent picosecond time-resolved CD measurements of the dissociation
of carbonmonoxide from myoglobin. CD is routinely employed to study the
structure, the thermodynamics and the kinetics of protein folding. Much of the
theoretical basis of the CD of proteins has been established, but the
relationship between CD and the detailed structure of proteins has yet to be
fully understood. The results of this research, the development of theoretical
methods to calculate the circular dichroism spectra of peptides and proteins
from simulations, will provide the connection between the atomic-detailed
structure of proteins and their CD. ***