* 9632160
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of Simulated and Observed  Changes in Climate and Environments Across the Permian      Deglaciation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* John Kutzbach, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 99,327.00

Abstract ATM-9632160 Kutzbach, John E. University of Wisconsin Title:
Collaborative Research: Analysis of Simulated and Observed Changes in Climate
and Environments Across the Permian Deglaciation The Permian Period contains a
transition from a major glaciation to a fully ice-free state. This transition
has been ascribed to an increase in atmospheric CO2, and could thus provide an
analog in the geologic record for the likely results of human perturbations to
the Earth system over the next millennium. This award supports a project to
assemble the extensive sources of information on the Permian environment into a
unified relational database. This will permit a global assessment of data
patterns and their temporal and spatial relationships and will help to determine
whether local changes are due to continental motions, rather than "global
change." Another aspect of this work is to determine the reliability of the
paleoclimate indicators (e.g. dating uncertainties), and thus how unequivocally
such data may be used to validate the climate model predictions. These
experiments will establish the sensitivity to realistic changes during the
Permian in two important climate forcing factors, paleogeography and atmospheric
CO2, and their role in explaining the large-scale features of the Permian
deglaciation.