* 9632052
* STTR PHASE I: A Novel Continuous Production Method for      Rugged Gradient Index Plastic Optical Fiber
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* James Walker, NANOPTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9632052 Walker This STTR Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility of
a continuous process of producing rugged, low moisture content, high bandwidth,
gradient index plastic optical fiber. Existing Japanese production methods
result in bandwidths which are three to ten times less than theoretically
possible, and the bandwidth of the fiber is not stable and reproducible. The
production rate is intrinsically limited by the batch nature of the process and,
or, multi-step procedure. In the United States, the High-Speed Plastic Network
(HSPN) consortium was formed in 1994, and is supported by a $5 million Advanced
Research Projects Agency grant. A member of that team has licensed one of the
Japanese batch technologies to fabricate the above type of fiber. This project
will develop a novel, low cost, continous production process for the fiber. The
fiber will have a stable bandwidth of &gt; 2 GHz.km, be stable from -40 C to +
150 C, have low moisture uptake, attenuation of less than 150dB/kilometer and be
stable to radiation exposure up to 1000 Rad. This type of fiber is expected to
have great utility in high speed local area networks. Local area networks have
inadequate band width for the anticipated needs in the coming years. Gradient
index plastic optical fiber will be the most cost effective solution with
adequate band-width. At present there is no satisfactory production process for
a rugged version of this fiber. ***