* 9632527
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on        Nanostructured Materials and Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,04/30/2001
* Thomas Kuech, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Carmen I. Huber
* 04/30/2001
* USD 9,170,000.00

9632527 Kuech The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) on
Nanostructured Materials and Interfaces at the University of Wisconsin, Madison
supports research in three interdisciplinary groups focusing on film growth by
chemical vapor deposition, grain boundaries and current percolation in high-
temperature superconductors, and nanostructured magnetic oxides. The first group
investigates the fundamental mechanisms underlying film growth by chemical vapor
deposition, with a focus on the growth of Si and Ge and their alloys. The second
group focuses on the role that grain boundaries and the electronic structure
play in determining the critical current density of polycrystalline high
temperature superconductors. The third group addresses the fabrication,
characterization, and understanding of the properties of perovskite-like
magnetic oxides with potential device applications. The MRSEC supports shared
experimental facilities for materials research, exploratory research through
seed funding, and collaborations with industry and with other universities.
Educational outreach programs include development of instructional materials for
high school science teachers and outreach visits to local schools. The Center
supports 15 senior investigators, 8 postdoctoral research associates, 16
graduate students, 7 technicians or other professionals, and 10 undergraduates.
The MRSEC is directed by Professor T. F. Kuech. %%% The Materials Research
Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) on Nanostructured Materials and
Interfaces at the University of Wisconsin, Madison supports research in three
interdisciplinary groups. The first group investigates the fundamental
mechanisms underlying the growth of semiconductor films with focus on the growth
of the technologically important materials silicon and germanium and their
alloys. The second group focuses on the role structural defects play in
determining the critical current density of polycrystalline high-temp erature
superconductors. The third group addresses the fabrication, characterization,
and understanding of the properties of magnetic oxides with potential device
applications. The MRSEC supports shared experimental facilities for materials
research, exploratory research through seed funding, and collaborations with
industry and with other universities. Educational outreach programs include
development of instructional materials for high school science teachers and
outreach visits to local schools. The Center supports 15 senior investigators, 8
postdoctoral research associates, 16 graduate students, 7 technicians or other
professionals, and 10 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor T. F.
Kuech. ***