* 9632967
* The Quaternary Record of Lake-Level Oscillation and Climate Change: Lake Issyk-Kul, Kyrgyzstan, Central Asia
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Kenneth Rasmussen, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 06/30/2000
* USD 140,000.00

Abstract ATM-9632967 Rasmussen, Kenneth A. Macintyre, Ian G. Smithsonian
Institution Title: The Quaternary Record of Lake-Level Oscillation and Climate
Change: Lake Issyk-Kul, Kyrgyzstan, Central Asia Lake Issyk-Kui in the former
Soviet Republic of Kyrgyzstan is the fifth deepest lake in the world (668
meters). Issyk-Kul is located 1600m above sea level in the Asian landmass, and
is positioned between the winter Siberian High and the summer Southwest Indian
Low-even subtle changes in moisture and/or temperature regime due to climate
shifts in the position or intensity of these major atmospheric elements should
effect changes in lake-level Issyk-Kul is a closed-basin lake with abundant
carbonate sediments and a rich natural history of large-scale, and ongoing lake-
level change. Modern lake level has fallen 3 meters in the last 70 years and
evidence suggests even larger oscillations long before any possible human
intervention. Preliminary fieldwork revealed that paleo- shorelines are recorded
in coastal hardgrounds of inorganic and microbialitic origin- these provide a
dateable proxy for Late Holocene lake level positions. This award supports a
investigation of: (1) nearshore carbonates and Late Holocene beach deposits, and
(2) the deep-basin sedimentary and paleolimnological record. Paleoenivronmental
significance of the relic microbialites will be established through modern
analogues. Origin, growth, and recent environmental history of the living and
relic microbialites will be established through petrographic techniques,
mineralogic analysis of cements to detect salinity shifts, and preliminary
stable isotopes analysis of calcite cements to assess their utility as proxies
for hydrologic regime.