* 9632241
* MPWG:  Creating Afterschool Science Opportunities for Girls in NYC Settlement Houses:  A Model Project
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Barbara Sprung, Educational Equity Concepts Inc
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 07/31/1998
* USD 119,053.00

The project will create increased science opportunities for girls ages 6-11 by
piloting a hands-on science/gender equity model in after school programs at four
New York City settlement houses, and by creating a Program Handbook for
dissemination through United Neighborhood Houses (UNH) and United Neighborhood
Centers of America (UNCA). The model will be developed for both single-sex and
co-ed settings, and will include staff training, youth activities, and a parent
involvement component. This project will build on the proven success of
Educational Equity Concept's "Playtime is Science" program, with two important
innovations: an increase focus specifically on improving results for girls, and
a new setting, i.e. community-based after-school sites instead of public
schools. Specific objectives are: a) to increase the amount of hands-on science
offered to girls ages 6-11 in settlement houses from none to at least two hours
per week; b) to develop both single-sex and coed models for carrying out hands-
on science with a gender equity focus; c) to train staff in settlement houses in
both hands-on physical science and in gender equity; d) to involve parents of
participating girls in hands-on science and gender equity activities; e) to give
settlement house staff the training they need to institutionalize the model
program so that it will continue beyond the grant period; f) to evaluate the
success of the model; g) to develop a Program Handbook; and h) to work in
partnership with UNH in New York City and UNCA nationally to disseminate the
model and materials.