* 9632058
* Collaborative Research:  Modeling Speed-Accuracy Tradeoffs  of Aimed Movements
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Rebecca States, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1998
* USD 106,892.00

9632058 STATES Aimed movements are a ubiquitous part of everyday life. Of
particular importance is their central role in situations involving the transfer
of information between people and machines (e.g., mouse movements by computer
users, control stick movements by pilots and heavy machine operators, etc.). A
fundamental constraint on the control of aimed movements is described by speed-
accuracy tradeoffs (SATs), i.e., faster movements are less accurate. Using the
stochastic optimized-submovement model (SOSM) proposed by David Meyer and his
associates as a starting point, this research will investigate the control of
aimed movements in four areas: (a) the generality of SATs for multi-joint
movements, (b) transfer of practice effects across the SATs, (c) the existence
of corrective submovements during aimed movement, and (d) what is learned as
SATs improve. The SOSM provides only one of several theoretical frameworks
within which the results of this research can be interpreted. The research is,
therefore, intended to (a) probe the empirical limits of these existing
theories, (b) resolve fundamental disputes among these theories concerning the
nature of the control of aimed movements, and (c) gather the database required
either to elaborate one of the existing models or to propose a new theoretical
framework, depending upon the nature of the results. Through a better
understanding of aimed movements, this research should provide insights into how
to structure control tasks. In addition, because the research includes both
studies of how individuals differ in the nature and their use of submovements
and studies of how performance improves when individuals practice aimed
movements, it will shed light on issues such as personnel selection and how to
organize training for jobs involving person- machine interaction through aimed
movements. ***