* 9632568
* Interrelations Between Bacterial Infection, Inflammation,   and Thrombosis on Biomedical Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Stuart Cooper, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 260,316.00

9632568 Cooper Clinical infections are one of the greatest problems associated
with synthetic implanted devices. Such infections account for more than 45% of
hospital infections, associated with indwelling catheters and surgery for joint
replacement, and bypass operations. Such infections are also more difficult to
treat than conventional infections. With over 200 million intravascular devices
sold annually, it is clear that infections associated with biomedical devices
pose a huge problem in clinical medicine. Understanding the mechanisms by which
the bacteria responsible for such infections adhere to implants and resist
antibiotic treatment is an important step in developine materials that resist
bacterial growth, and improving therapy for implant-associated infections. The
use of plastic materials for implants is not only associated with risk of
infection, but also risk of clot formation (thrombosis), and inflammation around
the site. Little is known about the specific mechanisms that govern the complex
relationships between infections, inflammation, and thrombosis. Factors that may
affect this relationship are the surface chemistry of the device, the proteins
that may be absorbed from the blood after implantation, and the surface
chemistry of the bacteria and blood cells. The focus of this research will be to
investigate the cellular adhesion and activation events that infection,
inflammation, and thrombosis have in common, and to determine their individual
effects on the other processes. Specifically, the influence that protein and
cellular components of thrombi (e.g. fibrin and blood platelets) have in
mediating bacterial adhesion and colonization on artificial surfaces will be
investigated. The effects of adherent bacteria on platelet adhesion and
activation will also be studied. Another important factor that will be
investigated is the change in the metabolic state of adherent bacteria on
thrombi and on implant surfaces. The adhesion, activa tion, and accompanying
shape changes of white blood cells in the presence of adherent bacteria on
chemically modified polyurethanes will be studied. These studies will primarily
be carried out using an automated viedomicroscopy system that allows the direct
observation of individual cells interacting with different surfaces over a
period of time. The study of cell-surface interactions will be carried out on
both glass and polyurethane surfaces, as well as model surfaces of self-
assembling monolayers. The information obtained in this work will provide a
better understanding of the interrelationship between implanted devices,
bacterial infection, inflammation, and thrombosis, an how each process may
influence the other. Detailed understanding of the mechanisms that govern these
relationships will lead to the development of biomaterials that resist microbial
adhesion and proliferation as well as thrombosis. Ultimately, studies such as
these are important in improving patient welfare and reducing health care costs.
***