* 9632028
* Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Geometry, Analysis and Topology: Research, Technology, Industry and Education
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Harold Boas, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 08/31/2000
* USD 400,334.00

The group in Geometry, Analysis, and Topology (GAT) at Texas A&amp;M University
is an interdisciplinary group of mathematical researchers in the areas of
Algebraic Geometry, Algebraic Topology, Differential Geometry, Geometric
Analysis, and Several Complex Variables. In addition to basic research, this
group is engaged in the development of innovative programs linking traditional
areas in pure mathematics to cross-disciplinary research, industry, technology,
and education. The Group Infrastructure Grant (GIG) will provide the funding to
build a research infrastructure that will nurture both fundamental mathematical
research and its application in cross-disciplinary science and engineering, in
industrial mathematics, and in education and training. The group's current and
recent interdisciplinary initiatives include applications in chemistry,
robotics, visualization, geometric modeling, computational geometry, operations
research, computer-aided design, symbolic computation, image understanding,
discrete optimization, integer programming, database indexing, and scientific
computation. In addition, a successful industrial mathematics program is being
developed through joint research and cooperative ventures. Educational and
training initiatives are being developed utilizing the World Wide Web,
industrial and cross-disciplinary co-ops, mathematical technology courses (TeX,
Maple/Mathematica, and WWW) aimed at secondary school instructors, Maple
supported undergraduate instruction, and a vigorous program of scientific
seminars and conferences. All of these efforts will be strengthened under the
Group Infrastructure Grant, affording the GAT group the opportunity to enhance
its scientific programs and expand its outreach activities.