* 9632394
* ROW:  Developing Interactive Presentation Tools for         Educational Digital Libraries
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Aidong Zhang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

Advances in multimedia computing technologies offer new approaches to the
support of computer-assisted education and training within many application
domains. Novel interactive presentation tools can be built to enhance
traditional teaching methods with more active learning. Since a variety of user
interaction styles are possible, research must address the incorporation of such
human interaction factors into presentation tools. Under this Research Planning
Grant (RPG), the principal investigator conducts preliminary research into the
impact of various quality-of-service (QoS) parameters on the various
presentation tools that support interactivity functions necessary within digital
libraries intended for education or training. The project explores and compares
the benefits of various techniques designed to support such functions. The
research activities include: (1) the identification of QoS parameters critical
to the support of interactive learning and training activities; (2) preliminary
experimentation with these parameters and candidate multimedia presentation
methods; and (3) the construction of prototype applications to demonstrate the
interactive capabilities of learning and tutoring tools. A successful completion
of these activities can lead to a more ambitious research plan to investigate
interactive techniques for supporting on-line education- and training-oriented
digital libraries.