* 9632993
* Laser Spectroscopy of New Fullerene and Metallofullerene    Optical Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1996,11/30/1999
* John Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1999
* USD 346,872.00

Abstract 9632993 Wright This research is concerned with understanding the
relationship between the different kinds of fullerenes, their nonlinear
properties, and their electronic structure. The proposed work will involve
creating examples of the new derivatives and materials that can be probed to
understand how the interaction with other moieties changes the electronic and
optical properties. It is clear that the neutral fullerenes do not have
interesting nonlinearities and that the most interesting members of the
fullerene and fullerene derivatives family are the charged ions, charge transfer
complexes, and the endohedral metallofullerenes. The proposed research will
continue to have two important parts: synthesis, purification, preparation, and
characterization of new fullerene-based materials and measurement of the novel
optical properties of these materials. The heart of the optical measurements
will concentrate on using the capabilities of multi-resonant four wave mixing
spectroscopy to identify the states that are responsible for the nonlinearities,
to probe the transitions and coupling between electronic states, and to
determine the character and usefulness of the new states that are caused by
having endohedral metals or external moieties that allow charge transfer
transitions. %%% There is great interest in the optical properties of materials
that are based on fullerenes and metallofullerenes because of their stability,
nonlinear properties, charge transfer characteristics and the ability to
manipulate their properties through changes in the valence state, the size of
the cage, the number and type of endohedral ions. the derivatization, and the
linking with other fullerenes. The possible materials include charge transfer
salts, nano-scale surface structures and films, zeolytes, and polymeric
materials. Development of new optical materials requires an understanding of how
changes in the nature of the fullerene affect the material's optical and electr
on transfer properties. Work during a prior grant period has made it clear that
the neutral fullerenes will not be the magic nonlinear material that will make
the field of photonics competitive. Their nonlinearities are much smaller than
the workers in the field had hoped for and measured. Nevertheless, the
nonlinearities of the anions are substantial and they may be improved
considerably by the ideas presented here and by forming derivatives that
accentuate the polarizability. The fullerenes are also unusual and intriguing
materials because of the ability to engineer their electronic structures by
manipulating the number of carbons in the cage, the valence state, the
endohedral metal ion and by forming fullerene derivatives. In addition to their
promise for nonlinear materials, the normal electronic and charge transfer
states of fullerenes are central to many interesting potential uses including
photorefractive, photoconductive, photovoltaic, hole burning storage, and laser
materials. The program during this grant period will focus on the electronic
structures characteristic of the different valence states of the charged
fullerenes and the endohedral metallofullerenes.