* 9632667
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center on        Advanced Oxides and Related Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2002
* Allan Jacobson, University of Houston
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ulrich Strom
* 08/31/2002
* USD 4,540,000.00

9632667 Chu The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the
University of Houston supports research on the synthesis and characterization of
oxide materials that have technologically important applications in ionic
devices in one interdisciplinary research group. The devices include membrane
and electrocatalytic reactors, solid oxide fuel cells, and chemical sensors. The
devices promise major advances in industrial chemical processes by improving
product selectivity, process efficiency and environmental compatibility. Special
emphasis is on complex oxides that are active catalysts for hydrocarbon
oxidation and oxygen reduction and have the high ionic conductivity and
electronic conductivity required for ionic devices. The MRSEC supports the
development, operation and maintenance of shared experimental facilities for
materials research. It provides seed funding for exploratory research, fosters
research participation by undergraduates and pre-college students, and is
developing strong industrial relationships. The Center currently supports 11
senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral research associates, 10 graduate students,
and 6 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor Paul C.W. Chu. %%%
Changing needs in transportation fuels, increasing availability of natural gas,
and the emphasis on energy efficient, environmentally benign processes are
driving new demands for advanced catalytic and ceramic materials. These trends
suggest new opportunities for improved catalytic and separation processes that
apply novel oxide materials in new energy production approaches. The Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University of Houston
supports research on the synthesis and characterization of oxide materials that
have technologically important applications. The MRSEC supports the development,
operation and maintenance of shared experimental facilities for materials
research. It provides seed funding for explora tory research, fosters research
participation by undergraduates and pre-college students, and is developing
strong industrial relationships. The Center currently supports 11 senior
investigators, 3 postdoctoral research associates, 10 graduate students, and 6
undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed by Professor Paul C.W. Chu. ***