* 9632593
* Novel Structural Studies of Adsorption and Heteroepitaxy    on Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Michael Bedzyk, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2000
* USD 364,294.00

9632593 Bedzyk This research project addresses critical aspects of
heteroepitaxial growth of semiconductor structures including effects of strain,
surfactants(growth related adsorbates including dopants), and alteration of
surface kinetic phenomena through surfactant species. The approach employs the
x-ray standing wave(XSW) technique utilizing advanced light sources at national
facilities along with more conventional surface science techniques at
Northwestern to focus on the structure, adsorption, and transformation kinetics
of growth-related species on the surface of a growing, strained heterolayer. In-
situ studies undertaken will center on the molecular beam epitaxy of elements
from groups IV-IV on silicon and germanium substrates. The high resolution XSW
data will provide atomic positions within a strained overlayer with a precision
of 0.01 Angstroms, and will be used as a stringent test of theoretical models
and simulations. %%% The research will contribute basic materials science
knowledge at a fundamental level of technological relevance to several aspects
of advanced electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry. Additionally,
the knowledge and understanding gained from this research project is expected to
contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced devices and
circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An important feature
of the program is the integration of research and education through the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***