* 9632592
* Kinetics and Mechanisms:  Oxidation Mechanisms of Some      Selected Sulfur Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Reuben Simoyi, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 06/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

Dr. Reuben Simoyi, Department of Chemistry, West Virginia University, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for studies of the oxidation mechanisms of sulfur compounds.
Dr. Simoyi will study the kinetics and mechanisms of oxidation of selected
sulfur compounds including thioureas, sulfinic acids, sulfonic acids, sulfide,
and dimethyl sulfide. Oxidation of biologically relevant sulfur containing
compounds including taurine, cysteine, isethionic acid, methionine and
glutathione will also be investigated. The ultimate goal is a more complete
description of chemical oscillators involving sulfur compounds, and an
understanding of the pattern formation and symmetry-breaking bifurcations of
these compounds. Techniques such as stopped and continuous flow methods,
relaxation spectra, turbidimetry, EPR and NMR will be utilized. These systems
are relevant to an understanding of sulfur abatement procedures in environmental
pollution, and the amino acid studies may provide fundamental insights into
their physiological importance. Sulfur is a unique element in the periodic table
because it can occur in widely varying oxidation states (from -2 to +6), and it
is thus quite reactive with metals, nonmetals and with organic compounds. These
characteristics contribute to the environmental concerns associated with oxides
of sulfur, which themselves are major atmospheric pollutants which can cause
acid rain. The detailed reactivity of these and other sulfur compounds,
especially those with environmental and biological significance, is not well
understood. This project will help to elucidate the unusual reactivity patterns
observed for these sulfur compounds, and will thus contribute to a broader
understanding of their role in these important areas.