* 9632034
* (ESH) Late Glacial-Holocene Climate Records of Midwestern   United States from the Stable Isotope Ratio of Lake         Organic Matter
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1999
* R. Krishnamurthy, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/1999
* USD 150,796.00

9632034 Krishnamurthy Except where historical data exist, proxy recorders
provide the only functional means for retrieval of paleoenvironmental
information The rapid sedimentation rates in lakes provide the potential to
obtain continuous fine resolution records of environmental change on a regional
scale. While some proxies, such as pollen, have been used successfully for a
long time, others such as stable isotope ratios in inorganic carbonates are in a
developmental stage. More proxies need to be developed because no single one can
tell the entire story. This project will explore the potential of 13C, C/N and,
especially, the D/H ratio of extractable organic matter in lake sediments from
the Midwestern United States in the extraction of late glacial-Holocene climates
of the region. In a pilot study using these proxies in the acid-resistant
organic fraction extracted from Austin Lake (Kalamazoo, MI), it was shown that
SW Michigan experienced a mid-Holocene warming (MHW) 8-3 kyrs BP. D/H provided
the most dramatic evidence. This apparently is the first time D/H in organic
matter in lake sediments has been measured for paleoclimate information. The
strategy employed in this proposal is to make use of previously studied and
archived cores obtained using mostly NSF funding (UMN, USGS, Bradford Institute
of Oceanography) and to compare the results with records established by pollen
studies. In addition,, some new sites that are currently being studied for
palynology at the University of Minnesota will be studied for an integrated
study using isotopic and pollen techniques: two with contrasting hydrologic
settings in Kalamazoo, and two western Michigan sites. One of the western
Michigan sites has already been cored by the UMN (separate NSF funding) in
summer 1995. These latter sites are actively depositing carbonates and are deep
enough to be laminated. Chronologies of the sediments, when not already
established, will be by 14C and 210Pb techniques. The choice of arch ived cores
from the Midwestern US insures (1) that minimal efforts and expenditure will be
involved in field operations, (2) that advantage is taken of previous NSF
funding for sample collection, and (3) that isotope techniques can be compared
directly against the pollen-based documentation of the climate history of the
region. This study will (1) test the preliminary findings that the D/H ratio of
lake organic matter is a useful proxy of climate, and (2) provide a multi-proxy
based continental, late Glacial-Holocene climatic history of the Midwestern
United States. ??