* 9632302
* Dynamics of a Native Iris-Herbivore Association:  Effects   of Salinity, Herbivory, and Genetic Variation
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Karl Hasenstein, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Michael Willig
* 03/31/2001
* USD 250,000.00

This project will investigate the interaction between different types of plant
stress in a population of native iris growing under a range of salinity
conditions and herbivory. Both salinity and herbivory can be important sources
of plant stress, and both can induce the production of abscisic acid (ABA) and
jasmonic acid (JA). Variation in the production of these hormones among
individual plants appears to be genetically influenced. The magnitude of the
stress induction response can directly affect plant growth and reproduction as
well as resistance to herbivore attack. This project combines field experiments
with laboratory analyses to 1) examine the relationship between phytohormone
induction and iris and herbivore performance, 2) quantify gene flow and genetic
structure in the iris and herbivore populations, and 3) determine if iris and
iris herbivores are locally adapted to their microenvironment. Both ABA and JA
are growth regulators that influence plant tolerance to environmental and
herbivore-mediated stress. Thus the results of this project have important
economic implications. This study will be the first to determine the
concentrations and fluctuations of stress-induced ABA and JA in a natural plant
population, and can therefore advance our general understanding of the role
played by phytohormones in plant stress tolerance. Plant resistance to pests and
pathogens is both genetically and environmentally based. By quantifying salinity
stress and determining the genetic structure of the plant and herbivore
populations, this study can determine what plant genotypes are associated with
tolerance and susceptibility to salinity and herbivory stress, as well as the
herbivore genotypes associated with virulence. This information can then be
applied to managed systems in which stress tolerance is an important component.