* 9632706
* New Theoretical Approaches to Electron-Electron Interactionsin Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1996,11/30/2000
* Jerzy Cioslowski, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 11/30/2000
* USD 263,500.00

Professor Cioslowski of Florida State University is being supported by the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program. During the next three years his
group will cary out a comprehensive research program that aims at gaining
theoretical knowledge of the electron-electron interactions in molecules will be
carried out. The program will involve a suite of five innovative approaches to
efficient computation, accurate approximation, and detailed analysis of the
electron pair density and related two-electron quantities. High-
performancealgorithms for the evaluation of the electron intracule and extracule
densities on arbitrary grids of points will be developed. New applications of
the Hiller-Sucher-Feinberg identity will afford accurate electron intracule
densities that possess proper coalescence cusps at the origin, opening an avenue
to fully non-empirical correlation energy functionals of the one-electron
density matrix. Topological analysis of various components of the intracule and
extracule densities will provide intriguing insights into electron correlation
in molecules, whereas partitioning of two-electron properties will elucidate the
relative importance of intra and interatomic correlation effects. A new approach
to assembling the correlation holes from approximately transferable
contributions will yield highly accurate density functionals for the correlation
energy. The planned research will result in new approaches to computing
properties of large molecules that are of importance to diverse branches of
chemistry. The introduction of new correlation energy functionals will allow
such computations to be carried out more rapidly and accurately, making it
possible to study electronic structures of an ever-increasing number of chemical
species. Consequently, first-principle modeling of biochemical systems, new
pharmaceuticals, and advanced materials will become more feasible than ever
before.