* 9632027
* Cell and Molecular Biology of High Capacity Calcium Sequestration in Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Vincent Franceschi, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/2000
* USD 332,485.00

9632027 Franceschi Calcium (Ca) is involved in the control of many physiological
processes in plants, and therefore regulation of Ca activity is critical to
normal plant growth, development and productivity. Ca is taken up in the root
and transported along with water. The water evaporates from the surfaces of the
plant, and over time large amounts of Ca can accumulate in various organs, which
necessitates high capacity Ca sequestration systems. Ca oxalate formation in
plants has evolved as a high capacity mechanism for removing Ca when it is
present at levels that can no longer be controlled by the lower capacity
mechanisms common to all cells. This idea is supported by observations that most
plant families produce Ca oxalate crystals, that this product can account for up
to 85% of the dry weight of some plant species, and that 90% of the Ca in plants
can be in this form. The goal of this project is to elucidate features of cells
called Ca oxalate crystal idioblasts, which are responsible for large scale Ca
accumulation. Crystal idioblasts are structurally and biochemically specialized
for Ca accumulation and Ca oxalate crystal formation. Four proteins have been
identified that play key roles in crystal formation in crystal idioblasts. These
are: "matrix protein," a unique vacuolar Ca binding protein; calreticulin, a
high capacity Ca binding protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER); an ER Ca
ATPase (ERCA) which acts as a Ca pump; and oxalate oxidase, which is involved in
release of Ca from crystals when free Ca availability becomes limited. In
addition, ultrastructural examination shows that crystal idioblasts have
abundant ER and Golgi bodies. The aim of the proposed research is to
characterize the structure, function and control of developmental expression of
these proteins, and thus to gain a better understanding of how they regulate Ca
levels in plant tissues and cells. The specific objectives are to: 1, complete
the analysis of cDNAs for matrix protein, calreticulin, ERCA an d oxalate
oxidase, and produce antibodies to the proteins isolated from a bacterial
expression system; 2, purify matrix protein from an expression system and
examine its physical-chemical properties in vitro; 3, characterize the temporal
and spatial regulations of the proteins and their mRNA transcripts during
changing Ca nutrition; 4, determine the pattern of expression of the proteins
and their transcripts at the subcellular level from crystal idioblast initiation
through maturation; and 5, characterize the formation and modification of the ER
and Golgi systems during idioblast development. Molecular biological techniques
will be used to accomplish all or parts of the first 3 objectives. Biochemical
techniques, Western and Northern blotting, and high resolution in situ
hybridization visualization and immunocytochemistry by the light and electron
microscopy will be used for objectives 3 and 4. Objective 5 will be completed
using laser scanning confocal and standard transmission electron microscopy. %%%
A better understanding of the mechanism of Ca oxalate crystal formation is
imperative to our understanding of Ca regulation in plants, as well as for the
potential manipulation of this process, or selected features of it, by
biochemical or molecular genetic means. This project will significantly enhance
our understanding of Ca oxalate crystal formation specifically, and will provide
important new information on mechanisms of Ca regulation in plants in general.
Furthermore, it should be kept in mind that plants are not the only living
organisms that manufacture mineral crystalline structures based on calcium
salts; for example, the exquisitely precisely-sculpted spicules and mineralized
exoskeletons (e.g., oyster shells) of invertebrates, and the bones and teeth of
vertebrates, are also examples of this general process of biomineralization. The
Ca oxalate crystals of plant crystal idioblasts represent a relatively simple
model system for biomineralization, and it is anticipated that the results of
this project will provide important new insights into the general area of
biomineralization which will be useful not only to biologists interested in how
nature manufactures mineralized materials, but also to materials scientists and
engineers who are interested in either harnessing or mimicking natural processes
to create novel and useful ceramic structural materials. ***