* 9632121
* Examining the Impact of Government Tax Policies on the      Development of the Market for Health Insurance
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Price Fishback, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1998
* USD 12,150.00

As medical prices and health care expenditures continue to rise, the
government's role in the health insurance market is the subject of intensive
debate. The current tax-subsidy of employer-provided health insurance is under
scrutiny, as it is thought to have encouraged increases in comprehensive
insurance and the demand for medical care. However, empirical studies
investigating this issue have only employed data collected after major changes
in the tax code were enacted in 1954. As a result, the true effect of the tax-
subsidy on the development of the health insurance market has yet to be
examined. This doctoral dissertation improvement award will permit the cost of
placing in machine-readable form surveys conducted by the National Opinion
Research Center in 1953 and 1958 which provide detailed micro-level data on
medical expenses, health insurance coverage, income, savings, and employment for
roughly 3,000 families drawn from an area-probability sample of the U.S. non-
institutionalized population. Since the 1953 data were collected before the
major tax changes, it will be possible to directly test the effect of the 1954
tax changes on the market for health insurance using a decomposition technique.
In addition, the data contains valuable information that will be used in future
research examining the development of the health insurance market.