* 9632740
* Interactive Nano-Visualization for Science and              Engineering Education (IN-VSEE)
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2002
* Robert Roberson, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* WALTER C. ERMLER
* 02/28/2002
* USD 2,229,746.00

9632740 Ramakrishna The integration of nano-science and technology concepts into
upper -division high school and lower-division college curricula will require
innovative educational approaches that will help students understand the
structures and properties of matter on a scale below 100 nanometers, i.e., the
nanoscale. This Interactive nano-Visualization in Science and Engineering
Education (IN-VSEE) project will create a consortium of university and industry
scientists, community college and high school science faculty and museum
educators with a common vision of creating an interactive World Wide Web (WWW)
site to develop a new educational thrust based on remote operation of advanced
microscopes and nanofabrication tools coupled to powerful surface
characterization methods. The centerpiece of this project is the revolutionary
scanning probe microscope (SPM), which has evolved rapidly into a relatively
simple,, yet powerful, technique capable of imaging and manipulating materials
at resolutions down to the atomic scale. The proposed emphasis on SPM will allow
students and teachers nationwide to operate and learn about nanotechnology using
this Nobel-prize-winning technique. The key objective of IN-VSEE is to bring the
exciting world of nanotechnology into the classroom to help inspire today's
students to become tomorrow's scientists and engineers. IN-VSEE is a unique
initiative that enables a science or engineering class ("operator") to select
and investigate materials over the WWW. Using a "fishbowl" format, other classes
("observers") will be able to observe the operator class conducting and
experiment. Operator classes will remote-control the SPM from their classroom
with the SPM images broadcast over WWW in real-time. The observers will actively
participate by communicating with the operator class via WWW-Chat or video
conferencing. IN-VSEE will have a chain reaction effect by creating dialogue and
being shared over WWW with other classrooms. This same approach will serve as a
model for the national use of other instruments beside the SPM. ***