* 9632290
* STTR PHASE I:  Blue-Emitting Electroluminescent Devices by  Metal-Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Richard Tuenge, Planar America, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

*** 9632290 Tuenge This Phase I STTR project will investigate metal-organic
chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) to improve the performance of the blue-
emitting layer used for full-color thin film electroluminescent (TFEL) displays.
TFEL displays have demonstrated performance advantages compared with active
matrix liquid crystal displays (AMLCD's) including wide viewing angle, wide
operating temperature range, fast response time and inherent ruggedness.
Commercialization of TFEL displays has been impeded by the insufficient
luminance and efficiency of the blue-emitting EL phosphor films. MOCVD has
demonstrated the capability of growing crystalline binary and ternary sulfide
phosphors at temperatures less than 600 C, eliminating the need for costly high
temperature substrates. Two approaches will be pursued for improving the blue EL
material performance. The MOCVD process for he SrS:Ce phosphor will be optimized
for luminance and emission intensity in the blue spectral region. The addition
of codopants including Mn and Zn will be investigated to compensate for SrS
lattice defects. Secondly, MOCVD of cerium doped cubic- GaS will be investigated
as a potential new blue EL phosphor. The best performing blue-emitting material
will be selected for process scale to commercial size TFEL display panels in
Phase II. Potential commercial applications include full-color emissive flat
panel displays for use in portable computers, industrial process control,
instrument and medical electronics and telecommunications. ***