* 9632162
* Use of Mutants to Study Biogenesis and Functions of the     Reaction Center Proteins of Photosystem I
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2001
* Himadri Pakrasi, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2001
* USD 324,500.00

9632162 Pakrasi This proposal is focused on the study of the multisubunit
protein complex Photosystem I (PSI). Localized in the thylakoid membranes of
cyanobacteria, algae and plants, PSI is an integral component of the
photosynthetic electron transport chain, and mediates transmembrane electron
transfer from plastocyanin or cytochrome c6 to low potential acceptors such as
ferredoxin. PSI is a large pigment-protein with eleven polypeptide components.
In addition, cofactors such as quinones, iron sulfur centers, carotenoids and
nearly 100 chlorophylls are present in this protein complex. The PSI complex
from cyanobacteria has been crystallized and its structure is currently known at
a resolution of 4.5 A. The long range goal of this project is to understand, in
molecular terms, the biogenesis and function of PSI. The experimental organism
is Synechocystis 6803, a unicellular, naturally transformable cyanobacterium,
that offers a versatile genetic system to study this protein complex. The PI's
lab has recently identified BtpA, a novel protein in Synechocystis 6803, that is
not a structural component of PSI, but regulates the assembly of its
catalytically active core complex. The specific aims of this project are: (1) To
determine the cellular location of the BtpA protein. (2) To elucidate the
function of BtpA by isolating and analyzing suppressor mutants that restore the
assembly of the PSI core complex in btpA mutants. (3) To investigate whether
BtpA is a membrane-bound molecular chaperone. (4) To examine whether BtpA acts
as a translational activator protein. (5) To elucidate the basis for temperature
sensitivity of a BtpA mutant in the assembly of PSI. %%% By harvesting solar
radiation, the PSI complex provides half of the energy for biomass production in
our world. Most, if not all, of the structural proteins as well as the redox
components of PSI have been identified. The current challenge is to understand
the mechanisms that control the stoichiometric assembly and function of this
membra ne protein complex. During this project, tools of genetics, biochemistry
and biophysics will be combined to pursue this challenge. Understanding the
biogenesis and function of this supramolecular complex will also make important
contributions to the general knowledge about such large protein complexes in
other biological membranes. ***