* 9632981
* Modular Optical Interconnect Assemblies for Backplane and   Switching Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Raymond Kostuk, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* James W. Mink
* 05/31/2000
* USD 223,515.00

9632981 Kostuk The increasing demands on interconnects for network switching and
multiprocessor backplanes is forcing consideration of advanced electrical and
nonelectrical solutions, such as optical interconnects. Electrical backplanes
have been demonstrated at data rates of 500 MHz for 64 bit wide buses with
point-to-point connections over distances of 0.5 m (i.e. Cray T-90). Optics can
increase the performance of such systems by providing higher bandwidths over
long transmission distances, and support architectures requiring fanout and
fanin. Another important performance consideration is system cost. The Cray
electrical backplane is expensive because it requires non-conventional
electronic switching elements and packaging methods. If optics is to prove
useful, the cost of its devices and packaging must be lower than electrical
alternatives. Many research groups have concentrated on developing optical
interconnect architectures and optoelectronic devices. However, micro optic
interconnect systems and cost reducing fabrication methods are not very well
developed. The purpose of this proposal is to advance the state of micro optic
system development by implementing optical interconnect modules for two
important interconnect applications: 1) backplane networks, and 2) multistage
switching systems. Both systems utilize free-space micro diffractive optic
components to increase routing functionality over short connection distances
while maintaining acceptable alignment tolerances. The free-space optics module
for the backplane application provides an efficient parallel interface between
vertical cavity surface emitting laser (VCSEL) arrays and a long distance fiber
distribution network. This allows the backplane to extend from the intra machine
to inter machine levels for parallel processing tasks. The optics modules for
multistage switching systems are suitable for interfacing to both VCSEL and
CMOS-SEED modulator smart pixel array systems. The proposed free-space op tics
modules reduce the complexity of earlier optical system designs by eliminating
the requirement for polarization optics and increases the optical transfer
efficiency. This should increase the bandwidth at which these systems can
operate. In addition to designing and fabricating these optical interface
modules we are planning to work with Donnelly Corporation to apply their
injection molding techniques to replicate the optical components and packaging
mounts. This should further reduce the cost of implementing these systems. A
collaboration with the University of Colorado is also planned to incorporate our
optics module for the multistage switching system in their intelligent backplane
architecture. ***