* 9632819
* The State of Dispersed Molecular Hydrogen: Porous Materials and Droplets
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/11/1998
* Tito Huber, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/11/1998
* USD 112,470.00

9632819 Huber This project will prepare and characterize supercooled hydrogen in
small volumes. Molecular hydrogen is a composite boson, lighter than helium, for
which a superfluid phase has been predicted if the material can be supercooled
below 5 K. Experiments will be conducted to prepare supercooled hydrogen micro
volumes and study them by spectroscopic techniques. The work is of general
interest since bosonic materials display unusual behavior such as
superconductivity or Bose-Einstein condensation, as well as superfluidity. The
challenge in this project is to supercool molecular hydrogen substantially below
its crystallization temperature of 13.8 K. Hydrogen in microporous media and
unsupported clusters of hydrogen will be investigated. The research is of
fundamental interest in condensed matter and materials physics. %%% This project
deals with molecular hydrogen confined to small volumes as in aerosol droplets
or in microporous media. When so constrained, the hydrogen is more likely to
supercool. If supercooled hydrogen liquid can be obtained at temperatures below
5 K, theoretical arguments suggest that a superfluid state may be obtained.
Achievement of molecular hydrogen in a new superfluid state would represent a
major discovery in condensed matter physics. This project will develop
techniques to obtain micro volumes of molecular hydrogen at low temperatures,
study the micro volumes by spectroscopic techniques, and search for
superfluidity of hydrogen in the microvolumes. ***