* 9632570
* Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,04/30/2002
* Herbert Herman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ulrich Strom
* 04/30/2002
* USD 3,401,350.00

9632570 Herman The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at
the University of New York at Stony Brook supports research in the area of
thermal spray processing and associated materials. Thermal spray coatings are
crucial to the economic, safe, and efficient operation of a wide variety of
engineering components. The Center has a focus on key scientific issues which
are likely to play a role in thermal spray processing. The research is carried
out in two interdisciplinary research groups. One group integrates diagnostics
and modeling of the plasma spray process in order to develop tools for
generating process designs and intelligent control strategies. A second group
concentrates on basic understanding of the relationship between processing,
microstructure, and properties of the thermal spray product. Details of the
microstructures will be linked through modeling to activities in the first
group. Special emphasis is placed on measurement of mechanical properties and on
application of a variety of sophisticated characterization tools. The MRSEC
supports the development, operation and maintenance of shared experimental
facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding for exploratory
research and emerging areas, and fosters research participation by
undergraduates. The MRSEC has strong industrial links and an educational
outreach program from the pre-college to the graduate level. The Center
currently supports 13 senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral research associates,
1 technician, 8 graduate students, and 4 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed
by Professor Herbert Herman. %%% The Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center (MRSEC) at the University of New York at Stony Brook supports research in
the area of thermal spray processing and associated materials. Thermal spray
coatings are crucial to the economic, safe, and efficient operation of a wide
variety of engineering components. The Center has a focus on key scientific
issues which are likely to play a role in thermal spray processing. The research
is carried out in two interdisciplinary research groups. One group integrates
diagnostics and modeling of the plasma spray process in order to develop tools
for generating process designs and intelligent control strategies. A second
group concentrates on basic understanding of the relationship between
processing, microstructure, and properties of the thermal spray product. Details
of the microstructures will be linked through modeling to activities in the
first group. Special emphasis is placed on measurement of mechanical properties
and on application of a variety of sophisticated characterization tools. The
MRSEC supports the development, operation and maintenance of shared experimental
facilities for materials research. It provides seed funding for exploratory
research and emerging areas, and fosters research participation by
undergraduates. The MRSEC has strong industrial links and an educational
outreach program from the pre-college to the graduate level. The Center
currently supports 13 senior investigators, 3 postdoctoral research associates,
1 technician, 8 graduate students, and 4 undergraduates. The MRSEC is directed
by Professor Herbert Herman. ***