* 9633408
* Production of Iron-Complexing Compounds by Marine  Particle-Associated Bacteria
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Margo Haygood, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2000
* USD 250,000.00

9633408 Haygood Iron availability is believed to have an important influence on
the productivity of marine environments. The chemistry of iron in the ocean is
still poorly understood, but there is an emerging consensus that iron is largely
complexed by organic compounds in seawater, thus affecting the chemical behavior
of iron, as well as its availability to organisms. Many bacteria, including some
marine species, are known to produce siderophores, compounds which bind iron.
Such siderophores may contribute to iron complexation in seawater. The
investigators will study siderophore production by marine bacteria associated
with particles. This study seeks to determine whether siderophores participate
in iron complexation in seawater, and what environmental conditions control
their production. Siderophore production by selected marine bacteria will be
studied in the laboratory using biochemical, molecular, and immunological
techniques. Knowledge of the factors regulating siderophore production will be
useful in predicting their occurrence in the marine environment and will lead to
a better understanding of iron and its influence on productivity and community
structure in the ocean. This information will be immediately useful in chemical
modeling of the behavior of iron in seawater. These studies will provide a key
link between studies of the organic iron ligands in seawater, and the role of
bacteria in influencing the availability of iron to phytoplankton and bacteria
in the ocean.