* 9633438
* Programming-Language Structures for Representing and        Optimizing Operating-System Resources
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Olin Shivers, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This research project seeks to demonstrate that fundamental operating system
services and resources can and should be represented directly in the natural
linguistic structures of advanced programming languages. A component of this
effort is to develop aggressive optimisation strategies making this modelling
practical and efficient. The central question underlying the research is: how
can the benefits of advanced programming languages be brought to bear upon
current systems-programming practice? Modern computer applications are most
commonly written in C, a language well- known for its lack of support for
writing modular, robust programs. C has no module system, allows dangerous
"casting" of data types, violates abstraction barriers, provides no garbage-
collection support for automatic storage management, has no concurrency
operators, and generally exposes the details of the underlying machine to the
programmer. It is not defined in terms of a mathematically sound underlying
semantics. As a result, modern software is fragile, error-prone, and difficult
to build, maintain or reuse. Modern programming languages, such as the ML family
of languages, provide much more support to the programmer for writing large,
robust programs. Unfortunately, these languages are not yet practical tools for
implementing real-world systems software. In practice, programs written in these
languages are slow, use large amounts of memory, and have awkward interfaces to
OS services. Providing access from programs written in these languages to the
machine resources, in ways that are natural to the language, should help to
address these shortcomings. This research enables new optimisations and makes
available new models to the programmer, allowing systems programs to be written
that exploit the expressive power of advanced programming languages. A service
kernel provides access to the underlying machine resources in a way that is
tightly integrated, both in architecture and in implem entation, with advanced
languages. The research issue is to investigate the architecture of an operating
system that is symbiotic, not with C, but with a modern programming language,
and to develop technologies for exploiting the tight integration of the OS and
the compiler to provide efficient, high-level services. The kernel is being
developed in ML, on two hardware platforms: a bare Intel PC system, and a
wireless, mobile "personal digital assistant" with limited on-board resources.
***