* 9633792
* Field Survey of the February 17, 1996 Irian Jaya Tsunami
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Costas Synolakis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 04/30/1997
* USD 13,464.00

9633792 Synolakis This action is to support the participation of U.S.
researchers in the international effort to learn from the February 17, 1996
Irian Jaya earthquake and tsunami, in order to gather and study perishable
inundation data. The participants will join the International Tsunami Survey
Team which has surveyed six of the 1992-1994 worldwide events, resulting in a
small but valuable database of inundation data. On February 17, 1996, a strong
earthquake shook Biak Island off Irian Jaya in East Indonesia. The earthquake-
generated tsunami waves propagated to Japan, where the measured height of the
attenuated waves was approximately one meter, with a reported wave height on
reaching the west coast of the United States of up to 7cm. The US participants
will: (1) measure maximum penetration points (maximum runup) at different
locations, (2) attempt to estimate tsunami inundation velocities, and (3)
interview eyewitnesses to determine the nature and number of runup waves
observed. Runup data are highly perishable, given that reconstruction efforts
start a few days, if not hours, after the event. Even in remote areas, storms
and wind-generated waves may alter the topography or scatter the debris line
which is used for estimating the location of the penetration points. It is for
this reason that travel to the site must occur as soon as possible after the
event to document the coastal effects of a damaging tsunami. Accurate
information of the runup height distribution will allow a better definition of
the tectonic source motion, which in turn will permit the calibration of a
source model for future use. It is anticipated that the team will be able to
obtain profile data in the survey which will be used both to augment the
modeling, and also to evaluate how important beach topography is for first-
order predictions. ***