* 9633320
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Rebecca Gomez, NM Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Bonney Sheahan
* 08/31/1998
* USD 80,000.00

This two year fellowship for postdoctoral study will allow Dr. Rebecca Gomez to
obtain training in linguistics at the University of Arizona. Her research
centers around structural cues in early language acquisition. Research on
language acquisition suggests that infants become sensitive to structural cues
in language long before they begin using language referentially. Knowledge of
structural information in language might also support higher level processing
such as that involved in language comprehension. One problem with much of the
existing work on this topic is that it focuses on infant's and children's
sensitivity to structure in language, without addressing how they acquire that
sensitivity. Because of the considerable redundancy in natural language, it is
often difficult to determine what factor or factors was responsible for infants'
discriminations. An approach that has been used to circumvent these problems
with older learners capitalizes on the use of artificial languages, thus
enabling more precise control over the language learning environment than is
found in natural language studies. The objective of this research, therefore, is
to study structural cues in early language acquisition using artificial
languages. The extension of the use of artificial languages to infants is of
potentially great importance to theories of language acquisition.