* 9633390
* Building Evolutionary Software Through Modular Executable   Specifications and Incremental Derivations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Paul Hudak, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/1999
* USD 450,000.00

The first goal of this investigation is a software development strategy in which
ultra-modular executable specifications are the starting point of systems
design. By ultra-modular is meant a set of specific technologies that allow one
to anticipate and realize change, including the use of domain-specific embedded
languages to capture high- level, domain-specific semantics, and modular monadic
interpreters on which to realize the semantics and associated software tools.
Using these techniques a level of modularity in software is obtained that has
not been achieved before: namely, modularity at the meta-level of abstract
semantics. Second, the research seeks a notion of type-based modularity to
capture software architecture. There is a misconception that type systems are
contrary to the goals of "dynamic languages," which in turn are viewed as good
candidates for building evolvable systems. This research contests this claim. In
fact it is expected that modern typed languages such as ML and Haskell can offer
even greater support for constructing reliable and efficient evolutionary
software. In particular, the design and use of a higher-order module language is
studied to capture systems architecture. Finally, a methodology is investigated
that supports the notion of incremental derivations. In this methodology, some
executable specifications are refined for improved performance, whether by
formal methods (program transformation, partial evaluation, etc.) or by informal
methods (such as rewriting inner loops in a lower-level language). The key point
is that the derivations themselves can be modularized, thus making them suitable
candidates for smooth evolution. When formal methods are employed, this also
yields a technique for constructing modular proofs of program correctness; yet
another innovative aspect of this approach. These three ideas form the
cornerstone of the research effort. To evaluate them, the investigation includes
the design of a prototype extens ible operating system. ***