* 9633648
* GOALI: Electromagnetic Compatibility Educational            Experiences: A Joint Effort Between Chrysler Corporation    and Michigan State University
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Dennis Nyquist, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 05/31/2001
* USD 208,841.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9633648 Principal Investigator: Dennis Nyquist Title:
GOALI: Electromagnetic Compatibility Educational Experiences: A Joint Effort
Between Chrysler Corporation and Michigan State University In this GOALI
program, the initial agenda of a long term interaction with Chrysler Corporation
involving electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) issues will be implemented.
Problems involving electromagnetic immunity and emission are particularly
important to automotive engineers, who must deal with complex electronic systems
in every part of a vehicle. The continuing move to higher frequencies is
expected to exacerbate the problem. In this GOALI research, a new senior level
EMC course will be developed jointly by Chrysler personnel and the Michigan
State University faculty. The course will be taught as part of the standard
electrical engineering curriculum at MSU and, in a modified form, internally to
personnel at Chrysler. An associated laboratory will be developed and taught at
the state of the art Chrysler Technical Center. Graduate students will also be
part of this program and will be trained in state of the art EMC testing
techniques, and will help in the development of the laboratory and course
materials. Usefulness even beyond the important automotive context is apparent,
as EMC problems are also a growing concern in wireless communications, and in
many other areas. The multidisciplinary and "hands-on" nature of the
electromagnetics training which this project provides is expected to be an
excellent training ground for students.