* 9633800
* Integrating Teaching and Research:  The Engineering         Education Scholars Program
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Denice Denton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 10/31/1999
* USD 280,485.00

ABSTRACT Corradini 9633800 The future success of U.S. higher education requires
better integration of both teaching scholarship and research scholarship.
Likewise, the future success of the U.S. economy requires that some of our best
and brightest young people choose to enter the engineering profession. In
addition, both pedagogical techniques and content knowledge are necessary to
prepare effective teachers for engineering classrooms. To these ends, the
University of Wisconsin-Madison proposes to implement a cultural change approach
to engineering education that will create an improved, student-centered,
problem-based, teach approach to teaching and learning instead of a faculty-
centered, traditional approach and that will focus on both research and teaching
instead of primarily research. These goals will be achieved by developing an
integrated Engineering Scholars Program (ESP) which will consist primarily of a
one-week summer workshop for graduate engineering students and new engineering
faculty. Given the need for curricular and pedagogical reform in engineering and
given the high attrition rates of students in engineering, we will focus our
attention nationally on engineering graduate students and new faculty,
especially women and minorities, interested in pursuing an academic career. We
will collaborate with the engineering coalition schools to recruit and identify
thirty participants each year for three years. Fully aware that our cultural
change approach entails a complex and iterative process, our activities will be
guided by collaborative, continuous improvement teams of local, on-campus and
outside experts who will be responsible for 1) program content that integrates
research and teaching, 2) program evaluation and assessment to insure the
highest possible program quality and 3) program transition from a dependency on
outside experts to a reliance on local experts. Together with our partners in
industry, we propose an innovative, three-year program that will evolve i nto a
UW-Madison sponsored program in collaboration with engineering education
coalition schools. Our program will have these major components: 1) workshops
for content knowledge about teaching and learning plus hands-on application and
a reflective approach, 2) collaborative, cross-disciplinary teams of
participants as well as local and outside experts, 3) networking strategies to
build collaborative faculty teams at home institutions, 4) a transition plan to
move from outside experts to local experts teams, and 5) evaluation, adaption,
and dissemination. ***