* 9633519
* CISE Minority Institutions Infrastructure: Multidimensional and Multispectral Information Processing and Computational  Aspects
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Malek Adjouadi, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/2000
* USD 221,065.00

9633519 Adjouadi, Malek Florida International University CISE Minority
Institutions Infrastructure: Multidimensional and Multispectral Information
Processing and Computational Aspects This grant provides support for graduate
students to continue their research with a center serving a strong graduate
minority population, the NSF funded Center for Advanced Technology and Education
(NSF-CATE). The research areas include real-time applications of computer
vision, neural networks, and mulitidimensional and multispectral signal analysis
and modeling, all under a highly distributed and parallel platform. This support
provides a strong basis for the development of visual/sensing techniques in a
multi-dimensional and multispectral framework to address various dynamic and
static phenomena viewed either through real-time confocal microscopy, flow
cytometry, or a high-speed motion analyzer. Modeling of dynamic phenomena which
integrate time with the three spatial dimensions; real-time image analysis and
interpretation; application of the fundamentals of the wavelet theory; and
implementations of the functional principles of the hypercolumn theory of the
visual cortex constitute key research endeavors under this proposal. The
important concepts of parallelism, data compression and high-speed data
communication play a significant role in the aforementioned research goals. The
existing NSF-CATE infrastructure and the support of this grant allows for a
significant impact to be made not only in enhancing the theoretical foundation
of the outlined research goals, but in carrying-out key applications with our
industrial partners, especially in biomedical diagnostics. ***