* 9633738
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Getting Saved from the     Public School:  Conservative Protestant Identities and      Alternative Education
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1996,10/31/1998
* Christian Smith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/1998
* USD 7,500.00

9633738 Smith What explains the explosive growth of home schooling and Christian
schooling among conservative Protestants in America? This Doctoral Dissertation
Improvement research proposes to investigate the relationship between religious
identities and educational choices with data that are representative of
religious conservatives throughout the nation. It will explore how the symbolic
boundaries of family, faith and schools are constructed by conservative
Protestants, and how these cultural constructions interact with changing social
conditions, including the social mobility of conservative Protestants and the
increasing differentiation of the educational field, to determine schooling
decisions. NSF support will fund the creation of a nationally-representative
dataset of conservative Protestant schoolers, which will include information
from 71 personal and 240 telephone interviews. This dataset will provide data to
address questions such as: (1) which conservative Protestants from what social
positions are attracted to alternative education?, (2) what are the motives
behind the decision to leave the public schools?, (3) what role does religious
identities and traditions play in parents' rationales for leaving the public
school?, and (4) what impact does broader social and cultural forces (e.g.,
"cultural war" and privatization of religion) have on the involvement of
conservative Protestants in alternative education. **** ??