* 9633351
* The Interactions Between Aluminum and Biogenic Silica in    Marine Sediments: An Experimental Flow-Through Reactor Study
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Philippe Van Cappellen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/1998
* USD 103,879.00

9633351 Van Cappellen Aluminum plays a major role in the benthic regeneration of
nutrient silicic acid and the preservation of biogenic opal in the sedimentary
record. Based on results of a previous study of sediments from the Indian sector
of the Southern Ocean, potential mechanisms by which Al intervenes in the early
diagenesis of silica include: (1) primary uptake of Al by biosiliceous skeletons
during biomineralization, (2) secondary uptake of Al by biosiliceous
microfossils at the seafloor, (3) readjustment of the Al/Si ratio of the surface
layers of biosiliceous debris during burial, and (4) simultaneous precipitation
of pore water silica and aluminum. This study will test the proposed Al-Si
interaction mechanisms and, in doing so, build a quantitative basis for
predicting their relative importance in different marine depositional
environments. Stirred flow-through reactors will be used in the experiments,
because they allow the measurement of reaction kinetics under reproducible,
steady-state conditions. The effect of primary Al uptake during
biosilicification will be studied by measuring the steady state rates of silicic
acid production from high-Al and low-Al samples of pure diatom cultures. The
kinetics will be determined as a function of the degree of saturation,
temperature, pH and Al content of the silica frustules. The early diagenetic
interactions between silica and soluble Al will be studied by supplying
dissolved Al via the input solution, or by adding a solid source of reactive Al
to biogenic silica suspended in the reactor. In the latter experiments, a given
amount of biogenic silica will be mixed with increasing amounts of the solid Al
source. This will mimic the increased dilution of biogenic silica by detrital
material in marine sediments. The experimental results will allow to examine the
hypothesis that the asymptotic pore water silica level in detrital-rich
sediments represents a kinetic steady state between production of silicic acid
by biogenic silica dissolution and consumption by precipitation of authigenic
Al-Si phases. The Al/Si stoichiometry of the authigenic precipitates will be
obtained from the relative rates of Al precipitation and silica reprecipitation
in the reactor experiments. Batch adsorption experiments will also be used to
constrain the levels of Al sorption at which secondary Al uptake by biosiliceous
surfaces switches from adsorption to the formation of precipitates. Scanning
electron microscopy and solid state chemical analyses will complement the
reactor-based experiments.