* 9633391
* Integrating Formal and Informal Techniques:  An Approach to Evolutionary Systems Development
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Betty Cheng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/2000
* USD 157,162.00

A formal method consists of a well-defined specification language and a
rigorously defined set of rules that can be used to reason about the
specifications expressed in that language. The specification language is used to
describe the intended system behavior. In order to facilitate the use of formal
methods for software development, particularly for high-assurance systems, the
objective of this project is to produce a set of integrated techniques that
support the use of formal methods for all phases of software development.
Towards this end, several new techniques and tools are being developed that
support the application of formal methods for software engineering. These
include tools to support correct program derivation from formal specifications,
to formally specify requirements analysis and design information, to determine
software reuse based on formal specifications, to reverse engineer existing
software to obtain formal descriptions, and to statically analyze requirements
specifications for completeness and consistency. Formal specifications can be
checked for consistency and completeness using automated techniques. However,
during the initial phases of a project, it may be difficult to construct formal
specifications directly. In contrast, many developers find it more intuitive to
create diagrams to model their systems. As a means to bridge the gap between
formal and informal approaches to software development, this research
investigates the formalization of a commonly used modeling notation, known as
the Object Modeling Technique. The notation comprises three complementary
diagrams: object (entity-relation) diagrams, state diagrams, and data flow
diagrams. These three diagrams, respectively, model the architecture (static),
behavior (dynamic), and data flow and services of a given system. The results of
the formalization studies will enable the automated generation of formal
specifications from diagrams. The next step is to investigate and develop formal
semantics for the integration of the three models. Finally, design
transformations are studied that can be applied to the diagrams and the
corresponding specifications. ***