* 9633424
* Dynamics and Microphysics of Narrow Cold-Frontal Rainbands  as Investigated with a Three-Dimensional Cloud Model
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Pao-Kuan Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 03/31/2001
* USD 300,729.00

9633424 Wang The narrow cold frontal rainband (NCFR) is one of several types of
mesoscale rainbands observed in mid-latitude cyclones. Previous studies have
shown that NCFRs have the potential to produce very heavy rains and high winds.
The Principal Investigators will utilize an advanced numerical mesoscale weather
model to simulate the dynamics and microphysics of NCFR. Imbedded along the
synoptic-scale parent front, NCFR's are dominated by well-marked mesoscale to
microscale structure with quasi-periodically spaced precipitation cores
separated by gaps containing little or no rain. Previous NCFR studies have shown
that riming of snow crystals is highly important to graupel growth aloft and
thus to surface rainfall. The numerical model is configured to simulate line
convection and includes a three-class ice microphysics parameterization. Initial
parameters of main interest will be mid- to upper-level environmental wind shear
and the length of mesoscale waves perturbing the leading edge of the cold air.
The choice of these two parameters is motivated by recent observational evidence
that upper wind shear affects graupel growth in postfrontal snowbands and that
strong positive correlations exist among the depth of NCFR precipitation cores,
their radar reflectivity and the separation between them. If successful, this
research will increase our understanding of the fundamental physics of these
systems which are capable of producing severe weather. This may eventually lead
to better predictions. ***