* 9633374
* Organic and Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2001
* Robert Bergman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 11/30/2001
* USD 770,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program
provides continued support for studies of organometallic reaction mechanisms by
Dr. Robert G. Bergman, Chemistry Department, University of California at
Berkeley. Efforts will be focused on three projects. The first concerns
interaction between transition metals from the left and right sides of the
series, respectively, within a single molecule. A second goal is generation of
organometallic complexes that are highly reactive due to the presence of an
unpaired electron at the metal center. In such species, relatively strong
covalent bonds are formed to the metal so that organic compounds that do not
ordinarily associate with metals may bond and then exhibit new reactivity. Some
chemistry of analogous 18-electron metal anions will also be included. The third
project is the synthesis of new ligands that confer planar chirality on early
and late transition metal complexes so that the stereochemistry of metal-
centered reactions that carry out organic transformations with asymmetric
induction may be investigated. New metal dimerization catalysts for preparing
oligomers and polymers with unusual structures from dienes and polyenes will be
developed. Chemical reactions involving organic molecules and transition metal
complexes are fundamental to the understanding of important catalytic and
biological processes. In this program, the details of reactions in which the
presence of one or two metals imposes steric restrictions or develops unusual
electronic driving forces will be investigated.