* 9633070
* Predicting Physical Disturbance in a Changing Environment:  Field Test of a Biomechanical Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Mark Denny, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2000
* USD 320,000.00

9633070 Denny Disturbance plays a central role in non-equilibrium theories of
community structure, in which high species diversity and species coexistence are
attributed to processes of stochastic recruitment in a heterogeneously
perturbed, patchy environment. The disturbance regime of the rocky intertidal
system offers an advantage for study in that it is characterized by chronic high
intensity physical disturbance due primarily to a single factor -- the
hydrodynamic forces imposed by wave action. This controlling nature of "wave
exposure" is one reason the intertidal zone serves as a model system in
experimental ecology. Dr. Denny's lab has recently been able to combine the
results of earlier work in wave statistics and hydrodynamics with empirical
measurements of the strength of intertidal organisms in a quantitative,
biomechanical method that predicts physical disturbance as a function of time
and the "waviness" of the sea. Preliminary applications of this approach have
shown that its predictions are reasonably accurate, but a rigorous test of the
approach has not been conducted, which is the impetus for this project.
Extensive field measurements will be conducted of the parameters that serve as
inputs into the biomechanical approach, and these data will be used to predict
the week-to-week rate of disturbance of each of six representative species of
plants and animals at a series of sites along the shore. These predictions will
then be compared to the rates of disturbance measured empirically at these same
sites. The goodness of fit between prediction and empirical measurement can then
be calculated to provide evidence of the overall predictive ability of the
biomechanical approach. The inexpensive instruments developed in these studies
will make it possible for intertidal ecologists to repeat the basic steps of
this approach (measuring maximal wave height, measuring habitat-specific maximal
water velocities), and thereby should facilitate the use and testing of the
biomechanical method at a wide variety of sites. If these tests of the
biomechanical approach confirm its ability to predict species-specific rates of
disturbance, the method can be a valuable tool for understanding the ecological
consequences of both seasonal and year-to-year variability in wave exposure, and
for the prediction of how rates of disturbance will change if large-scale
climatic change causes longterm shifts in the waviness of the ocean.