* 9633385
* Theoretical and Computational Studies of Glasses and the    Glass Transition
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* William Klein, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 525,100.00

9633385 Klein, Gould and Brower This is a new award which is funded jointly by
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities/MPS, and the Divisions of Materials
Research, Mathematical Sciences and Advanced Scientific Computing. An integrated
theoretical and computational investigation will be made of the structural
properties of fragile glass-forming liquids and the relation of this structure
to the mechanisms of relaxation. Glasses have become an increasingly important
class of materials in several new technologies. They possess advantages such as
light weight and ease of processing, but suffer from degradation through creep,
fatigue, and embrittlement. To understand these mechanisms, it is necessary to
understand the structure of glasses and how they relax. At present, experiments
can provide information about relaxation processes in glasses, but do not yield
much information about their structure or relation of this structure to the
relaxation mechanisms. In contrast, computer simulations can provide information
about structure, but only on relatively short time and length scales. Moreover,
theoretical understanding of glasses is in a relatively crude state. In this
research, a sequence of models will be studied beginning with a mean-field model
of a glass-forming liquid and proceeding via various approximation methods to
include non-mean-field effects. Several parallel computer architectures will be
used to extend the size and the time scale of the systems simulated. The
simulations will be based on an efficient message passing molecular dynamics
program, and by more speculative methods based on Fourier acceleration
algorithms and on cellular automata models. The results of the theoretical
investigations and computer simulations, in conjunction with ongoing laboratory
experiments at Boston University and other locations, will facilitate an
understanding of the relation between the relaxation observed experimentally in
deeply supercooled liqui ds and glasses and the existence of structures seen in
computer simulations. Understanding of this relation will make it possible to
use the structure of glasses to predict their temporal evolution. The research
will be done in collaboration with colleagues at Boston University in the
Departments of Physics and Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering, and the
Center for Computational Science. In addition, colleagues in the Physics
Departments at Clark and Brandeis Universities, the Center for Computational
Materials at NIST, and at Thinking Machines Corporation will participate.
Graduate students will also participate through the NSF-sponsored Graduate
Research Training Program at the Center for Computational Science at Boston
University. Computer platforms include Boston University's 38-processor SGI
Power Challenge array, a work station cluster and several CAM-8 machines. A
workstation cluster at Clark University and the NIST Cray YMP will also be used.
%%% This is a new award which is funded jointly by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities/MPS, and the Divisions of Materials Research,
Mathematical Sciences and Advanced Scientific Computing. The research combines
aspects of NSF programs on Advanced Materials and Processing and on High
Performance Computing and Communications. An integrated theoretical and
computational investigation will be made of the structural properties of fragile
glass-forming liquids and the relation of this structure to the mechanisms of
relaxation. Glasses have become an increasingly important class of materials in
several new technologies. They possess advantages such as light weight and ease
of processing, but suffer from degradation through creep, fatigue, and
embrittlement. To understand these mechanisms, it is necessary to understand the
structure of glasses and how they relax. At present, experiments can provide
information about relaxation processes in glasses, but do not yield much
information about t heir structure or relation of this structure to the
relaxation mechanisms. In contrast, computer simulations can provide information
about structure, but only on relatively short time and length scales. Moreover,
theoretical understanding of glasses is in a relatively crude state. The results
of the theoretical investigations and computer simulations, in conjunction with
ongoing laboratory experiments at Boston University and other locations, will
facilitate an understanding of the relation between the relaxation observed
experimentally in deeply supercooled liquids and glasses and the existence of
structures seen in computer simulations. Understanding of this relation will
make it possible to use the structure of glasses to predict their temporal
evolution. The research will be done in collaboration with colleagues at Boston
University in the Departments of Physics and Electrical, Computer and Systems
Engineering, and the Center for Computational Science. In addition, colleagues
in the Physics Departments at Clark and Brandeis Universities, the Center for
Computational Materials at NIST, and at Thinking Machines Corporation will
participate. Graduate students will also participate through the NSF-sponsored
Graduate Research Training Program at the Center for Computational Science at
Boston University. Computer platforms include Boston University's 38-processor
SGI Power Challenge array, a work station cluster and several CAM-8 machines. A
workstation cluster at Clark University and the NIST Cray YMP will also be used.
***