* 9633040
* U.S.-Hungary Engineering Research on Switched-Circuits in   Digital CMOS Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2002
* John Ringo, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/2002
* USD 83,478.00

INT 9633040 Ringo This U.S.-Hungary research project involves Dr. John Ringo of
Washington State University and Dr. Gabor Temes of Oregon State University and
their Hungarian counterpart, Dr. Kalman Tarnay of the Technical University of
Budapest. Their collaborative efforts will feature improvement of design
techniques for accurate high-linearity switched-capacitor circuits.
Specifically, the researchers will study the underlying problems associated with
shrinking dimensions of components for CMOS switched capacitor designs. Focus
will be on determining: 1) approaches for making novel mixed-mode CMOS circuit
operation less dependent on the exact characteristics of devices; 2) the
influence of thermal and quantum-mechanical device effects on these circuits; 3)
modeling and simulating these effects; and 4) identification of ways to minimize
their influence. The intent of this joint research is to apply the device-level
results obtained at the Technical University of Budapest to the optimization of
the circuits developed at Oregon State University. Overall, results are expected
to yield improved models for computer-aided circuit analysis and scaling rules.
This engineering project in solid state and microstructures research fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in
the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and share
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??