* 9633444
* Fault Tolerance Analysis of Mobile Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Teresa Dahlberg, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

Deployment of wireless, mobile networks is rapidly increasing as advances in
digital cellular systems promise large-scale, reliable voice, data, and
multimedia communications in a mobile environment. The realization of Personal
Communications Services (PCS) will increase dependence on mobile networks by the
mass public and private sectors, implying that system failure resulting in loss
of communication or critical data will not be tolerated. Fault tolerance
analysis provides an understanding of system functionality in the wake of
failures. Fault tolerance analysis such as the reliability, availability, and
survivability problems continues to be well researched for wired networks. The
mobility of the user along with the unpredictability of motion indicate that
models and assumptions for wired networks cannot be carried over to the
wireless, mobile domain. Very little focus has yet been placed on fault
tolerance analysis for mobile networks in particular. This project fills this
void through exploratory research on fault tolerance analysis of systems which
provide large-scale PCS, including voice, data and multimedia communications.
These systems are comprised of radio frequency communications within mobile
cellular or picocellular networks that are interconnected to the existing
(wired) infrastructure. The fault tolerance criteria and evaluation approach are
not immediately apparent for these systems due to the heterogeneity of the
services provided and of the underlying interconnection network, and due to the
inherent unreliability of the wireless communications medium. The goal of this
project is to formulate the appropriate research problems regarding fault
tolerance of mobile systems and to indicate an analysis strategy. This includes
identifying fault tolerance parameters (or propose new ones) which are most
useful to measuring system robustness, developing a network modeling approach
(or set of approaches), and proposing preliminary fault tolerance algor ithms
using these models.