* 9633688
* Collaborative Research;  Studies of Channelized Flow in the Mariana Forearc:  Pore Fluid Geochemistry, Sedimentology,   and Heat Flow
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1996,09/30/1999
* Andrew Fisher, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 09/30/1999
* USD 103,345.00

9633688 Fisher A major focus of marine geoscience research is elucidating global
chemical mass balance for dissolved species in the oceans. A major uncertainty
in these calculations is an estimate for fluxes associated with fluid flow
through convergent margins. For some chemical species this omission is
significant. Before better estimates of global mass balances can be determined,
the chemical composition of venting fluids from subduction zones must be
determined and the diagentic reactions that form these fluids must be
understood. Recent work on this problem has focussed on subduction zones
characterized by large accumulations of underthrust sediment. In such regions,
however, the diagentic reactions in the thick sediment sequences may obscure the
primary signal of fluids from the underthrusting ocean crust. The present
recommended project will focus on fluid flow and chemistry of fluids from the
Mariana forearc region. Sediment accretion is minimal in this area, and study of
fluid flow and chemistry should provide an excellent guide to understanding
primary chemical signature of fluids derived from the ocean crust. A combination
of remote vehicle sampling, coring from surface ship, and measurements of
sediment heat fluid and pore fluids will provide data from three areas in the
Marianas where fluid flow appears to be channelized along fault zones. In
addition to addressing significant scientific questions, the project will
provide important background information for proposed ocean drilling in this
region. ***