* 9633535
* Advanced Semiconductor Structures for Next Generation       Wireless Systems: Interplay Between Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* April Brown, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Filbert J. Bartoli
* 07/31/1999
* USD 369,997.00

9633535 Brown In this proposal program, The Georgia Institute of Technology
(Georgia Tech), The University of Illinois (UIUC), and TRW will collaborate to
significantly advance the growth and fabrication technologies for phosphorous-
based microwave and millimeter wave devices. The framework for this effort is
provided by the current system drivers for improvements in wireless
communication systems. These criteria are reduced process cost, improved
efficiency, linearity and output power, minimization of bias voltage and current
drain, and reduced noise. Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) is the most widely used
growth technique for commercial microwave and millimeter wave devices which
require epitaxial films. It is widely recognized that InP-based materials offer
significant advantages for these targeted device applications. Significant
improvements, however, are currently required to advance these materials to an
adequate state of maturity for manufacturing. The ability to utilize phosphorus
in a "standard' MBE configuration, i.e. all solid sources, will enable specific
performance and process cost improvements. We propose to address this vital
need. Concurrent with this goal will be the advancement of MBE as a process
technology. We will address both of these issues by performing the materials
experiments in conjunction with the development of a physically-based MBE model.
The effort at The University of Illinois will be focused towards the development
of improved process technologies for InP-based HEMTs. In particular, the
improvement in dry etching uniformity and the development of improved device
structures and schemes for ohmic contacts will be investigated. The process
issues chosen will enable improvements in process cost and in device
performance. Materials characterization and device fabrication and measurement
will be performed at TRW. TRW has committed a significant effort (- 60% cost
sharing) towards this collaborative project. In addition, TRW will provide
summer e mployment for students working on this project. ***