* 9633585
* AMP:  Minority Travel Grant to Participate in the Sixth     National Conference of the Council on Undergraduate Research
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* John Stevens, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 07/31/1997
* USD 12,500.00

HRD-9633585 Stevens The Council on Undergraduate Research (CUR) requests funding
in the amount of $25,000 for travel grants for underrepresented minorities to
attend its Sixth National Conference to be held at North Carolina Central
University (NCCU), June 27,-29, 1996. This is the first time CUR's biennial
conference has been held either at a public institution or an historically Black
institution. This affords an unprecedented opportunity both for the Black
academic community and the growing Hispanic community to network within the
undergraduate research community at the national level. The theme of the June
1996 Conference is: Enriching Science through Partnerships: Academics, Industry,
Government." Targeted mailings administered by both CUR's National Office and NC
Chancellor Julius Chambers have promoted the conference nationwide to science
faculty at historically Black and Hispanic institutions. Funds are now being
sought to provide travel assistance to these targeted groups.The objective of
encouraging underrepresented minorities to attend the conference is three-fold.
The first objective is to provide the opportunity for underrepresented minority
faculty and administrators at primarily undergraduate institutions to learn more
about funding opportunities and successful undergraduate research programs
through networking and attending workshops at the Conference. The second
objective is to bring the voice and perspective of the underrepresented minority
community into the national dialogue on undergraduate research. And the third
objective is to foster the involvement of underrepresented minorities in the
organization of the Council on Undergraduate Research.