* 9633121
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Sociology:  Business Group Structure and the Dynamics of Firm Performance in the      People's Republic of China
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* Victor Nee, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1997
* USD 7,496.00

9633121 Nee The way in which firms in the People's Republic of China conduct
business has been fundamentally altered in the past two decades. Firms have
gained increasing independence from central authority and, in the process, have
begun to grow at unprecedented rates. Chinese firms are not, however, conducting
business as isolated economic entities. Rather they are joining business groups
and conducting business from within these interfirm networks. Researchers have
documented the central role organizational environments play in determining firm
behavior and outcomes, but no systematic effort has been made to document the
impact interorganizational networks have on firm behavior and performance. The
proposed research will provide an account of the structure of the emergent
Chinese business groups and document their impact on the performance of member
firms. In the process, this research will also inform more general theoretical
discussions about the role interfirm networks play in structuring the behavior
and performance of individual firms. The proposed research also has implications
for mangers and policy makers both in China and abroad as China's firms continue
to expand and play an increasingly important international role. This research
will employ quantitative panel data, financial and network data on the 40
largest Chinese business groups and their 522 member firms, as well as
qualitative case study data on six of the groups included in the broader data
set. The dynamic, multi-level quantitative data will facilitate the use of the
techniques of social network analysis to describe the structure of the groups
and hierarchial regression analysis to test the effects the structure has on
firm behavior and performance. The funding of this proposal will facilitate the
collection of the second wave of the quantitative data (including all network
data) as well as the case study data. ***