* 9633159
* CISE Miniority Institutions Infrastructure:  Proposal for   CISE Miniority Institutions Infrastructure Grant
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Vivian Fielder, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 02/28/1998
* USD 45,477.00

9633159 Eschen, Elaine Fielder, Vivian Fisk University Proposal for CISE
Minority Institutions Infrastructure Grant: Expanding the Minority Pipeline:
C.S. at Fisk University Fisk University, a small HBCU-MI with 69.8% female
students has an outstanding reputation of producing highly qualified graduates
in many scientific disciplines. As such, Fisk is excellently situated to be
instrumental in the national effort to increase the numbers of African-Americans
and women in computer science. The purpose of this project is to design a five-
year plan for the development of the human and technological infrastructure
necessary for Fisk to be a national model for the attraction and retention of
female and African-American computer science students. To attain this goal
Bellin and Monroe of North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical State
University recommend that three main program components be addressed:
recruiting, mentoring and graduate study (Computing Research News, Jan. 95).
Instead of targeting isolated aspects of the student experience, a broad
strategy that manages all stages of student progress from high school to
professional career is proposed. Recruitment is addressed by outreach and bridge
programs, and expanded computer science specific recruitment efforts. Retention
strategies include scholarships and mentoring at all levels. The establishment
of a graduate degree program and under-graduate research programs is an integral
part of the plan. The enhanced infrastructure supports the expansion of faculty
research programs which are the basis for student research activities.