* 9633607
* Interactions of Physics and Biology: Gelatinous Predators   in Chesapeake Bay
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Jennifer Purcell, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2001
* USD 255,000.00

Purcell 9633607 This research will interface with the ongoing 5-yr LMER II
program (TIES) in Chesapeake Bay, which will provide logistic and analytical
support and data on hydrography, mesozooplankton, and ichthyoplankton. A bay-
wide data set will be collected on the distribution of gelatinous predators
(medusae and ctenophores), as they are related to large-scale hydrographic
features in the water column. The features of particular focus will be the
seasonal pycnocline, fronts, the hydraulic control point, and biological
patches. Regions of the bay for intensive mapping, and process-oriented studies
include the polyhaline southern bay and the mesohaline mid-bay. In process-
oriented studies, feeding and fecundity will be measured to determine if trophic
interactions increase at hydrographic features. TIES will continuously measure
mesozooplankton abundances and temperature, salinity, chlorophyll, and dissolved
oxygen. Depth-discrete samples of gelatinous predators will be made using an
opening closing net system. Biovolumes, numbers, and sizes of the live
gelatinous organisms will be determined on board ship. Small and delicate
specimens (larval ctenophores and hydromedusae) will be quantified from
additional vertical plankton hauls. Individual specimens will be collected and
(1) preserved immediately for gut content analysis, and (2) incubated overnight
for egg production. Data analysis will emphasize 3-dimensional mapping and
correlations of hydrographic data with population data on regional, seasonal,
and interannual bases, as well as comparisons of the trophic and reproductive
data relative to hydrographic features. Gelatinous predators are important
components of the pelagic food web in Chesapeake Bay. Aggregations of jellyfish
occur because of interactions of their behaviors with the physical
characteristics of the water column. Chesapeake Bay is physically complex, with
many possible aggregating features. Population data exist for only three
gelatinous species in the bay, but 30 species have been reported. This research
will provide critical studies on how physics and biology interact to cause
intensification of trophic interactions at fronts and other physical features.
***