* 9633675
* CISE Miniority Institutions Infrastructure: The             Establishment of Infrastructure for High Performance        Computing Program(HPCP)for Teaching and Research at Tuskegee
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2002
* Alan Letton, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia J. Eaton
* 07/31/2002
* USD 1,279,500.00

9633675 Narang, Hira Letton, Alan Tuskegee University CISE Minority Institutions
Infrastructure: The Establishment of Infrastructure for High Performance
Computing Program (HPCP) for Teaching and Research at Tuskegee This minority
institution infrastructure grant proposes to establish research infrastructure
in High Performance Computing (HPC) involving students and faculty of Tuskegee
University with scientists and researchers of Oak Ridge and Argonne National
Laboratories. To sustain and invigorate the proposed research infrastructure,
three supportive components are proposed: - Computing Facilities Component -
Education and Training Component, and - Summer Programs Component The computing
facilities component proposes to provide the high performance computing
facilities consisting of workstations and high-end PCs, as well as necessary
software tools, to support both applicative and fundamental research in high
performance computing. The Education and Training component proposes to develop
students and faculty interests and skills in high performance computing
methodology through structured courses, seminars, workshops, and hands-on
training in the usage of high performance computing machinery at national
laboratories. The Summer Programs Components envisages bringing high school
students, from 9th through 12th grade levels in varying periods of summer, and
train them in problem solving as well as internet access and multi-media
applications. The additional objective of this component is to intensively
involve undergraduate/graduate students and faculty in high performance
computing research through summer programs at national labs. ***