* 9633633
* On a Dynamic Balance Theory of Photosynthetic Pigment       Regulation in Unicellular Algae: Tests of a Novel Hypothesis
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Todd Kana, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2000
* USD 338,753.00

P.I. : KANA, Todd M. Proposal No: 96-33633 Title: On a Dynamic Balance Theory
of Photosynthetic Pigment Regulation in Unicellular Algae: Tests of a Novel
Hypothesis ABSTRACT Environmental control of photosynthetic pigmentation in
microalgae is hypothesized to depend on a simple control mechanism operating
around photosystem II dynamics. The mechanisms responsible for photoacclimation
of photosynthetic pigments have eluded researchers for more than 5 decades. A
"dynamic balance" theory of photoacclimation is described based on general
behavior of the photosynthetic apparatus in constant and fluctuating
environments. This novel theory is the first to explain how pigment
concentrations are optimized over a broad range of light, nutrient, and
temperature environments. The proposed research will directly test the dynamic
balance theory. Four taxonomically diverse microalgal species are targeted for
investigations. Controlled growth experiments under differing photoacclimative
conditions will provide a basis for relating photosynthetic response,
pigmentation, and photosystem II dynamics. It is anticipated that experimental
support for the theory will lead to the development of models combining other
known photosynthetic regulatory mechanisms, resulting in a more general
appreciation of constraints on photosynthesis and mechanisms of energy balance
in photosynthetic organisms.