* 9633011
* Interband Coupling in Type-II Quantum Wells Studied with    Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Michael Weimer, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2000
* USD 318,000.00

9633011 Weimer This research project aims to gain fundamental understanding of
the relationship between interface quality and carrier wave function overlap in
quantum well semiconductor structures. The approach is to examine the influence
of Al(Ga)Sb barriers on the interband coupling in model InAs/Ga(In)Sb/Al(Ga)Sb
structures that comprise the active regions in type-II quantum well and quantum
cascade lasers. Scanning tunneling microscopy(STM) and spectroscopy(STS) will be
used to provide fundamental data on interface quality and will be related to
carrier wave function overlap. The insights developed from analysis of the STM
and STS data will be used in MBE growth and subsequent processing studies to
optimize material quality, growth sequence, design and fabrication of type-II
mid-IR lasers. %%% The research will contribute basic materials science
knowledge at a fundamental level of technological relevance to several aspects
of advanced electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry. Additionally,
the knowledge and understanding gained from this research project is expected to
contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced devices and
circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An important feature
of the program is the integration of research and education through the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***