* 9633565
* Workshop:  The Applications of Persistent Spectral          Holeburning Workshop to be held at Big Sky, Montana on March3-6, 1996.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1997
* David Brady, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 02/28/1997
* USD 8,250.00

9633565 Brady The past several years have seen continuing improvement in
materials and techniques for persistent spectral holeburning (PSHB). These
improvements have in several cases yielded demonstration projects tantalizingly
close to marketplace viability but no immediate plans for deliverable products
are known. This workshop will consider how the community might overcome this
roadblock and begin to address real and compelling applications. The workshop
will include focused presentations on key issues identified by the organizing
committee and active working group sessions on specific problems. PSHB is
applicable to both large market applications like digital data storage and
optical communications and to smaller market applications like transient data
sensors and analog signal processing. To be applied in practice, PSHB must
overcome one of two barriers: o To be applied where there exist competing
technologies, such as data storage, a PSHB system must carry sufficient
advantages to overcome the natural bias against changes in fundamental hardware
technology o To be applied where there exists no competing technologies, such as
transient signal capture, the advantages of the application must be sufficient
to support its development. In general, the barrier to development for new
applications is lower than the barrier to development for established
applications and once a technology, such as PSHB, is established for a new small
market application, the barrier to transferring it to an established larger
market application is reduced. ***