* 9634859
* In Process Grinding Damage Monitoring by Digital Signal     Processing of Acoustic Emission Signals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Peter Willett, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2000
* USD 195,087.00

9634859 Webster Acoustic emission (AE) is an in-process sensing technique that
offers promise in detecting grinding damage like burning, residual stress or
cracking. While filtered root-mean-square AE signals have been used in a number
of grinding applications, using the unfiltered signal with advanced signal
processing methods has the potential to provide better signatures for
identifying and classifying grinding damage. This project will design signal
processing methods to handle AE signals in the 0.015 - 1.2 MHz range, and
determine the detection and classification methods to monitor different types of
grinding damage. Using the facilities of the Center for Grinding Research and
Development at the University of Connecticut, the experimental program will
consider workpiece burn detection in creep-feed and shallow-cut grinding, and
surface and subsurface damage in ceramic grinding. This project has a balance
between theory and experiment. Of particular significance for a university lab,
is the capability to gather experimental data on creep feed grinding. The use of
AE sensor technology and signal processing has the potential for improving the
material removal rates and productivity in grinding by preventing grinding burn.
This will allow the material removal rates to be increased without a penalty in
productivity, quality or component performance.