* 9634162
* U.S.-GLOBEC: Recruitment Variability and Advective Processes on Georges Bank - Diet of Early Stage Copepods
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Michael Sieracki, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1999
* USD 261,027.00

9634162 SIERACKI The specific focus of this project will be to describe
quantitatively the contribution of nano- and microplankton (i.e., plants and
animala, 2-200 um in size) prey fields to recruitment of target copepod
populations on Georges Bank. The PIs hypothesize that early stage copepods
advected onto the Bank from the Gulf of Maine and the Great South Channel
experience an enriched food environment on-Bank relative to source regions. The
project will examine consumption of nano- and microplankton by naupliar stages
N3-N6 of the calanoid copepods Calanus finmarchicus and Pseudocalanus spp. in:
1) source areas in the Great South Channel and the Gulf of Maine where the
advective regime contributes water (and presumably copepods) to Georges Bank; 2)
on-Bank regions receiving these inputs, including the region of enhanced
production on the Northeast Peak; and 3) areas on either side of the tidal front
separating the Bank crest from deeper waters on the Southern Flank. The study
focuses on Calanus and Pseudocalanus because these species dominate the
zooplankton biomass of Georges Bank during the January-June period. Naupliar
stages will be studied because these are the stages at which copepods recruit to
the population. Field sampling will be conducted in the Great South Channel and
southern Gulf of Maine because these are sites for advective inputs of water and
zooplankton onto the Bank crest. This project is a part of the U.S. GLOBEC
Northwest Atlantic Field Studies, Phase 2 program. ***