* 9634653
* Dissertation Research:  The Effects of Raw Material and Land Use Patterns of Lithic Assemblage Variability in the       Acheulean at Olorgesailie, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1997
* Stanley Ambrose, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1997
* USD 8,700.00

Under the direction of Dr. Stanley Ambrose, Mr. Michael Noll will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze stone tools recovered from the
archaeological site of Olorgesailie which is located in the southern Kenya Rift
Valley. The site spans a period of from ca. 900,000 to 600,000 years ago and the
large and well excavated samples of archaeological materials are representative
of the Acheulean culture of Homo erectus. Dr. Glynn Isaac, the first
archaeologist to conduct systematic research at Olorgesailie noted that that the
assemblages recovered from different areas of the site varied significantly from
each other but that they displayed no patterned change over either space or
time. The variation seemed to be random with no discernible cause and reflected,
therefore, patterns of thought uncharacteristic of modern humans. Mr. Noll will
re-evaluate this hypothesis. He notes, as did Dr. Isaac, that the stone tools
are fashioned from a wide variety of raw materials, some more amenable to
flaking than others and he believes that changing availability of these
materials over time and the physical constraints of the stones themselves may,
to a large extent, explain the variation observed. To conduct this work, Mr.
Noll will first locate raw material sites and determine the time intervals when
they were geologically exposed. He will then conduct a series of flaking
experiments and engineering analyses to elucidate flaking properties. In
particular he wishes to learn whether some types of materials are more easily
fashioned into tools than others. Finally he will examine the archaeological
assemblages and attempt to explain observed variation in light of these factors.
Archaeologists wish to understand how hominid behavior changed and developed
over time. While many Acheulean period sites have been excavated, and while it
is evident that these people acted differently than their modern day
counterparts, it has proven very difficult to gain insight into their thought
processes. Because Acheulean lithics are widespread across the Old World, they
provide the best source of data for such a study and Mr. Noll has developed a
technique which hopefully will accomplish this goal. The results of his work
will be of interest to many anthropologists. The project will also assist in
training a promising young scientist.