* 9634197
* Application-Driven Network Performance Evaluation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/2000
* USD 234,496.00

Prior research on multiprocessor interconnection networks has primarily focused
on the network topology, switching mechanism, and message routing algorithm to
maximize network performance. Very little work has been done to study the impact
of the communication properties of parallel applications. Communication pattern,
message generation frequency, and message size are the three attributes to
quantify any communication. The proposed research is aimed at characterizing
these communication workloads and analyzing their impact on multiprocessor
performance. The research has two major phases. In the first phase, traffic
profiling of a wide range of parallel applications will be conducted by
collecting execution traces from parallel machines and also from an execution-
driven simulator. The communication traces will be analyzed to determine
different types of traffic patterns, rate of communication, and volume of
communication. The second phase of the project will use these realistic traffic
properties for the performance analysis of interconnection networks via
simulation and analytic models. In-depth simulation of known unicast and
collective routing algorithms on various topologies will be performed with these
workloads. Analytical models capturing wormhole switching, virtual channel flow
control, routing mechanism and the realistic workloads will be developed. The
main contribution of the project is characterizing application workloads to be
used for different architectural and algorithmic research. For example,
evaluation with these workloads will quantify the actual performance advantages
of adaptive routing algorithms, will identify the potential bottlenecks of
existing communication mechanisms, and will provide insight for developing
application-specific routing algorithms. Next, the new mathematical tools will
be more accurate in predicting the realistic communication traffic. The
techniques and tools developed in this research can be used in understandi ng
and evaluating the interplay between parallel architectures and algorithms to
maximize the performance of existing machines and to design better machines in
the future.