* 9634670
* Creating Partnerships Between Urban Community College       and Industry to Prepare Students to Enter and Succeed       in the Technical Workforce
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1996,11/30/1996
* Nancy DeSombre, City Colleges of Chicago Harold Washington College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 11/30/1996
* USD 9,554.00

Title: Creating Partnerships between Urban Community College and Industry to
Prepare Students to Enter and Succeed in the Technical Workforce This project is
planning a national conference to create partnerships between urban community
colleges and industry to prepare students in urban communities to enter and
succeed in the technical workforce. With the increased use of technology by
corporate America, industry can no longer accept people who lack technical
skills. Urban community colleges and their high school partners are uniquely
positioned to assume a lead role in preparing the workforce necessary for
industry to remain productive in urban areas. Partnerships between industry,
urban based public schools, and community colleges must be established that have
as a central purpose the preparation of students for technical careers and
access of students to other careers which depend on use of technical
information. The conference is involving city major's offices, business and
industry, the Superintendent of the public schools, and Chancellor or President
of the community college system in nine major urban cities (Chicago, Los
Angeles, Miami, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Baltimore, New York, St. Louis, and
Detroit). To set an agenda for such a highly visible national workshop, a
national Steering Committee is being established to lead in planning and
coordinating the effort.