* 9634521
* Conference:  Organization of the 1996 Diffractive Optics and Micro-Optics Topical Meeting (April 28 - May 3, 1996;      Boston, MA)
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* David Hennage, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 04/30/1997
* USD 5,000.00

9634521 Hennage The Optical Society of America requests a grant in the amount of
$5,000 from the National Science Foundation for the support of the 1996
Diffractive Optics and Micro-Optics Topical Meeting, to be held April 28-May 3,
1996, in Boston, Massachusetts. This grant request is to support partial travel
of students and young faculty to attend this important meeting. This meeting was
last held in 1994 in Rochester, New York and about 16% of the participants were
students. This year the meeting will be held jointly with four other topical
meetings (Integrated Photonics Research, Holography, Optical Fabrication and
Testing, and Extreme Ultraviolet Lithography). The Diffractive Optics Topical
Meeting made its debut in New Orleans in 1992. The meeting was held again in
1994 in Rochester, New York. The aim of this meeting is to bring together
scientists and engineers of various backgrounds to discuss new developments in
the various aspects of diffractive and refractive micro-optics. Diffractive
optics and micro-optics are continuing to find new and interesting applications.
These optical elements provide the potential to reduce significantly the size,
weight, and cost of a variety of optical systems. In addition, diffractive and
refractive micro-optics can be combined to provide unique system properties.
Some of the topic areas to be discussed are: * Design &amp; Analysis of
Diffractive &amp; Micro-Optics Optical Elements * Fabrication &amp; Replication
of Diffractive Micro-Optics Optical Elements * Dynamic Diffractive/Micro-Optics
Optical Elements * Applications &amp; New Products ***