* 9634238
* Multisite University-Industry Collaboration:  A New Paradigm for Graduate Education
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2004
* Murray Johnston, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Richard D. Foust
* 08/31/2004
* USD 1,705,000.00

9634238 Futrell Univ of Delaware A new program in graduate and postdoctoral
education designed for relevance to research careers in industry will be
established through this award to the University of Delaware under the Grant
Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program in the
Chemistry Division and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. Led by Jean H. Futrell, a team of
scientists from the University of Delaware, Johns Hopkins University, the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County, and DuPont Central Research and
Development will provide a new research and training program in analytical
chemistry focusing on both fundamental research in mass spectrometry and
applications to industrial problems. The educational program features shared
mentorship responsibilities in research and training across the four sites,
along with a combination of new courses, professional training experiences, and
structured internship rotations. The proposed program differs from the standard
model of graduate education in that the faculty team for the proposal will be
jointly responsible for the programs of study recommended to individual Ph. D.
committees. Students will be required to demonstrate mastery of all modern tools
for analytical problem solving in addition to in-depth research in a selected
area of mass spectrometry. Thesis research will explicitly include an industrial
applications component in addition to traditional emphasis on fundamental
discovery research. This university/industry collaboration tests a new paradigm
in graduate and post-graduate education of analytical chemists with the
objective of preparing them for leadership roles in industrial research.
Scientists from three universities and a major industrial research laboratory
partner to offer an educational program spanning all aspects of modern mass
spectrometry.