* 9634954
* Mid-Frequency Vibration Analysis of Complex Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1997,04/30/2001
* Christophe Pierre, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 04/30/2001
* USD 166,480.00

The main emphasis of this research project is to develop methods for analyzing
and predicting mid-frequency vibration transmission in complex structures, which
are assemblages of connected substructures. Complex structures are a
generalization of periodic and nearly periodic structures. In the mid-frequency
range of vibration for a complex structure, the vibration wavelengths are small
enough for uncertainties and flaws in the structure to have significant impact
on the global dynamics. The assumptions which currently limit high-frequency
statistical energy methods are systematically examined and relaxed. This extends
their applicability to more general systems such as those with strong inter-
component coupling. A major thrust in this research effort is on the elimination
of assumptions which restrict the analysis to the high-frequency range. The
outcome of this research is a hierarchy of new methods for the vibration
analysis of complex structures. These new methods are valid for both mid-and
high-frequency ranges, reproduce mode localization and related phenomena caused
by uncertainties, which handle moderate and strong coupling situations, and are
relatively simple. The methods developed are validated through systematic
comparison with experimental data. Simple benchmark experiments (e.g., vibration
transmission in two coupled plates) are carried out in the laboratory.