* 9634557
* A Nontraditional Vibration Analysis of Rotating Disk/SpindleSystems and Its Applications to Computer Hard Disk Drives
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* I-Yeu Shen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 08/31/2000
* USD 159,830.00

The primary focus of this research is to develop a new mathematical model to
explain and predict the nontraditional vibration resonances observed in disk
drive experiments. This new mathematical model is agumented to resolve five
emerging vibration problems in the disk drive industry. They include damping,
forced response, disk/spindle/head interaction, control of squealing noise, and
nonlinear fluid- film bearings. In the past several years, advances in
manufacturing and electronic technologies have substantially increased the
capacity of computer disk drives by enhancing the data storage density(e.g.,
4000 tracks per inch) and by stacking more disks (e.g., 10 disks) into modern
disk drives. In the meantime, the computer industry continues to reduce the size
and weight of disk drives by using smaller and thinner disks mounted on spindles
with shorter bearing spans. As a result of these design trends, vibration
resonances less than 500 Hz with significant amplitudes have been observed
repeatedly in experiments. These vibration resonances are extremely detrimental
to their performance, because their low frequencies and large amplitudes prevent
the recording heads from reading or writing the data correctly and repeatedly.
This new mathematical model is more realistic than the existing models, because
it considers multiple flexible disks on a rigid spindle that has two flexible
bearing supports. The theoretical predictions are verified experimentally
through a full-scale disk drive test rig available in the Dynamics and Vibration
Laboratory at the University of Washington.