* 9634127
* Development and Rubustness Analysis of Fifth-Level Adaptive Critics for Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Sivasubramanya Balakrishnan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/1999
* USD 212,219.00

9634127 Balakrishnan This study will build on previous supported research into
brain-like intelligent control, using an advanced form of neural network design.
This research has three major objectives: the first is to develop two level-5
adaptive critic designs. (Increasing level numbers indicate increasing level of
capabilities to solve engineering problems and closer mimicking of perceived
human intelligence. Currently, the highest level of critic design that has been
well understood and used in a few applications is a level- 4 critic.) The first
critic design based on approximate dynamic programming outputs the optimal
return function and the derivatives of cost with respect to system states. The
second critic design outputs the Hamiltonian and the derivatives of the
Hamiltonian with respect to states and control. Advantages of these designs
include retrieving Ricatti mattrix from the critic, and being able to check the
Legendre-Clebsch condition, necessary for minimality. The second major objective
is to investigate the robustness of the synthesized controller to: a) parametric
variations, b) bound but unmodelled disturbances, and c) stochastic
disturbances. The robustness analysis will be based on singular value based
techniques, Liapunov concepts, and Montecarlo simulations. The third major
objective is to use a set of two critics in conjunction to solve bench mark
engineering problems involving inner loop and outer loop to account for slow
dynamics and fast dynamics. The significance or major goal of this research is
to combine human problem solving (brain like intelligence) philosophy embedded
in a level-5 critic design and firm mathematical foundations offered by modern
control and dynamic programming to solve difficult control problems in
engineering. This approach not only finds optimal solutions but attempts to
analyze the resulting solutions through robustness analysis. Such relations to
establish relative stability of neurocontrolle rs are expected to help in the
acceptance of neurocontrol for implementation in engineering. *** ??