* 9634421
* CRI: Engineering Approaches to Understanding                Electroreception of Weak Signals in Noisy Environments
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* David Beeman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1999
* USD 99,987.00

IBN: 9634421 PI: Wachtel The overall OBJECTIVE of this project is to utilize
engineering based "enabling technologies" to better understand of neural (brain)
function. In particular, we will address the issue of how neural sensory systems
are able to detect very weak signals in the presence of large amounts of
background "noise". Our prototype will be the electroreceptive systems of
sharks, (who are able to detect an electric field equivalent to a 1.5 volt
"flashlight battery" placed across the Atlantic Ocean!) The possible mechanisms
by which this exquisite sensory system operates will be explored using
technologies such as Interactive Computer Simulation and Digital Signal
Processing models adapted from electrical and computer engineering venues. The
SIGNIFICANCE of this project will extend far beyond understanding how sharks
detect very weak electric fields. First of all, it will allow us to demonstrate
how "engineering based" technologies can be usefully deployed in studying the
nervous system. Such technologies may play a vital role, during and after the
"decade of the brain", in helping us understand how the brain operates as an
information detector and processor. In addition to its fundamental value in
neurobiology, such an understanding could lead to the evolution of improved
computers - particularly those based on "neural network" designs. The ability to
detect and interpret weak signals is also of vital importance in developing
advanced communication systems and understanding the way "nature" has been
accomplishing this for millions of years is likely to be extremely relevant.