* 9634710
* SGER: Line Linking of Individual Designer's Decisions to the System Level and to System Life-Cycle Value in the Face of Multiple Criteria
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* Wolter Fabrycky, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/1998
* USD 45,530.00

9634710 Fabrycky This award provides funding for fundamental research on
engineering design. An underlying premise of this work is that engineering
design is a decision-making process. As such, it involves decisions whose
objective is to maximize value. To date, however, a measure of value has not
generally been available to engineers participating in a design, and their
design decisions have had to be made largely in the dark. Specifically, this
research seeks to generate a measure of systems worth that can be displayed to
engineers participating in a design in near real time, thus enabling them to
make decisions that maximize or at least increase system worth. An important
feature of this measure is that it will include life cycle factors, including
environmental impacts. If successful, this research will provide both a new
direction in engineering design research and considerably increased value to the
engineering design process. It is becoming increasingly the consensus that
engineering design is a decision-making process, and a measure of system worth,
available to engineers working on a design, is a critical element of design
decision making. This research holds the promise to lay a foundation that could
greatly improve the quality of engineering design across all engineering
products, processes and services.