* 9634101
* Electrostriction in Ceramics and Glass
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2002
* Robert Newnham, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2002
* USD 511,769.00

9634101 Newnham The electrical, mechanical, and thermal properties of packaging
materials have been investigated thoroughly over the years, but reliable data on
the electrostriction coefficients of low-permittivity oxides and nitrides are
scarce. Electrostriction is a fourth rank tensor property relating mechanical
strain to the square of the electric field. The principal goal of this project
is to carry out electromechanical measurements on ceramics and glasses
representative of the inorganic materials used in multilayer packaging, metal-
on-silicon devices, high voltage insulators, optical fibers, micro-electrical
mechanical systems, and thick film substrates. Among the materials to be studied
are silica, silicon nitride, alumina, aluminum nitride, forsterite, spinel,
mullite, cordierite, silicate glasses, mica, and porcelain. The PI and his group
have developed two techniques for measuring the electrostriction coefficients of
ceramics and glasses. The 'direct' method involves measuring the field-induced
strain with a carefully calibrated optical interferometer. The 'converse' method
entails monitoring the dielectric constant as a function of mechanical stress.
The principal purpose of this project is to formulate structure-property
relationships describing the dependence of the electrostrictive coefficient on
atomic bond type, atomic bond length, crystal structure, and chemical
composition of the material. Since electrostriction is the primary coupling
mechanism between electric polarization and mechanical strain, the PI hopes to
identify correlations between electrostriction coefficients, elastic compliance,
and dielectric permittivity. %%% The electrical, mechanical, and thermal
properties of packaging materials have been investigated thoroughly over the
years, but reliable data on the electrostriction coefficients of low-
permittivity ceramics and glasses are scarce. The goal of the proposed research
is to measure the electrostriction coefficient of a variety of ceramic and glass
materials. Electrostriction is a fourth rank tensor property relating mechanical
strain to the square of the electric field. It is present in all insulators and
becomes especially important in the ferroelectric ceramics used as capacitors
and transducers, and in electronic and optical devices where extremely high
fields are present. This includes optical fibers, high voltage insulators, laser
windows, multilayer electronic packages, thin film components and thick film
substrates. In these materials the stresses and strains caused by electric
fields are often surprisingly large, making electrostriction an important
degradation mechanism. If materials having a zero electrostrictive coefficient
could be found, the reliability of electronic and optical devices based on that
material could be significantly improved. ***