* 9634519
* Dissertation Research:  Climatic Effects on the Nasal       Complex in Macaca fascicularis and Macaca mulatta
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1996,02/28/2002
* Jeffrey Laitman, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 02/28/2002
* USD 8,173.00

This research proposal seeks to understand the effects of climate on the
structure of the nasal complex by examining the crania of two similar non-human
primate groups, Macaca fascicularis and Macaca mulatta, that inhabit different
environments. A deeper understanding of the nasal complex (nose, nasal cavity,
and paranasal sinuses) is essential for the testing of hypotheses regarding its
functional adaptation and evolution in primates. Previous studies on the effects
of climate have usually been limited to external craniofacial landmarks. This
study approaches the question by assessing data from both internal dimensions
and volumes in combination with more traditional external measures. It is
hypothesized that there will be significant osteological differences in nasal
complex morphology for macaques inhabiting different climates. These differences
may reflect the accommodation of respiratory mucosa, the primary modifier of
inspired air. Methods to be used will include: 1) linear measurements using
traditional anthropological techniques; 2) a seed-filling method that permits
volumetric assessment of the maxillary sinus and nasal cavity to yield estimates
of the respiratory mucosal area; and 3) the application of new advances in CT-
imaging which will allow both for precise visualizations of internal nasal
components, and permit measurements of their surface areas. This study will
provide new insight for understanding the functional adaptations of the nasal
complex in primates, especially in regard to interactions between climate and
respiratory demands. The use of new methodologies for assessing nasal volume and
CT-scanning for determining internal surface areas, coupled with traditional
craniometric measures, will provide a more in depth, multidimensional approach
than attempted previously.