* 9634058
* A New Technique for Monitoring Metallic Contamination       During Aqueous Semiconductor Wafer Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Ahmed Busnaina, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2000
* USD 193,103.00

9634058 Suni As device and interconnect sizes continuously shrink, the
microelectronics industry faces a number of serious technological challenges.
One important challenge is to decrease the level of metallic contamination on
wafer surfaces during processing. This is evidenced both by the tolerance limit
of 1010 metal atoms/crn2 during fabrication of 16-MB dynamic random access
memory(DRAM) and by the ability of metallic contaminants to short-circuit
ultrathin((40() gate oxides . The level of contamination on the wafer surface is
determined to a large extent by the tradeoff between deposition and dissolution
of trace metallic impurities in aqueous chemical process solutions. This
tradeoff involves a number of fundamental physical and chemical processes,
including surface electroless reaction, bulk diffusion and convection. The
potential sources, deposition mechanism(s) and transport of contaminants are
still poorly understood despite their critical importance. Study of these
problems has been hampered by analytical difficulties in measuring the level of
surface contamination. We propose to develop a new in situ technique for
indirect monitoring of metal contaminant deposition and dissolution in aqueous
chemical process solutions. This employs spatially resolved absorption
spectroscopy to detect concentration gradients in the boundary layer near the
wafer surface with sensitivity limits in the ppb range. We will employ this
technique to monitor the rate of Cu(( deposition from a buffered oxide
etchant(BOE) and to monitor the rate of Cu dissolution in a standard chemical
process solution SC-1. The experimental measurements will be complemented by
computer modeling of metal contaminant deposition and dissolution during aqueous
wafer processing using realistic process geometries. The proposed model will
include diffusion, convection and electroless surface processes using time-
dependent, three-dimensional finite difference solution of the governing
momentum and mass transport equation s. Experimental determination of the rates
of surface electroless processes and bulk transport are essential to correctly
predict rates of metal contaminant deposition and dissolution. Besides potential
applications as an in situ sensor, the experimental technique can be employed in
a variety of studies of the fundamental physical and chemical processes
occurring during metal contaminant deposition and dissolution. By illuminating
the surface with ultraviolet light and controlling the surface
electrochemically, the potential at which deposition is initiated can be
measured. This will allow determination of the applicability of the Nernst
equation to the prediction of metal contaminant deposition by electroless
processes. ***