* 9634329
* Contemporary Variability, Future Changes and Human          Dimensions of Snowpack Water Resources Over the Western     United States
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Richard Armstrong, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2000
* USD 407,349.00

9634329 Serreze A research team combining skills in data analysis, remote
sensing, modeling and the human dimensions of global change will conduct an
integrated assessment of the variability and sustainability of snowpack water
resources over the western United States under contemporary and possible future
climate states. Emphasis will be placed on the Colorado and Columbia basins and
sub-basins. Contemporary variability will be assessed using blended data sets
incorporating daily snow water equivalent (SWE), temperature and precipitation
records from SNOTEL (SNOwTELemetry) sites and synoptic reporting stations as
well as SWE derived from passive microwave brightness temperatures. In
conjunction with National Meteorological Center (NMC) 'reanalysis' atmospheric
fields, we will first focus on establishing large-scale and regional
relationships between circulation and the seasonal accumulation/melt of the
snowpack. This will be followed by analyses of extremes in the observed record
and linkages between SWE variability and teleconnection patterns, emphasizing
regional responses to El-Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) forcings. These
investigations will also utilize ensemble forecasts from a version of NMC's
Medium Range Forecast (MRF) model, forced by observed and idealized evolutions
of sea surface temperature. Our empirical and modeling studies make use of
circulation 'downscaling', whereby point or regional variables (e.g., SWE from
SNOTEL sites average for sub-basins) are related to circulation through
empirical relationships with the frequency/persistence of atmospheric
circulation patterns based on principal component analyses. Following studies of
contemporary variability, the circulation downscaling transfer functions will be
applied to 2xCO2 output from at least two different general circulation models
(GCMs). This technique makes the best use of today's GCMs to provide climate
change scenarios through use of the large-scale circulation, which the models
reproduce fairly well, while avoiding the uncertainties modeled point surface
variables. Following diagnostic studies similar to those outlined above,
reconstructed daily temperature, SWE and precipitation from the 2xCO2 scenarios
will be coupled with a snowmelt runoff model, providing assessment of potential
future changes in snowmelt runoff in a series of regional studies. Using
information from the above investigations along with other existing data,
different systems of water administration in the Colorado and Columbia basins
will be examined as they relate to seasonal to international variations in SWE
and conditions of global change. The objective is to improve predictions on the
time and space scales most relevant to the management of waters resources at
urban-rural interfaces and those appropriate to understanding hydrologic
variability. These studies will focus on: 1) flexibility of water allocation
among users in response to interannual variability and potential changes in
water availability and 2) vulnerability of system outputs (agriculture,
recreation, power, water quality) to possible extremes of climate variations,
sequences of climate events and climate change.