* 9634146
* Supervisory Control and Hybrid Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1996,11/30/1999
* A. Morse, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/1999
* USD 209,037.00

9634146 Morse Plant models are inherently inaccurate, and controllers regulating
processes described by such models must be able to ensure satisfactory closed-
loop performance in the presence of exogenous process disturbances which cannot
be measured. Modern linear control theories are now very highly developed and
can be used to design controllers with such capabilities for processes admitting
linear models provided the model uncertainties are time-invariant and
sufficiently small. But for large model uncertainties derived from real-time
changes in plant dynamics, simple examples show that no single, fixed-parameter
linear controller can possible regulate in a satisfactory way. Such large
uncertainties might arise in real time, because of changes in operating
environment, component aging or failure, perhaps a sudden change in plant
dynamics due to an external influence. To cope with these types of uncertainties
obviously requires a controller which can change or be changed in response to
received changes in plant dynamics. An especially promising system architecture
with this capability consists of a family or fixed- gain or variable-gain
candidate controllers, and an "event-driven switching logic" called a supervisor
whose job is to determine in real time which controller should be applied to the
process. Examples of supervisory control systems include reconfigurable systems,
fault correction systems, and certain types of parameter-adaptive systems. We
propose first to refine and extend the concept of supervisory control introduced
in our earlier work, to encompass broader classes of systems and second to use
supervisory control as a motivating vehicle for the study of basic issues in the
newly emerging field of hybrid dynamical systems. ***