* 9634396
* Biomimetic Integration of Organic and Inorganic Phases      into Composite Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1996,07/31/2003
* Daniel Morse, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/2003
* USD 860,000.00

Abstract DMR-9634396 Stucky A team of investigators from University of
California, Santa Barbara, in collaboration with researchers at DuPont, propose
to develop methods for defining patterning in inorganic/organic composite
materials in order to control shape, strength, and thermal transport. The
biomimetic patterning that is sought includes both the spatial relationships
between the organic and inorganic phases and the long-range hierarchical
ordering of the resulting macrostructures. A known method of creating composite
materials with well defined patterning is the cooperative assembly of organic
surfactants and molecular inorganic species into mesocomposites. In this
synthesis, the patterning in the final product is under control of the
inorganic/organic interface. The proposed research will address the use of
polymer-surfactant assemblies and polymerized inorganic phases to create
materials with patterning on longer length scales. Particular emphasis will be
placed on using inexpensive calcium carbonate or calcium sulfate as the
inorganic phase. The exceptional fracture resistance of sea shells, which are a
composite of calcium carbonate and only 1-2% organic material, demonstrates that
even inorganic materials that are inherently brittle can be used to form tough
composite materials. One of the major determinants of the toughness of shells is
the long-range pattering of tabular aragonite crystals in an organic matrix. The
process by which the red abalone controls the formation of this structure will
be investigated to understand how this complex, tough composite material is
synthesized, and knowledge obtained from the biosynthetic system will be applied
to the synthesis of composite materials. While patterning on the micrometer
length scale in biological systems is thought to be under control of the
templating organic species, patterning on longer length scales is believed to be
due to a reaction-diffusion mechanism. This research will address composite
patterning by nonlinear dynamic reactions, including clock reactions and
reaction-diffusion reactions, by tailoring the conditions to the growth of
appropriate solid materials. The results of these studies will provide methods
for controlling the three-dimensional properties of inorganic/organic composite
materials by defining the patterning of the inorganic and organic phases over
well defined length scales. %%% One of the accomplishments of nature that has
not been emulated by man is the simultaneous synthesis and shaping of
constructed objects. The spider and silkworm synthesize silk as they spin it;
the molluscs prepare calcium carbonate directly in the desired architecture. The
research described in this proposal explores the integration of organic and
inorganic phases into patterned composite materials using inorganic/organic
interfaces and non-equilibrium chemistry. The premier polymer science and
technology which has been developed over many decades at DuPont Central Research
and Development will be combined with the academic bio and materials science
capabilities at the University of California, Santa Barbara, to provide an
industrial, high technology environment for the training of students and
execution of the research. In these studies, in vivo biological studies are used
to guide the development of the in vitro biomimetic chemistry. The biomimetics
approach is interpreted as being well beyond visual similarities or the two-
dimensional coating of surfaces, but is viewed in terms of the three-
dimensional, long range patterned control of composition, hierarchical structure
and nanophase space properties. Organic and inorganic cooperative control of
composite assembly, polymer structure direction of patterned inorganic
organization, and space time nonequilibrium syntheses will be investigated to
achieve this goal. The approaches outlined above, taken in the context of a
molecular level understanding of the often elaborate and highly long range
ordered assembly of biomateria ls, will lead to the practical design of
technologically useful materials with specific properties over sharply defined
length scales.