* 9634110
* Cryogen Spray Cooling for Spatially Selective               Photocoagulation of Biological Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Bahman Anvari, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/1998
* USD 109,340.00

9634110 Anvari In many therapeutic applications of lasers, it is desirable to
induce photothermal destruction of subsurface targeted structures without
damaging the overlying tissue. For example, successful laser treatment of
certain skin disorders such as port wine stains (PWS), and hemangiomas requires
selective destruction of subsurface targeted blood vessels while protecting the
normal, overlying skin structures from thermal injury. The objective of the
proposed research is development and optimization of cryogen spray cooling (CSC)
to deliver short spurts of a cryogen (on the order of milliseconds) in
conjunction with laser irradiation to protect superficial skin structures from
thermal injury, while achieving photothermal destruction of subsurface targeted
blood vessels. Further development of CSC in conjunction with laser irradiation
will provide substantial relevant data to investigators interested in
therapeutic procedures utilizing the laser or other radiative sources to induce
spatially selective thermal damage in multi-layered composite structures. The
specific objectives of this proposal are: 1) development of mathematical models
to assist in optimization of CSC and laser irradiation parameters; 2) in-vivo,
and in-vivo experimentation using collagen film and chicken comb models,
respectively, to verify accuracy of the mathematical modeling, and demonstrate
utility of CSC in conjunction with laser irradiation for spatially selective
thermal damage; 4) design and construction of a compact, and portable prototype
instrument to: a) allow delivery of cryogen and laser light through an optical
fiber; and b) perform diagnostic measurements that determine depth of targeted
blood vessels prior to selection of appropriate CSC and laser irradiation
parameters; and 5) expansion of the Bio- and Biomedical-Engineering (BBME)
concentration at Harvey Mudd College (HMC) engineering department. The preceding
tasks will be accomplished through a joint effort with the Beckman Laser
Institute and Medical Clinic (BLIMC) at University of California, Irvine (UCI).
Scientists at BLIMC will collaborate on the development of a diagnostic
procedure to determine depth or subsurface chromophores. Furthermore, facilities
and instrumentation necessary for successful completion of the proposed research
are available at BLIMC. The educational objectives will be achieved by student
participation in algorithm and instrumentation development, in-vitro
experimentation. The interdisciplinary nature of the project will allow
development of educational materials for BBME courses at HMC that would include
such topics as biomedical optics, heat transfer, laser-tissue interactions,
biomedical instrumentation, and numerical optimization techniques. ***