* 9634324
* Coalescence and Phase Separation During Spinodal Decomposition of Solvent Mixtures
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1997,07/31/2000
* Reuel Shinnar, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2000
* USD 380,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9634324 In recent years, the authors have developed solvent
extraction processes that are based on phase separation of partially-miscible
solvent mixtures. During this work it was found that under certain
circumstances, when two rapidly miscible solvents are heated above critical
temperature and then rapidly cooled at a temperature below their co-existence
curve, phase separation is extremely rapid, even in the presence of emulsifiers
and impurities that tend to slow down coalescence. There is considerable
experimental evidence in our previous work indicating that separation occurs by
spinodal decomposition and not by conventional nucleation and growth. In
addition, the possibility of phase separation without nucleation at the
submicron scale was further supported by our theoretical work. What still
remains to be explained is why, after a deep temperature quench, phase
separation leads to the formation of large, millimeter-size drops, as opposed to
the micron-size drops that are formed as a result of very small quenching. The
explanation of this quite fascinating phenomenon is one of the main objectives
of our proposed research. The formulation of a theory of phase separation of
deeply quenched systems remains a major challenge. Almost all the experimental
and theoretical works on spinodal decomposition have considered only very small
temperature quenches (i.e. 0.1(C at most) from the critical point, often
assuming that other effects due to temperature inhomogeneties could be simply
superimposed. However, one of the results of our work dealing with the phase
separation of deeply quenched (i.e. ( 10(30(C) below the critical point)
systems, is that this "superposition" approach is not correct. In fact, instead
of the small, mircron-size drops that form as a result of "classical" spinodal
decomposition, we observed the formation of large, millimeter-size drops. Now,
if these large drops were initially small, and then grew by diffusion and
coalescence (as the "classi cal" theory would suggest), then their growth would
be heavily retarded by the presence of any surface-active compounds within the
system. On the other hand, we observed that phase separation of deeply quenched
systems is fast, independently of the presence of such compounds. A complete
explanation of the phenomenon is not available at present, although our
theoretical model does offer some encouraging results in that direction. What is
needed, however, is not only more theoretical work, but also visual observations
of the phenomenon at much shorter timescales than we were able to do till now.
This experimental work is the main subject of the current proposal, and includes
the construction of an experimental setup that will allow us to study the phase
separation in a continuous, steady state apparatus, overcoming the difficulties
encountered in the past to observe the initial, fast stage of the phenomenon.
The proposed research will lead to a better understanding of spinodal
decomposition. In addition, it has applications in the development of improved
solvent extraction processes both in biotechnology and in the extraction of
metal ions from contaminated soils, sediments and sludges, using chelating
agents that are soluble in organic solvents. ***