* 9634109
* Heat Induced Changes in the Mechanics of Soft Tissue
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Jay Humphrey, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* H. Frederick Bowman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 158,641.00

9634109 Humphrey Advances in laser, microwave, radio-frequency, and similar
technologies continue to promote new applications of heat to treat various
pathologies. yet, most clinical studies are motivated by the advances in device
technology, not a fundamental understanding of the underlying thermo-
biomechanics, which at present remains poorly understood. Exploiting the
potential of heat-therapy will, therefore, require quantification of the effects
of clinically controllable parameters such as the temperature level, heating
history, and the mechanical load state during heating. In general, there are two
primary irreversible effects of heat treatment, cell necrosis and denaturation
of structural proteins. Thus, to design and eventually optimize a heat-therapy,
one must be able to predict (spatially and temporally) the concomitant
irreversible effects on cell viability and connective tissue integrity for a
given heating device. Rather than studying a specific clinical application, the
overall goal of this work is to establish a theoretical basis for quantifying
irreversible heat-induced changes in the nonlinear, anistropic behavior of soft
tissue -- our specific aim is to develop and validate phenomenological
thermomechanical damage relations for three different tissues that will be
exposed to a broad range of temperatures (from 45 to 85oC), both isothermally
and non-isothermally), hearing periods (from seconds to hours), and mechanical
load states during heating (isometric, isotonic, and cyclic stretching). The
proposed tissues are bovine chordae tendineae, epicardium, and endocardium. In
addition to a gel matrix, chordae consists primarily of uniaxially oriented
collagen, epicardium of a 2- D network of collagen, and endocardium of a 2-D
network of collagen and elastin. These three tissues were selected because they
have increasingly more constituents and microstructural complexity, and they
admit rigorously performed and interpreted uniaxial or in-pl ane biaxial testing
-- this will allow the development of 1-D and then 2- D relations of increasing
complexity. There are no comparable data or constitutive relations for thermal-
damage in the literature. The PIs recently showed that the effects of
temperature level and heating period are coupled in heat-induced collagen
denaturation: there exists a "time-temperature equivalency" in the form of an
exponential relation in traction free, isothermal shrinkage tests on chordae. A
similar relation exists in heat-induced cell death. The PIs hypothesize that an
analogous equivalency exists in tissues under more general conditions (e.g.,
multiaxial, non- isothermal loading), which will simplify quantification in
terms of a load and temperature-dependent scaled heating time. Concepts from
finite strain damage mechanics and irreversible continuum thermodynamics will be
extended to determine the dependence of the Helmholtz free energy and the damage
evolution equation on the current finite strain and prior thermal-damage, the
latter of which likely depends on an accumulative scaled heating time. Such
quantification will allow tissue-level engineering analysis of potential heat-
therapies, and hopefully optimization thereof. ***