* 9634130
* Microwave Measurements of Structures and Other Properties of Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Stephen Kukolich, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 09/30/2000
* USD 251,240.00

Stephen Kukolich of The University of Arizona is supported by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program to perform high resolution fourier-transform
microwave (FTMW) spectroscopic studies of transition (TM) hydrides, metal-olefin
complexes, non-rigid complexes, dinuclear complexes and organometallic radicals.
In the first case, TM complexes containing two hydrogen atoms will be
investigated, with an eye towards distinguishing between `dihydrogen` complexes
(the hydrogen-hydrogen bond remains intact) versus dihydrides (hydrogen atoms
bond independently to the metal, and are separated by much larger distances).
Data will be analyzed to provide information on the three-dimensional
structures, internal motion, quadrupole coupling constants and dipole moments of
the molecules under study. Most of the systems that will be investigated were
chosen to help in modeling and understanding the chemistry and interactions of
transition metals in catalytic and enzyme systems. Metal hydrides are often
quite reactive and play important roles in many industrial processes. The
electronic and structural changes in olefins on complexation to metals play an
important part in catalytic processes. Efficient production of a large fraction
of industrial chemicals depends on one or more catalytic processes. The active
sites of many enzymes which are essential for living systems involve various
transition metal complexes.