* 9634049
* Analysis of a Stress-Inducible DNA-Binding Protein in a     Cyanobacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* George Bullerjahn, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 08/31/1999
* USD 186,413.00

9634049 Bullerjahn This project is an investigation of a mechanism by which the
cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942 can adapt to oxidative stress.
The gene dpsA, encoding a stress-induced DNA-binding protein has been cloned and
sequenced. Previous work has shown that the DpsA protein accumulates under
conditions of nutrient stress as well during the stationary phase of the growth
curve. The protein forms extremely stable hexameric complexes that bind DNA;
studies of the evolutionarily divergent Escherichia coli gene and its product
indicate the DpsA protein serves to protect the chromosome from oxidative stress
during long-term nutrient depletion and exposure to peroxide. However, a major
difference between the E. coli and Synechococcus polypeptides is the presence of
a heme-binding domain in the C-terminal half of the Synechococcus DpsA protein.
It is suggested that the function of heme is to consume excess peroxide by a
catalase mechanism. There is potentially a higher demand for detoxifying
reactive species of oxygen in oxygen-producing phototrophs such as
cyanobacteria. Mutants defective in the production of DpsA will be examined with
respect to their ability to survive conditions of photooxidative damage and
peroxide treatment. Truncated and chimeric forms of dpsA will also be introduced
into dpsA null mutants of Synechococcus in order to test whether the presence of
the heme-binding domain plays an important role in survival. RNA blots and
promoter fusions will be used to determine the environmental conditions
contributing to dpsA transcription. Immunocytochemical methods will be used to
attempt to determine the location of the DpsA/DNA complex in the cells during
adaptation to stationary phase. This study may help determine whether there is a
distinct structural region of the nucleoid that is preferentially protected by
the DpsA protein complex. Lastly, the yeast two-hybrid system will be employed
to screen for possible protein-protein interactions that might be involved in
regulating assembly and turnover of the stable DpsA complex. Overall, this work
will help reveal mechanisms involved in global stress responses in
cyanobacteria, and other phototrophs. %%% This study is concerned with how the
cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942 can adapt to conditions which
cause oxidative damage to cell components. The gene dpsA and the protein it
encodes DpsA will be studied. DpsA helps protect the cells against oxidative
damage by an unusual mechanism. This proposal will focus on how light and other
environmental conditions control production of DpsA. These studies will provide
new information about how photosynthetic organisms respond to oxidative stress
and change. ***