* 9634314
* CRI: Neuronal Ensembles as Encoding and Processing          Probability Density Functions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* John Clark, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

IBN: 9634314 PI: John Clark The research will seek a deeper understanding of how
neural systems represent and process information about the world, by applying
established principles of information theory and statistical inference in the
context of a large body of neurobiological observations. The basic hypothesis to
be explored is that probabilistic information about meaningful variables (such
as measures of visual depth, optical flow, limb orientation, etc.) is encoded in
the firing rates of an ensemble of neurons. Bayesian inference then provides an
optimal framework for inference in the presence of uncertainty, given certain
prior knowledge that may be determined genetically or through learning
processes. This approach leads in a natural way to neuronal circuits that are
computationally more general than the standard input-output maps of neural-
network theory. For example, an explanation of experiments demonstrating
contextual or attentional influences on neuronal responses may be formulated in
terms of a network involving multiplicative synaptic interactions. Specific
thrusts of the research will include (i) the study of small-scale neuronal
circuits that illustrate the computational power of the model and furnish
prototypes for large-scale simulation of important brain subsystems and (ii) the
incorporation of learning rules that permit naive circuits to modify their
structure and optimize task performance. Cross-disciplinary in nature, the
project will join the expertise of a computational neuroscientist and a
theoretical physicist in work to be performed primarily in the laboratory of a
prominent neurophysiologist. Central to the project is the involvement of
physics graduate students in a new interdisciplinary training program in
computational neuroscience.