* 9634425
* CISE Educational Innovation Program: Development and        Dissemination of a New Undergraduate Course Sequence in     Software Design and Development
* CSE,EIA
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Bruce Weide, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/2000
* USD 218,981.00

9634425 Long, Tim Sitaraman, Murali Ohio State University/West Virginia
University CISE Educational Innovation: Development and Dissemination of a New
Undergraduate Course Sequence in Software Design and Development This CISE
Educational Innovation award supports the integration of research into the
undergraduate curriculum through the development and dissemination of a new
sequence in software design and development. The project is a joint effort
between Ohio State University and West Virginia University, with OSU as the lead
institution. The project involves the design, development, installation, and
evaluation of an innovative three-quarter sequence in software design and
development. The sequence is integrated and unified in its philosophical and
technical bases. A major part of the effort includes the development of a
software composition workbench consisting of an integrated set of software
tools. The workbench will be capable of guiding students and software developers
in their application of the methodologies taught in the course sequence and it
will instill in software developers a particular mental model of software and
how to construct it. Dissemination will be facilitated through training
workshops for visiting faculty from a number of other institutions. The total
project is supported in part also by the Fund for Improvement of Secondary
Education (FIPSE) in the Department of Education.