* 9634290
* Methods and Models for Integrating Economy, Agriculture,    Hydrology, and Climate Change in an Integrated Assessment   Model of Global Change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Norman Rosenberg, BATTELLE MEMORIAL INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 06/30/2000
* USD 500,000.00

9634290 Edmonds Battelle, Pacific Northwest Laboratories (BNW), Texas A&amp;M
University and the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research will develop
techniques for modeling the interactive impacts of climate on agriculture, water
resources and the economy and techniques for estimating the economic value to
the agricultural sector of early identification of climate change. These
techniques will be developed in two sequential tasks: Task 1: Develop techniques
for modeling the interactive impacts of climate on agriculture, water resources
and the economy; and Task 2: Develop techniques for estimating the economic
consequences to the agricultural sector of varying modes of reaction to climatic
change. The techniques to be developed address two of the major weaknesses in
current integrated assessment frameworks, i.e., the treatment of individual
economic sectors as though insulated and isolated from the economy as a whole
and the treatment of impacts as 'snapshots' fixed in time rather than as
transient or 'moving-pictures' of events occurring over decadal and century-
length time spans in which not only climate changes but demographic,
technological, political, social and economic conditions change, as well. Under
Task 1, the HUMUS model that simulates the hydrologic cycle and the EPIC model
of that simulates crop productivity and water requirement will be employed in
BNW's Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM) for integrated assessment of the
effects of climate change. In the research project these models will be linked
interactively with one another and with a computable general equilibrium model.
Regional distributions of climate change in the 48 contiguous United States will
be drawn from a set of General Circulation Model equilibrium and transient
experiments by means of the MAGICC/SCENGEN model. These models will be modified
to include the regional implications of sulfur aerosols on climate, and the
SCENGEN GCM library will be updated. Under Task 2, methods will be developed to
assess the economic consequences and the value of early detection of climate
change. These methods will utilize the tools developed in Task 1.