* 9634195
* Separation of Complex Materials by Composition Using Thermal Field-Flow Fractionation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Martin Schimpf, Boise State University
* Continuing grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 11/30/1999
* USD 96,000.00

This project is a Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) activity directed
by Dr. Martin E. Schimpf of the Chemistry Department at Boise State University,
and supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry. The focus of the research is on Thermal Field-Flow Fractionation
(ThFFF). This separation technique is based on thermal diffusion and the
separation process is known to depend on both the chemical composition and the
molecular weight or size of the compounds under investigation. Work by
undergraduate students will be done to develop a fundamental understanding of
thermal diffusion, particularly in terms of the separation of macromolecules and
particulate matter. The effect of properties of the sample material and the
carrier solvent will be studied to reveal their impact on retention. Factors
governing thermophoretic motion of polymers such as the effect of chain
branching will be investigated. The knowledge gained from the fundamental work
will be applied to practical separation problems involving copolymers. A
combination of ThFFF with measurements of viscosity will be used to obtain the
average molecular weight and composition of block copolymers. Two-dimensional
separations using ThFFF and size exclusion chromatography will be investigated.
The ability to separate the components of complex mixtures of compounds is vital
to the successful solution of a number of major problems in chemical analysis
such as the identity and concentration of environmental pollutants, and the
composition of drug formulations. This project, to be carried out by
undergraduate students, will investigate the fundamental basis and applications
of a separation method known as Thermal Field-Flow Fractionation (ThFFF). A
major factor for the interest in this approach is that the method is potentially
applicable to the separation of polymer materials in solution and solid
particles of matter.