* 9634440
* Theoretical Spectroscopy and Quantum Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* John Light, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 07/31/1999
* USD 372,250.00

Professor John Light of the University of Chicago is being supported by the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program. The project involves the
development of both new and improved mathematical and computational methods for
calculating and predicting quantum dynamical processes. The methods rely largely
on the use of the discrete variable representation of the potential as well as
the development of methods based on square integrable functions to molecular
scattering. The applications include the prediction of the ro-vibrational
spectra of floppy molecular dimers such as the water dimer, several
investigations of resonances in reactive scattering and photodissociation as
well as applications in the area of molecule surface scattering. The accurate
determination of structure and dynamics of few atoms systems is of great
importance to understanding and modeling a number of important processes such as
absorption and emission of light, energy transfer and chemical reactions. This
work continues the development and application of accurate methods in chemical
physics to the study of such phenomena. Chemical reactions both in the gas phase
and on surfaces are being successfully described by the use of increasingly
sophisticated mathematical models. Several such models are being developed in
this theoretical study, thus aiding our understanding and control of a number of
processes such as combustion, catalysis, and the formation of molecules and
materials.