* 9634125
* Measuring the Effects of Thunderstorms on Upper Tropospheric Trace Gases
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Jeffrey Stith, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2000
* USD 258,418.00

9634125 Stith A one month field experiment will be carried out to study the
formation of nitrogen oxides (NOx) by lightning and the transport of air and
trace gases by thunderstorms, as a part of the Stratosphere Troposphere
Experiments: Radiation, Aerosols, and Ozone (STERAO) experiment in June and July
of 1996. The main facilities of STERAO are the NCAR WB57F high altitude
aircraft, the NOAA WP3D aircraft with a tail Doppler radar, and the Colorado
State University CHILL multiparameter Doppler radar. Both of these aircraft will
collect aerosol, trace gas and kinematic data on thunderstorms. However, neither
of the two aircraft are able to penetrate the upper portions of the anvil cloud
from thunderstorms. This project will add the University of North Dakota
Citation fanjet aircraft to STERAO, so that penetrations of anvil clouds can be
made during the project. These are thought to be a critical part of the
experiment, because previous measurements of NOx in thunderstorms found that a
significant portion of the NOx produced by lightning was in the upper portion of
the anvil cloud and not in the clear air around the cloud which will be the
region sampled by the WB57F. If the same holds true for thunderstorms in STERAO,
the lack of an anvil penetrating aircraft may render calculations of the NOx
production by lightning difficult or impossible. The Citation will carry wind
and turbulence instrumentation, trace gas instruments, and cloud microphysical
probes. In particular, a fast-response chemiluminescence-based instrument for
NOx measurements will be used. The experimental data along with storm kinematic
data from the radars will be used to study the storm features that are
responsible for the transport and redistribution of trace gases. These results
will also be compared with proposed numerical cloud modeling studies of
convective redistribution.