* 9634498
* The Modeling and Identification of Dynamically Uncertain    Systems: Theory and Experiment
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Roy Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1999
* USD 179,224.00

9634498 Smith The focus of this work is the development of methodologies for the
modeling and identification of dynamically uncertain systems in a closed-loop
control configuration. The work has a strong experimental component, in addition
to the theoretical work required to develop the framework. The experiments serve
as testbeds for the theoretical and algorithmic work, and addition, contribute
to the development of feedback control technology within each of their
application areas. A chemical vapor deposition system for semiconductor
(GaAs/InP) growth is used as a closed-loop control and modeling testbed. The
issues raised by this experiment include: uncertain flow dynamics; process
nonlinearities; highly uncertain reaction dynamics; and model based sensing
using optical measurements. A magnetic bearing experiment is also studied. A
rotor shaft is levitated at each end by magnetic bearings. This is a
particularly difficult identification and control problem and the relevant
issues include: closed-loop identification of a multiple-input, multiple-output,
unstable system; uncertain resonant modes in the rotor shaft; and rotor rotation
dependent coupling between control loops. The third experiment is a radiant
thermal processing system, consisting of an array of lamps for the heating of a
plate. The issues involved here are: modeling of an infinite dimensional system;
variable interaction between lamps; and significant uncertainty in the plate
characteristics (emissivity, thermal coefficients). The theoretical side of the
project is based on a robust control modeling framework. Uncertainty in the
system dynamics is modeled by bounded perturbations to a nominal model. Prior
work in the area of model validation has developed computationally tractable
techniques for assessing the minimum size of the perturbations required to
adequately describe an experimental observation. We propose extending the
approach to develop methodologies for the experimental identification of model
parameters for perturbed models. ***