* 9634545
* Program to Assist EPSCoR Participants in Enhancing Their    Research Competitiveness
* O/D,EPS
* 08/15/1996,06/30/2001
* Albert Teich, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Karen L. Sandberg
* 06/30/2001
* USD 2,928,873.00

9634545 Teich In 1993, the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) initiated an effort to assist NSF and the state EPSCoR programs in
developing a clearer understanding of the concept of a state's competitiveness
in research, developing criteria for assessing competitiveness and its progress
over time, and identifying strategies to enhance competitiveness. This effort
has yielded important results which have improved the understanding of what
makes states, institutions, and individuals competitive in research. The results
are in a book published by AAAS early in 1996 entitled, Competitiveness in
Academic Research (Albert H. Teich, editor). The present proposal seeks support
to build on this intellectual base and use AAAS's resources to build closer ties
between the EPSCoR program participants and the broader science and technology
community. The proposed project will have three elements: (1) A leadership
development program to assist EPSCoR states in developing and nurturing ties to
the broader scientific community. This element will include a series of regional
meetings for EPSCoR personnel aimed at giving them the opportunity to think
systematically about the conceptual and practical issues surrounding their
programs; (2) A technical assistance extension service to work with EPSCoR
states in shaping their science and technology development plans and integrating
those plans into broader economic and social development strategies. Under this
project element, a team of world-class experts will be developed and made
available to state EPSCoR programs to assist them in their planning and proposal
development efforts; (3) An effort to enrich the intellectual framework of the
EPSCoR program through an examination of the nature of competitiveness in
research and the relative efficacy of various strategies aimed at achieving it,
extending and exploiting the work begun under the initial AAAS EPSCoR project
and gaining additional value from i t. A distinguished advisory committee
constituted by the AAAS Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy
(COSEPP) and including members of COSEPP, state EPSCOR project directors, and
others with relevant perspectives and expertise, will oversee all aspects of the
project. The project is planned to run for three years.