* 9634231
* Systematic Study of Subfamily Chloridoideae (Poaceae,       Grasses) Using matK Gene Sequence Variation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Khidir Hilu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 12/31/1999
* USD 155,000.00

9634231 Hilu The grass or cereal family Poaceae (Gramineae) is large and
economically significant, but it remains taxonomically difficult. Recent results
in molecular phylogenetic studies have yielded abundant DNA sequence data
bearing on the closest living relatives of the extant grasses and on the major
lineages of evolution within the family. With that "first generation" of
molecular analyses having established an overall phylogenetic framework for the
grass family, scientists are now turning their attention to fine scale analyses
of tribe, genus, and species-level relationships. Dr. Khidir Hilu at Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University is studying the subfamily
Chloridoideae, which comprises ca. 150 genera of grasses with a distinctive C4
pathway of photosynthesis. Many of these are southern-hemisphere plants,
especially rich in Africa and Australia. The subfamily is characterized by
subtle anatomical features of the leaf, presumably related to the biochemical
pathways for carbon fixation and transport; but major questions exist about the
naturalness of this group of genera, in particular whether different grass
lineages may have evolved the same C4 pathway convergently, in response to
similar drought-stressed environments. Working with Dr. Nigel Barker from
University of Cape Town, South Africa, Dr. Hilu is collecting representative
species samples from the Chloridoideae subfamily, for sequence analyses of the
chloroplast matK gene, which will be complemented by extensive data already
accumulated by Barker for the rbcL gene and by published data for nuclear
ribosomal genes. Comparisons among these gene sequences will yield estimates of
mutational differences (nucleotide substitutions) between grass taxa, and permit
reconstructions of the phylogenetic relationships of the subfamily. In turn,
this knowledge will answer questions about the evolution of particular
photosynthetic pathways in grasses and their attendant leaf anatomy.