* 9634040
* Workshop on Management Skills for Scientists to be held     December 7, 1996 at the Annual Meeting of the American      Society for Cell Biology in San Francisco, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Carl Cohen, American Society For Cell Biology
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1997
* USD 2,000.00

9634040 Cohen This is a grant for partial support of a four-hour Workshop on
"Management Skills for Scientists," to be held at the 36th annual meeting of the
American Society for Cell Biology in San Francisco, CA, on December 7, 1996.
While scientists receive extensive technical training in their specific
disciplines, they often find themselves at a loss when placed in a position of
leading a research team. Lacking the skills required to resolve conflicts,
understand and channel motivation and foster a team approach, many scientists
focus exclusively on the technical issues of a project. While good science may
be accomplished under such circumstances, the premise of this proposal is that
familiarity with simple management and team building skills can improve the
performance of research teams. The workshop will consist of both a didactic and
an experiential component. The principles of team building and management will
be discussed and illustrated by examples and by workshop participant
experiences. The thesis of the workshop is that the funds which are now spent on
outstanding scientific research projects might be more effectively used if
scientific work team performance were optimal. In this sense, the workshop
directly supports the scientific mission of the NSF by providing scientists with
a new set of tools to help improve productivity, communication and learning. ***