* 9634727
* Integration of Computer Aided Design and Dimensional        Inspection Through Automatic Process Planning and Probe     Path Generation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Aristides A. Requicha, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2000
* USD 271,343.00

9634727 Requicha This award provides funding for investigating the development
of software systems for automatically generating all the information necessary
to inspect mechanical parts with computer-controlled Coordinate Measuring
Machines (CMMs). The focus will be on unsculptured parts that may contain many
2.5-dimensional features such as bosses, slots and pockets. The primary input
will be a solid model of a workpiece to be measured and toleranced according to
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) dimensioning and tolerancing
standard. The output will be a set of setups, each associated with surface
features to be inspected, probes to be used, probe orientations, points to be
inspected in each feature, and CMM programs expressed in the ANSI standard
language for CMM control. This work will provide a direct link between the
Computer Aided Design and metrology activities in a product's life cycle. If
successful, this research will result in both scientific and industrial
advances. Scientifically, it will improve the current understanding of spatial
reasoning, which is a difficult area of artificial intelligence. Industrially,
it will provide a means for significantly reducing the costs of dimensional
inspection of mechanical parts, for reducing inspection time, and for promoting
consistency in part measurement. All of these benefit the overall manufacturing
process and product quality, which is increasingly important in today's
marketplace. This work impacts directly the measurement of mechanical parts (1)
to decide whether final products or supplier parts are acceptable, (2) to
qualify manufacturing processes, that is, to show that they produce the required
features, and (3) to control processes by identifying dimensional trends that
must be corrected by adjusting process parameters.