* 9650805
* Laboratory for Interdisciplinary Instruction in Digital     Audio Technology in Music
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* David Headlam, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 07/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

The creation of a digital audio laboratory through this Instrumentation and
Laboratory Improvement Project will support an interdisciplinary teaching
venture in Digital Technology in Music involving the Department of Electrical
Engineering and the Eastman School of Music of the University of Rochester. The
new laboratory facilities will support key curricular components in the
education of engineering and science students and it will support a valuable
component in the technical education of students of Music as well as for a large
group of students in disciplines spanning these extremes. Digital representation
and manipulation of signals is one of the keystones of Electrical Engineering;
and in music study, this technology is being increasingly incorporated to the
extent that it has emerged as an essential aspect. The laboratory facilities
created through the project will enable practical instruction in digital signal
technology to students via hands-on experience and the creation of original
student work. Additionally, in Electrical Engineering the equipment will add new
instructional capabilities in the areas of Signals, Communications, and Digital
Signal Processing, and at the Eastman School the equipment will enable new
instructional capabilities in Digital Technology in Music production, Multimedia
Production Technology and Music Education. The latter will include CD-ROM based
instructional and pedagogical materials, as well as research into sound
manipulation and transmission. The digitized format of these materials will
allow for their dissemination in conventional computer disk format, CD-ROMs, or
networks such as the INTERNET via World Wide Web.