* 9650522
* The Center for Aquatic Environmental Studies - A Miniature  Controllable Aquatic Ecosystem for the Study of             Biogeochemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* George Koch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 06/30/1999
* USD 26,517.00

This project has developed a conceptual framework for a Center for Aquatic
Environmental Studies (CAES) in which students can investigate biogeochemical
processes in a miniaturized aquatic ecosystem. The project supports two
laboratories of the CAES: four miniature aquatic ecosystems in which plants and
invertebrates live and grow in several large tanks and an isotopic laboratory
where processes of heavy metal sequestration can be measured. The new equipment
includes the basic materials for the aquatic ecosystems (e.g., tanks and
filters) and for isotopic sample preparation (e.g., fume and laminar flow hoods,
balance, oven, and hotplates). The CAES is being used to develop lab experiments
that can be used throughout the curricula in Environmental Sciences, Chemistry,
Geology, and Biology. These experiments include studies of the ecology of the
system (e.g., population dynamics), nutrient cycling, acid mine drainage, and
sequestration of heavy metals in aquatic plants, such as duckweed and water
hyacinth. Students can use the lab in introductory-level courses and can return
to the CAES frequently throughout their course of study, eventually doing senior
projects under faculty supervision as part of a 'capstone' course. Throughout
their study, students work in cooperation with others with diverse expertise,
learning from other students as well as from professors and the mini-ecosystem
itself. Students develop greater sophistication in their understanding and
abilities as time goes by, much as one does in projects associated with a job.
The CAES is a permanent entity, so students can benefit from long-term data
sets. Research at the senior level can be original, and students are being
encouraged to write publishable articles in conjunction with their advisors.