* 9650672
* Development of an Undergraduate VLSI Test Laboratory for    Digital, Analog and Mixed-Signal Circuits
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Shambhu Upadhyaya, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 06/30/1999
* USD 39,000.00

The purpose of this project is the development of an undergraduate VLSI
laboratory for testing digital, analog, and mixed-signal circuits. The lab
includes an integrated test platform based on a CMT Mixed-Signal Test Station
and a high-speed oscilloscope. The laboratory is intended to supplement two
existing undergraduate courses, Introduction to VLSI Electronics and VLSI
Testing, and to provide much needed hands-on experience for the undergraduate
students. This process will enable the undergraduate students to take a mixed-
signal VLSI circuit design from initial specifications to a working
implementation. The skyrocketing demands for mixed-signal technology in
telecommunication, high-performance computing, and automotive electronics have
necessitated the introduction of this technology at the undergraduate level.
Rapid prototyping with the help of automated design and test tools is perceived
as the most appropriate method of providing the students with a clear concept of
the various steps in the design, debugging, and evaluation of a typical VLSI
system. A new course focusing on the advanced design issues of analog and mixed-
signal circuits in VLSI is to be offered, fully utilizing the new laboratory.
The upgrading of the existing courses provides the ABET-recommended major
meaningful design experience (MMDE) in the VLSI track of the undergraduate
curriculum. This new laboratory is expected to have a direct impact on about
two-thirds of the undergraduate ECE students. The project's practical
experiences can enhance the job opportunities for the students in leading
industries, where such skills are of great value.