* 9650828
* Enhancement of Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum Through   the Incorporation of FTIR
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Hal Wright, Trident Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Iraj Nejad
* 08/31/1998
* USD 9,672.00

The focus of this project is the enhancement of the laboratory experience in
introductory, organic, and analytical chemistry through the acquisition of an
FTIR spectrophotometer. This instrument allows rapid acquisition of spectra and
helps students relate practical experiences to theory. The project provides
students with FTIR instrumentation which allows them to assimilate theory and
concepts, resulting in improved learning; provides students with experience in
applying qualitative methods to the analysis of data, resulting in increased
critical thinking and problem solving skills; better prepares students for
transfer into 4-year science and engineering curricula or for entry into
technical careers by providing a practical laboratory experience using
spectroscopy; and provides underprepared students exposure to advanced
analytical tools and an appreciation for "real world" chemistry by developing
laboratory exercises that incorporate FTIR applications. The addition of FTIR to
the laboratory, integrated with assignments in the classroom, reinforces
concepts and provide students a more comprehensive understanding of entry-level
and college-transfer chemistry. The approach in integrating theory and
application encourages further exploration and practice on the part of the
students.