* 9650586
* Teaching of Multimedia Information Processing &             Communications
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Yao Wang, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 06/30/1999
* USD 61,186.00

Multimedia communications refers to integrated processing and communications of
voice, image, audio, video, and computer generated graphics and data. In order
to prepare the students for this fast evolving technology, the Department of
Electrical Engineering is setting up a new Multimedia Laboratory, equipped with
a number of multimedia personal computers, audiovisual equipment, and necessary
networking and peripheral devices. This laboratory is used for a new laboratory
course titled Multimedia Information Processing and Communications, which
provides students with hands-on experience to the acquisition, processing, and
communications of voice, image, and video, as well as multimedia document
creation. Being interdisciplinary by nature, this course is offered as an
elective course for senior students majoring in electrical engineering, computer
engineering, and computer science. The facilities in the laboratory can also be
used for senior projects and other undergraduate/graduate research projects in
the area of multimedia communications. Planned senior/master's joint projects
include building prototype video conferencing and video-on-demand systems over
the Internet. Currently, the department has very strong and active educational
and research programs in Telecommunications and Image Processing. The addition
of the Multimedia Laboratory strengthens these programs and provides a synergy
among these disciplines. The success of this development can be evaluated by
feedback from students and employers. To enable fast and broad dissemination of
the experience, the project is establishing an Internet homepage that contains
all the developed courseware and related publications.