* 9650908
* Acquisition of a Fourier-Transform IR Spectrometer to       Enhance Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Edgar Gooch, Elon University
* Standard Grant
* John Dwyer
* 05/31/1998
* USD 13,706.00

For a number of years dispersive infrared (IR) spectroscopy at this college has
been done only by a small number of chemistry and biology majors. Students
majoring in other disciplines have had no contact with the instrumental
technique. The experiments performed were inefficient and limited in scope, and
there was no provision for the rapid analysis of many samples in large
instructional laboratories. This project provides a Fourier-transform infrared
(FTIR) spectrometer with 0.5-cm resolution and attenuated total reflectance
accessory. This modern instrument can have a dramatic impact on the program. It
makes possible the rapid analysis of many samples in large instructional labs.
This enables many more students to use the instrument, including majors in the
new environmental studies program and liberal arts majors in first-year
chemistry courses. This project targets primarily freshman and sophomore
students. To a smaller extent, the project benefits juniors and seniors, some
undergraduates doing research, and selected high school students interested in
the sciences. An FTIR enriches the undergraduate experience, attracts current
and prospective students to careers in science, and enhances the career
marketability for graduates in the sciences. It enables faculty to develop new
experiments in instructional labs which had not been possible because of the
poor resolution and low sensitivity of dispersive IRs. The success of the
project can be measured by the increased number of students using IR, the
production of new experiments and lab manuals in lower-division chemistry
courses, and the number of undergraduate research publications and presentations
based on projects using FTIR.