* 9650918
* A Distributed and Parallel Processing Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Kiumi Akingbehin, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 08/31/1998
* USD 14,347.00

Through this project, an instructional laboratory is being established to
provide undergraduate computer science students with hands-on experience in
distributed and parallel processing techniques. While most undergraduate
students study various aspects of distributed and parallel computing in various
courses during their undergraduate experience, very few actually receive hands-
on experience on such systems. Most general-purpose computing laboratories are
not designed for the type of system configuration and re-configuration needed to
illustrate the various concepts involved in distributed and parallel computing.
In addition, the generally low availability and high cost of such systems
usually precludes hands-on experimentation. The result of this situation is that
students graduate and proceed on to professional practice with a strong tendency
to favor the use of centralized computing techniques over distributed computing
techniques. One side-effect of this situation is that distributed and parallel
systems, despite their high potentials, are largely underutilized in today's
computing technology. The need for computer professionals with distributed
computing expertise can only increase as distributed processing systems such as
the Internet and the World Wide Web continue to make rapid gains in utilization.
The system established in this project provides, at reasonable cost, a system
that can be used to provide hands-on exposure to distributed and parallel
computing concepts in three primary undergraduate courses: Parallel Processing,
Operating Systems, and Data Structures and Algorithms. A number of other
undergraduate courses may potentially benefit from the laboratory. The system is
organized around one Sun SPARC station_20 with four processors and four
uniprocessor Sun SPARC station_4 workstations. The choice of Sun workstations is
consistent with current industrial/academic practice.