* 9650654
* An Integrated and Networked Microscopy Center for           Undergraduate Education
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Joseph Koke, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,994.00

This project concentrates on the formation of an integrated microscopy facility
(IMF) in the Biology Department. The IMF supports laboratory exercises at all
levels in the curriculum (freshman to graduate). The exercises are experimental
in nature and can foster analytical thinking skills through students'
collaborative analysis of data. Some of these students will graduate to become
teachers. Southwest Texas State University produces more than 2,000 elementary
and secondary school teachers each year, including 30-35 certified to teach
biology. In addition, an outreach program with area high schools is being
established. Therefore, project plans have emphasized adding a laser scanning
confocal microscope (LSCM) to the existing transmission electron and light
microscopes to form a state-of-the-art microscopy facility. An LSCM is essential
to this plan because of the nature of the images that it can provide and because
of its networking capability. Imaging is computer controlled and displayed.
Digitization of images permits each student to collect images from their
specimens and later retrieve the images using a computer at a site remote from
the IMF. Widespread use of the proposed IMF is possible because the LSCM
includes a UNIX-based computer that can be fully networked. Networking with
hardware already in place permits images from the IMF to be accessed from all
over campus and from all over the world. Thus any teaching lab with a
workstation (consisting of any modern PC or Mac) can access the IMF. Accessible
images include those from all the microscopes in the IMF, as the LSCM computer
can also be used to acquire and store images from these sources. The IMF allows
students access to high technology in a familiar, computer environment. The LSCM
provides technology that makes remote access to image files by students
possible. Implementation of the objectives of this project can markedly increase
the level of science education in biology and provide a model program for other
universities to emulate.