* 9650871
* Computer Laboratories in Calculus and Statistics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Bruce Torrence, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 05/31/1998
* USD 41,597.00

It has become obvious, in recent years, that a successful undergraduate
mathematics curriculum cannot ignore the relationship between mathematics and
real-world technology and that a successful curriculum demands the active
participation of students in the discovery of ideas. This project provides for
the creation of a mathematics laboratory classroom where students can utilize
Macintosh computers as tools for active investigation in the calculus sequence
and in introductory statistics. The new mathematics laboratory promotes active
learning through classroom interaction with software tools, provides the
opportunity to explore real-world examples previously inaccessible without
technology, shifts the pedagogical emphasis from computational methods to deeper
conceptual understanding, emphasizes the links between these subjects and others
in the natural and social sciences, and addresses national concerns about the
cogency of traditional mathematics instruction. The department is currently
employing, testing, and developing supplemental materials for the Project CALC
Mathematica laboratories developed at Duke University and Bowdoin College. They
are developing and implementing statistics laboratories using Data Desk and the
materials developed for the NSF Activities-Based Statistics project. These
materials can be evaluated relative to the current materials using student and
faculty surveys. Through this project, the department can strengthen
relationships with high schools in the surrounding rural counties and provide AP
teachers with much needed computer training through summer workshops. Other
dissemination plans include presentations and publications and the use of R-MC
listserver CRACAS.