* 9650754
* Microcomputer-Based Curricular Enhancements for Elementary  Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* David Meltzer, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/1998
* USD 10,396.00

The project involves adding microcomputer-based enhancements to the curriculum
of a new elementary physics course. This inquiry-based undergraduate physics
course is targeted at preservice teachers, as well as others who are getting
their first exposure to college-level physical science. The theme "energy
transformation and conservation" is used to tie together the various topics.
Students' preconceptions regarding physical phenomena - as determined by
pretesting - will guide the presentation, activities, and discussion. The
pretests form the basis for a thorough class discussion of the predictions made
by students regarding the outcome of various experiments. Investigations to test
their predictions will be carried out by the students, working in small groups,
through guided "mini-research projects." Class discussions will be centered
around the results of the student investigations, and comparison with the
predictions. The equipment acquired via this grant will allow automated means
for data acquisition, analysis, and graphing which are intended primarily to
supplement, and not to replace, traditional techniques. The product output of
this project will be a novel combination of class-tested activities that make
use of data analysis in the context of an inquiry-based elementary physics
course with an energy theme. We expect that the project will significantly
improve the knowledge of and attitude towards physics of students who arrive
predisposed to think of science as distasteful. Dissemination will be through
journal articles, presentations at meetings and on-request release of exams,
syllabi, etc..