* 9650552
* A Comprehensive Suite of Laboratory Projects for an Object- Oriented Computer Science Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Viera Proulx, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 12/31/2000
* USD 244,994.00

This project focuses on the development of approximately 50 freshman laboratory
projects that provide significant experiences with software design issues as
well as with traditional topics in algorithms and data structures. Also,
approximately 15 large scale software design projects will be developed that
will permit students to explore object-oriented design methodologies using
state-of-the-art development tools. The over-arching goal is to make the
software design process an important focus in the computer science curriculum
and to promote a hands-on approach to learning about design. The outcome of this
project will be directed to computer science majors and other majors interested
in learning about the software design process in depth. The methodology to be
used is to create interesting laboratory projects which examine design themes
that occur in standard applications, to explore problem solving and
visualization in mathematics and science, to illustrate processes using
algorithm animation and simulation, and to investigate the design of software
using object-oriented models. To assist this methodology the project team will
develop a robust collection of toolkits to support the freshman experience and
to integrate industrial strength C++ development tools and libraries to support
the upper level student projects. This project has significance and will have
national impact. The proposed laboratory projects are more substantial and
interesting than any currently available. They provide practical design
experience by making connections to typical applications and related
disciplines. The projects will work on multiple computer platforms and so will
be useful at many institutions. The dissemination will be via the World-Wide-
Web, journals, and textbooks.