* 9650139
* The Integration of Computer-Linked Data Acquisition and     Analysis Systems into Undergraduate Cell Biology and        Physiology Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* John Choinski, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 06/30/1998
* USD 38,575.00

A major problem in teaching experimentally based disciplines such as cell
biology and physiology is that the students spend most of the assigned
laboratory period working on `cookbook` experiments, with little time left to
learn about the process of science through independent work. This project
addresses the problem by introducing computer-linked data acquisition and
analyses systems to be used in a number of new experiments in the beginning and
the advanced cell biology courses and the plant physiology course. The new
experiments focus on studying structure/function relationships in photosynthesis
and respiration. These new systems empower students to gather and analyze data
more efficiently, thus allowing students the time to formulate and test their
own hypotheses as a normal part of the laboratory experience. Students are also
encouraged to undertake independent research projects. Specifically, two
laboratories are being equipped with six computer stations each. In the
beginning labs, interfaces link computers to sensors designed to measure pH,
pressure, and oxygen levels in the air for the study of photosynthesis and
respiration at the organismal level. In the advanced labs, computer-controlled
liquid phase oxygen electrode systems with attached fluorescence probes and
high-intensity light sources allow for a novel approach to the study of
chloroplast and mitochondrial function. The computer-enhanced data gathering
capability of these systems permits experiments to be done in a teaching
laboratory that would have been impossible to accomplish with older methods.
These methods should be of interest to educators committed to new approaches of
teaching about the scientific method and about structure/function relationships
in photosynthesis and respiration. The results of this project can be
disseminated through presentations in the teaching section of the American
Society of Plant Physiologists and through publication of materials, including
articles in educational journals and a cell biology laboratory manual.