* 9650078
* Undergraduate Instrumentation & Laboratory Improvement-     Instrumentation Projects: Mixed Analog-Digital Projects in  Wireless Communications
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* John Khoury, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 03/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

The objective of this project is the revitalization of an advanced senior-level
design project laboratory in the wireless communications field. The design of a
large mixed analog-digital project serves as a capstone design experience for
the seniors by merging concepts from circuit, system, communication, and linear
system theory into a single practical project. Only through the use of theory
learned in lecture can the students truly grasp the material. The wireless
project, incorporating some digital communications, helps to tie together many
of the concepts of electrical engineering. The large size of the project,
requiring about 10 students, is purposely configured to simulate an industrial
product development cycle. The project is divided into smaller tasks that
subteams of about three students can design and build. During the course of the
project, each subteam is required to present to the entire team a review of
their circuit specifications, a review of their design, and finally a review of
the experimental results. Written documentation of the experimental results once
the entire system is integrated is required. This experience helps the students
to learn teamwork and communication skills and to see engineering concepts at
work.