* 9650166
* An FT-NMR Spectrophotometer in the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Kenneth Harmon, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 62,850.00

This project introduces approximately 20 new experiments into the undergraduate
chemistry curriculum and requires the use of a new dedicated undergraduate
Fourier-transform nuclear magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) spectrometer. The
laboratory courses affected include organic, analytical, physical, biochemistry,
inorganic, and macromolecular. Also, the faculty is able to initiate new
research projects for undergraduate student participation. In a concerted effort
to improve all phases of its undergraduate instruction, the Department of
Chemistry is cognizant of the fact that its majors and nonmajors face a
technologically advanced workplace in all areas of scientific endeavor. It is
imperative that students are able to compete effectively in this arena. One way
of achieving this goal is to provide students with hands-on experience with
modern scientific instrumentation and techniques. The department believes that
the single most important spectroscopic technique previously lacking within the
department has been a modern FT-NMR instrument. The decision to obtain one is
clear given the fact that the only NMR instrumentation previously available for
routine undergraduate use has been a Varian T-60, an instrument that is
operationally and technologically antiquated. It is well established that modern
pulsed NMR spectroscopy covers a wider range of structural information than any
other single technique. The underlying purpose behind the use of the NMR is to
introduce the student to relatively simple experiments in the initial laboratory
course in organic chemistry and continually build up to more diverse and more
important uses of NMR spectroscopy as the student progresses. Concomitant with
the inclusion of experiments demonstrating the usefulness of NMR is the build
up, in lectures, of the underlying principles and theory behind one- and two-
dimensional NMR. The overall objective of this project is to enhance
significantly the scientific education of all students who are enrolled in a
chemistry-related curriculum. The effectiveness of individual experiments can be
constantly reviewed and evaluated by both faculty and students.