* 9650719
* Optical Measurement and Testing Systems for Undergraduate   Optics Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Charles Joenathan, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/2000
* USD 36,060.00

Testing optical components and making physical measurements using optical
techniques are important topics in an applied-optics program. These subjects are
multidisciplinary in nature. In recent years, advancements in electro-optic
technology, computers, and electronics have made optical measurement and testing
tools more reliable, accurate, and repeatable. Until the present, students had
been exposed to outdated testing and measurement tools and analysis. They made
qualitative measurement on the images obtained using photographic techniques.
Such predictions have limited impact because of the highly speculative nature of
the results. Many times this shortcoming added to the frustration of both the
teacher and students because the potential use of the measurement and testing
technique had been obscured by large error and very little repeatability.
Students in the optics course should be provided with the opportunity not only
to develop the basic skills but also to acquire expertise using the most modern
hardware and analytical tools. In addition, the incorporation of computer data
acquisition systems in the experiments leaves more time for the students to
concentrate on concept and methodology. For this reason, the measurement and
testing capability of the department is being strengthened. To this end, new
laboratory experiments are also being introduced. The equipment used in this
project is being used to provide automated as well as quantitative analysis for
the new laboratories in an optical metrology course (which will find its use in
other courses as well), develop new laboratory experiments that play a pivotal
role in the many fiber optics industries and communication, upgrade some present
laboratories with tools of higher precision and control so that the student gets
a better feeling for the data and the calculation, and improve the integration
of data acquisition and analysis for some experiments.