* 9650023
* Scientific Equipment to Improve Science Education Aboard the Vessel W.G. Jackson
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Ronald Ward, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 06/30/1999
* USD 29,698.00

This project is expanding the hands-on, investigative approach to science
education, an approach that this department has successfully used with
preservice elementary teachers as well as K-12 students and teachers. This
successful model for science education is now being extended to include the
upper-division science instruction and undergraduate research at this
university. The newly acquired, advanced equipment is being used aboard the new
65-foot floating laboratory and classroom, G. JACKSON. This new vessel is being
constructed and equipped with basic science and safety equipment. Its principal
focus is science instruction and research for undergraduate science majors and
prospective teachers. The new equipment is providing greater opportunities for
these students to experience an investigative approach to science in numerous
courses as well as through faculty supervised research. This equipment also
provides an introduction to current technology in several areas of science and
enhances student opportunities for higher level experience in experimental
design, data collection and analysis, and computer modeling. The university is
making the vessel and its inventory of science equipment available as a regional
science education resource. The vessel offers educational programs in various
port cities around Lake Michigan. Additionally, it is expected to be used by
other colleges and universities including Hope College, Western Michigan
University, DePaul University, Cornerstone College, and the following community
colleges: West Shore, Muskegon, Lansing, and Petoskey. The impact of the project
is to convey scientific principles and techniques with greater effectiveness;
enhance student understanding of how scientific data is collected, processed,
and applied to environmental questions; and introduce new content into the
students' aquatic science experience through working with advanced equipment.