* 9650428
* Applied Analytical Chemistry in the Solid State
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Susan Jansen Varnum, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/1998
* USD 30,551.00

Through this project, the department is upgrading its analytical/inorganic
program and improving and expanding upper-level laboratories by adding
instructional grade instruments and modest facilities for XRD analysis. As part
of the project, the department is delivering an innovative course in analytical
methods applied to inorganic solid-state materials. The course follows the
upper-level lecture course in inorganic chemistry, which provides students with
basic theory in structure and stability and gives them a hands-on introduction
to molecular modeling (MO) and MO methods. With this background, students can
synthesize and characterize derivatives of a selected class of interesting
solid-state materials. Characterization includes structural analyses by single
crystal x-ray diffraction, XRD, determination of magnetic susceptibility, EPR
analysis of magnetic state, and analysis of frontier states and redox chemistry.
The class of materials selected demonstrates interesting magnetic, electrical,
and spectral properties and crystallize in multiple crystal habits. Thus, they
serve as an excellent "medium" of analysis. A pilot course has been mounted and
run successfully with eight students. As a team-taught course, this course is
being inserted into the curriculum without decreasing other course offerings and
without burdening the instructors.