* 9650507
* Laboratory and Instructional Innovations in an              Interdisciplinary Biochemistry/Biotechnology Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Samuel Fan, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 48,853.00

This project aims to improve a budding undergraduate program in
biochemistry/biotechnology that is already receiving considerable regional
interest, to ensure its blossoming into national significance. This aim is being
approached by developing and implementing state-of-the-art laboratory sequences
in cell and molecular biology, biochemistry, and immunology to augment existing
courses and by presenting three-dimensional molecular models in a
lecture/discussion setting. The laboratory sequences lend relevance to lectures
and illustrate that science is built from bricks of knowledge supported by the
pillars of investigative process; the molecular modeling presentations help to
ease student understanding of macromolecule structure/function relationships.
About 50 undergraduates are directly affected by the main body of this project
each year, with another 300, primarily nonscience-majors, receiving additional
benefits due to the downward migration of exercises developed for the three
courses in question. Several innovative approaches to laboratory design are
being used to develop laboratory sequences appropriate and feasible to an
intermediately sized program such as this. Some of these approaches are to
integrate individual laboratory exercises into continuous projects; to
miniaturize exercises, thus reducing reagent and animal use while maximizing
results; to replace radioactive tracers with calorimetric or fluorescent ones;
and to incorporate, as they become well established and refined, exercises
developed for upper-level majors' courses into large classes for nonscience-
majors. These innovations not only make it feasible for this institution and
those who follow to implement state-of-the-art technology at the undergraduate
level, but also begin to address issues of practical concern in biological and
chemical education.