* 9650829
* Using Diverse Multi-Media Strategies to Promote Meaningful  Learning in Physics, Geology, and Biology for Prospective   Elementary Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Kathleen Fisher, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 06/30/1998
* USD 45,930.00

At San Diego State University, about 450 preservice elementary teachers take one
or more specially designed undergraduate courses in either physics, geology or
biology each year. These courses incorporate extensive class discussion, hands-
on experimentation, collaborative learning and the use of computers in creative
ways. The computer equipment obtained with NSF support are enabling the course
instructors to develop and integrate more advanced multimedia to enhance the
science learning experiences of the students in many new and exciting ways. The
physics courseis using the new computers with powerful new software developed on
another project to help students construct conceptual models in various domains
of physics. This new software provides tools for knowledge construction and
simulations of physics phenomena. Students working in groups build physics
understanding by using idea containers, electronic journals, bulletin boards and
World Wide Web resources to promote meaningful conversations as part of
learning. They make predictions about experimental outcomes and test their
predictions with both actual apparatus and computer simulations. The geology
course is furthering integration of hands-on collaborative learning with
multimedia and World Wide Web resources through enhancement and further
development of the World Wide Web page called TREES (Teaching Resources for
Education in Earth Science). CD-ROMs are being used to explore Earth Science,
and student field experiences are being used to create virtual field trips that
are available on the Web. The biology course is promoting meaningful learning by
engaging students in using their experiential knowledge to construct semantic
networks. Using new multimedia tools and the latest version of the software
SemNet, students are able to build networks that incorporate images, QuickTime
movies and Web resources all stored on CD and made available on the Web. Results
of development efforts in all three courses are being disseminated widely
through many channels, including Web pages, other teacher enhancement projects,
and professional meetings and publications. A particular effort will be made to
share resources with other faculty in the California State University system,
which graduates nearly 3,000 future K-6 teachers every year.