* 9650358
* Laboratory Activities for an Integrated, Multidisciplinary  Science Literacy Course
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Ann Rushing, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 06/30/1998
* USD 80,000.00

This project provides basic laboratory teaching equipment for a new,
multidisciplinary science course (the Natural World) that emphasizes the basic
foundations of natural science, science as a way of knowing, the uses of
science, historical influences on the development of science, and the
interrelationships between science and culture. A 2-semester laboratory-based
course, the Natural World is a part of a new core curriculum of 38 hours that
seeks to integrate the various academic disciplines within a set of
comprehensive and cohesive interdisciplinary courses. The Natural World is
centered around multidisciplinary topics of current relevance. The course is
being linked to two humanities courses that students take concurrently. This
project involves 10 faculty members from five science disciplines in the design
of a modular curriculum for multidisciplinary, collaboratively taught courses
designed for larger comprehensive universities. The laboratory activities
emphasize critical thinking skills, active learning, and collaboration among
students. The labs involve hands-on, discovery-based learning. The project seeks
to provide students with an understanding of how science is done by helping them
explore the scientific method, hypothesis formulation and testing, collection of
data, analysis of data, and the interpretation of data in the context of
hypotheses. The equipment is being used to implement the laboratory portion of
the Natural World course. The goal is to provide students with the opportunity
to experience science first-hand. With this basic scientific equipment and
computer resources, students are able to examine and analyze important
scientific issues and to make rational, objective decisions about these issues.