* 9650845
* A Quantitative Analysis Laboratory Curriculum Utilizing an  Analyzed Complex Matrix
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,09/30/2001
* Conrad Stanitski, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 09/30/2001
* USD 228,531.00

The proposed project will provide a prototype for the modernization of the
sophomore/junior level quantitative analysis laboratory course. The goals of the
laboratory course are first, to demonstrate principles taught in lecture, and
second, to teach laboratory technique emphasizing precision and accuracy. The
traditional laboratory course either emphasizes precision and accuracy by using
single-component samples or demonstrates modern techniques by using naturalistic
(non-analyzed) samples. This project will integrate the two goals by utilizing
an analyzed complex matrix for student samples, lypholized clinical control
serum, as a multicomponent sample to simulate situations likely to be found by
graduates in analytical laboratories. Significant features of the chosen sample
matrix include (1) a large variety of substances which have been analyzed by the
manufacturer, including ions, neutral molecules, proteins, and enzymes; (2) the
need for preanalytical separation and/or masking of interferents in some
analytical schemes; (3) the opportunity for kinetic analyses; and (4) a wide
range of concentrations of different analytes in a single sample. Other features
of the experiments to be developed include computer-aided data acquisition and
reduction. The project will be carried out in three phases: (1) the laboratory
exercises will be developed and tested using students at UCA; (2) chemistry
faculty from other universities will attend a workshop to learn the specific
laboratory exercises and test some of the exercises the next year in their
quantitative analysis courses; (3) the investigators will write a laboratory
guide for the experiments, using the accumulated knowledge of the classroom
experiences. Anticipated student outcomes of the project include improvement of
comprehension in the classroom of problems involving complex analyses, an
increased enthusiasm for analytical lab-work, and a greater familiarity with the
principles behind simple automated instrumentation.