* 9650761
* Integration of Molecular Modeling, Computational Chemistry  and Artificial Intelligence Throughout the Undergraduate    Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Charles Bock, Philadelphia University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 05/31/1998
* USD 49,996.00

The project provides equipment for a computer facility that enables modern
molecular modeling, computational chemistry, and selected applications of
artificial intelligence, including aspects of combinational chemistry, to be
incorporated throughout the undergraduate chemistry curriculum. Advances in
computer technology and software have made molecular modeling an indispensable
tool for practicing chemists and have made it possible to introduce the subject
into the undergraduate curriculum. Implementation of this project establishes a
network of high resolution graphics workstations connected to a high speed
server acting as a computational engine. The computer facility significantly
enhances instruction in General Chemistry, Organic Chemistry, Biochemistry,
Physical Chemistry, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, Advanced Organic Chemistry,
Instrumental Methods of Analysis, and Cell Biology. Students are learning to
visualize molecules in 3D; calculate energy optimized ground state geometries;
calculate and display LUMOs, HUMOs and electron density maps; perform infrared
spectra analysis including animation of normal modes; discover structure-
activity relationships; calculate gas phase reaction thermodynamics; refine
structures using restrained molecular dynamics; and use genetic algorithms in
optimal conformational searches. Wherever possible, the computational exercises
concentrate on aspects of compounds that are the subject of experimental studies
in the course curricula. Students participating in the active undergraduate
research programs in chemistry and biology also are using these modeling tools
to understand and interpret their research results.