* 9650755
* Implementing a "Development of Environmental Resource       Information" Minor
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Rollin Strohman, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 01/31/1999
* USD 38,000.00

A new minor in Development of Environmental Resource Information is being
established at this institution. This minor enables those persons involved in
resource management to place resource information in the correct geographic
location. It also provides an introduction to the legal aspects of boundaries
and resource utilization. The minor combines surveying with software instruction
in AutoCAD, Arc/Info, and land design software. This is balanced with boundary
law, resource ecology, and environmental impact analysis. The last course in the
minor is a project course in which all the material in the minor is integrated.
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) databases are becoming the standard
planning tool. But when these databases are created, more than 50 percent of the
effort and 90 percent of the cost is related to obtaining data in digital form.
This minor helps students create the data in a cost-effective manner. Global
Positioning System (GPS) receivers are a key technology in obtaining position
information to correctly place and check the accuracy of GIS data. The project
involves purchase of GPS receivers that will provide ground control for
production of orthophotos (uniform scale aerial photographs), digital elevation
model (DEM) data, and the requested cartographic data acquisition software. The
DEM data can be used with requested land design software for earthwork,
hydraulics, and hydrology calculations. A color printer and data collectors are
also used in the minor. Information on the minor can be publicized on a
department web page, and links to the page can be requested from other web
pages. Evaluations of the project can also be distributed there. Laboratory
exercises developed for the minor will be offered to the NASA project to develop
a National Remote Sensing Core Curriculum.