* 9650100
* Panola College Physics Laboratory Improvement
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Norma Evers, Panola College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1998
* USD 19,226.00

The goal of this project is to improve the physics laboratory experience for
students, making it a better aid to learning the concepts of motion and energy.
The acquisition of computers and interactive computer equipment also provides
much needed exposure to a rapidly changing technological workplace for a very
nontraditional student body, especially a large force of older female students.
The improvement in equipment is being accompanied by the development of a set of
experiments and related activities keyed to the interests of the students and
stressing the development of critical reading and thinking skills. Equipment
used in the project include MBL interface probes and software, interactive
digital video equipment, and additional computer software programs. The
curricula targeted for the project include the motion and energy units in the
first semester of introductory physics at all levels. Early development versions
of experiments in kinematics, dynamics, and mechanics being performed by
students who then provide feedback and refinements. Tested and critiqued by the
participants, a final set of experiments with assessments ready for use in
successive classes is produced. Materials developed can be provided to other
introductory physics teachers through professional organizations and
publications, along with evaluation information on the impact of the activities
on student learning and motivation.