* 9650321
* Integrating Instructional Computing Into Differential       Equations Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Luiz Martins, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/1998
* USD 44,377.00

The basis of this project is that differential equations present an excellent
opportunity to learn how the real world works, that a good way to do this is by
exploring specific real-world problems, and that this exploration can be fun.
The project makes use of an enhanced version of the Harvard Consortium's `Rule
of Three` (present things geometrically, numerically, and algebraically). The
enhancement consistently provides real-world interpretations and applications.
Traditionally, introductory differential equations courses concentrate on
finding, by hand, closed form solutions to a few standard types of equation.
This project focuses on helping students achieve a better understanding of the
meanings of these equations. It emphasizes understanding key concepts such as
linearity, equilibrium points, stability, and dependence on initial conditions
or parameters. To make exploring and following up on curiosity a realistic goal
throughout the course, the project supplies students with a powerful tool, the
computer algebra system Maple. Maple plots the solutions and direction fields
which are the keys to presenting things geometrically. There are other commands
to do the same at the numeric level, and at the algebraic level. In addition,
the project promotes a much greater involvement in the learning process on the
part of the students. Cooperative learning is a significant aspect of the
course. Material developed for the course will be available on the Department's
web site.