* 9650015
* Introduction of Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Fourier   Transform Infrared Spectroscopy into Physical Chemistry     Laboratory: Condensed Phase Experiments
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* David White, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 21,838.00

The establishment of a diverse and high quality education for undergraduate
chemistry students, and students in related fields, is a primary goal of the
Department of Chemistry. Chemistry's being primarily an experimental science,
one of its most important components is the undergraduate laboratories. The
purpose of this project is to introduce into the laboratory courses in physical
chemistry experiments that probe condensed phases at the microscopic level and,
at the same time, continue the laboratory upgrading by introducing modern
spectroscopic methods. Specifically, the aims of the project are to create five
new spectroscopic experiments based on scanning tunneling microscopy and
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy instrument packages that are within the
reach of most educational institutions; to develop these experiments to the
point that they can be adopted by instructors who do not have the prior
expertise using these techniques; to expose students in the introductory and
advanced physical chemistry laboratories to modern techniques in physical
chemistry as applied to diverse systems; and to communicate the results of this
project both regionally and nationally through presentations at scientific
meetings and publication in the Journal of Chemical Education. The improvements
and diversification in the physical chemistry curriculum can be expected to
encourage more students to pursue graduate studies in chemistry.