* 9650559
* Project Oriented Biochemistry Laboratory Course in a New    B.S. Biochemistry Degree Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Paul Craig, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 60,000.00

A project-oriented laboratory has been designed to introduce students to the
study of biochemistry as it is practiced. This course can be a capstone
experience for students from a variety of majors, including those who enter the
new Biochemistry program. In keeping with the department's focus on career
education, this course is also preparing the students for future employment or
graduate education. The specific goals of this proposal are to enable students
to study the protein chemistry, enzymology, and molecular biology of a single
enzyme in a series of integrated experiments using modern laboratory methods,
including chromatography and capillary electrophoresis, and to supplement the
learning experience of students enrolled in the biochemistry laboratory and
lecture courses with effective molecular visualization and modeling tools. The
students use a small computer network to prepare for experiments, using
simulation software to access sequence homology databases over the Internet, to
visualize proteins and nucleic acids, and to model small organic and
biomolecules. The equipment is also being used by students and faculty in
organic and analytical chemistry courses. The change in the biochemistry
teaching lab from a disjointed collection of experiments using unrelated systems
to a series of experiments focused around a single project is a model that can
be readily adapted by other educators who can design their courses to focus on a
single enzyme or protein with which they are most familiar.