* 9650125
* Capillary Electrophoresis System for Water Quality Analyses and Interpretations in the Undergraduate Geochemistry       Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* June Mirecki, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 06/30/1999
* USD 22,308.00

The acquisition of a capillary electrophoresis (CE) system enables analyses of
dissolved inorganic and organic anions in natural water samples. Dissolved
anions are analyzed routinely to assess water quality, supplementing the
analysis of dissolved cations by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission
spectroscopy (ICP-AES) methods. These data are fundamental to an understanding
of natural water compositions in the context of geochemical processes including
water-rock interactions, contaminant migration, and carbon cycling. Analysis of
dissolved anions in water is commonly accomplished using ion-exchange
chromatography. However, recent application of CE methods to water samples
presents many advantages over ion-exchange methods, especially in an academic
setting. CE systems have fewer moving parts, less expensive columns, smaller
solvent waste volumes, and faster analyses. Upper-level undergraduate geology
majors in the Introduction to Geochemistry course are being instructed in the
concepts of aqueous geochemistry (for example, equilibrium, activity and
concentration relationships, and mineral solubility). These concepts can be
applied in order to understand the processes governing natural (and possibly
contaminated) ground and surface water samples. Students proceed through a six-
part exercise in which they perform the following tasks: collect water samples
in the field; prepare water samples for analysis; analyze samples for anions by
CE; analyze samples for dissolved cations by ICP-AES; perform qualitative
interpretation of water-quality data by graphical methods; and perform
quantitative interpretations of water-quality data by computer models. In
addition to providing interdisciplinary educational and research opportunities
at the undergraduate level, acquisition of a CE enhances the department's
ability to develop undergraduate laboratory exercises focusing on water-quality
analysis.