* 9650237
* Augmenting Student Research in Developmental Biology at     Earlham College
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* William Harvey, Earlham College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 33,670.00

The Biology Department is committed to incorporating scientific inquiry
throughout the curriculum. This project targets the Developmental Biology course
and makes possible a set of inquiry-based projects that use various light and
scanning electron microscopic techniques to investigate Drosophila
embryogenesis. These projects parallel and extend examples of cleavage and
gastrulation presented in lecture. They also solidify understanding of
subsequent axis and pattern formation. Specifically, students observe cleavage
and gastrulation events using bright field, differential-interference-contrast
(DIC) and phase contrast techniques. Early developmental events are also
documented using videomicroscopy. In the inquiry-based component of the lab,
students work in groups to either investigate changes in nuclear and
cytoskeletal organization using fluorescent markers or changes in surface
morphology using the scanning electron microscope (SEM). The projects emphasize
embryogenesis as a set of questions to be explored. These inquiry-based projects
also build virtues associated with research: technical skill, enthusiasm,
confidence, perseverance, attention to detail, and creative problem solving.
Pilot studies using the SEM and fluorescent markers for nuclei and actin
filaments were successful in the previous offerings of Developmental Biology.
The new equipment used in this project may expand the current microscopic
capabilities to include DIC and video documentation and enhance significantly
students' capabilities in phase-contrast, fluorescence, and SEM studies. This
equipment is necessary for solidifying and expanding the investigative projects
described. Since few inquiry-based exercises are described in contemporary
laboratory manuals for use in Developmental Biology, this set of projects makes
a significant contribution to undergraduate Developmental Biology laboratories.
The equipment is also being incorporated into the existing secondary school
outreach programs.