* 9650826
* Incorporating FT-IR into the Laboratory Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Maria Longas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 08/31/1998
* USD 11,942.00

This project provides funds for the purchase of a Fourier-transform-infrared
(FTIR) spectrophotometer to be used for undergraduate teaching and research.
This project is the initial phase of a multiphase plan for improving the
instrumentation available at the university. The ultimate goals are to provide
an improved laboratory experience for the students, to increase their skill
level, and to attract more students to major in chemistry. The target audience
is students enrolled in the organic, inorganic, and biochemistry laboratory
courses, which, in addition to chemistry majors, include students in the
biological sciences and prenursing curricula. At present, only chemistry majors
get actual hands-on experience with the major instrumentation. This project also
increases the training available to the chemistry majors and gives all the
students better exposure to state-of-the-art chemical instrumentation. The plan
is to give as many students as possible (approximately 400 per year) experience
with FTIR. Advanced sampling techniques, such as horizontal attenuated total
reflectance and diffuse reflectance, are fully utilized. Experiments are
designed to allow the atmosphere in the teaching laboratory to mimic an actual
research setting. While IR spectroscopy typically has been associated with the
assignment and identification of organic functional groups, this project shows
it can be equally effective as a pedagogic tool in the undergraduate inorganic
and biochemistry curricula. Experiments developed in this project can be
published in an appropriate journal such as the Journal of Chemical Education.
This can be complemented with student presentations at regional and national
meetings. Thus, the use of FTIR is beneficial not only to these students but to
the entire undergraduate community nationwide.