* 9650425
* Improvement of Laboratory Instrumentation in the Freshman   General Biology Course for Science Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Ed Pickering, Wilberforce University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/1999
* USD 6,000.00

This university attracts primarily African-American students. Many students
come to this department with an interest in science but, as with most college
freshmen, a limited understanding of what scientists actually do and what is
required to become a professional scientist. As they discover the technical
nature and rigorous demands of a career in biology, many become discouraged and
seek a different career, unless they are given personal instruction and
encouragement and allowed to experience the excitement of using current
scientific equipment successfully at the introductory biology level. The
objective of this project is to increase student interest in pursuing a
biological career by providing more effective personal instruction using the
Socratic method, aided by a video/microscope system, and by providing more
hands-on experiences that both provide excitement and build scientific skills
through the use of different kinds of scientific instruments. The target
students are the freshmen who indicate an initial interest in a biological
career. The success of this project can be indicated by increased performance on
General Biology I and II examinations and reports, a greater positive attitude
toward the course as expressed on course evaluation instruments, reduced student
attrition during the freshman year and beyond, a higher percentage of students
graduating with a Bachelor of Science degree in Biology, and a higher percentage
entering biological careers. This will result in increased representation by
African-Americans in the biological professions. The outcomes of this project
will be reported before the Education Section of The Ohio Academy of Science.