* 9650526
* Incorporation of Cell and Tissue Culture Techniques and     Environmental Physiology into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Wendy McCullen, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/1998
* USD 32,924.00

The purpose of this project is to continually enhance the educational
opportunities available in biological sciences and to improve efficiency of
instruction in the classrooms and laboratories. The project has a far-reaching
impact on the campus which has extended beyond the Biological and Physical
Science Department. As a direct result of the project, two new courses,
Environmental Science and Ecology have been added to the curriculum. This
enhancement also involves the purchase of two labline environmental chambers,
three ecology study chambers, and two plant growth racks, which are all housed
in the lab classrooms in Nestor Hall. Upon development of the environmental
science course, the Environmental Technology Department made a decision to
require it for all of their technical students as a basic related course. All
equipment has been integrated into the biology curriculum across the board and
is being utilized to its fullest capacity. The videomicroscopy system is being
used to teach dissection techniques, to teach microscopy techniques, and to
study specific specimens as a group for discussion. Especially significant is
the dimension that this equipment adds to the two introductory-level,
nonlaboratory courses. Videomicroscopy is such a successful teaching technique
that the college has purchased additional systems so that the technique can be
made available to any faculty member. The department has recently purchased
photoprinters to capture images from the monitors. These images may then be used
on quizzes, exams, hand-outs, etc. Interactive computer/video applications are
continually being developed using the Media Argus Master Authoring software and
hardware purchased. In anatomy, these applications are being used as supplements
to lecture material and also, more recently, to provide alternative teaching
methods to those students opposed to the dissection of animals. Applications in
invertebrate biology are also in use. The results of this project have been
disseminated in workshops presented at both the departmental and divisional
levels. The authoring software has been widely viewed and interest in developing
interactive software applications has grown across campus.