* 9650733
* A World Wide Web-Based Laboratory for Undergraduate         Analog VLSI Design
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Robert Caverly, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 08/31/1998
* USD 20,838.00

The World Wide Web's (WWW) current explosion in popularity and accessibility is
shaping the way educational institutions provide future service to their
students. At the present time, there is a sporadic, but growing, movement to
provide WWW access to laboratories. This capability promises to provide those
teaching undergraduate-level courses the ability to access truly state-of-the-
art educational facilities from distant locations, with little or no additional
cost to the distant campus. This project centers around the development of an
undergraduate web-based laboratory in the area of analog integrated circuit
design and testing. The plan is to develop a suite of automated instrumentation
to be used for measuring the characteristics of the prefabricated analog
integrated circuit in several undergraduate level laboratories. The
instrumentation is controlled and the measurement results transmitted over the
WWW. The equipment acquired to implement this instrumentation suite is a
personal computer controller (featuring an interface to the WWW), a GPIB-
controlled signal analyzer, a function generator, a programmable power supply, a
frequency counter, a digital storage oscilloscope, and a high-frequency digital
multimeter. The instrumentation is being controlled in a similar fashion as the
current senior laboratory equipment at the University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth, which is based on a similar equipment suite.