* 9650765
* Introducing a Multidisciplinary Approach to the Physical    Chemistry Instructional Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 13,500.00

Physical chemistry courses tend to teach thermodynamics with a focus on
"classical" systems and methods that seem largely out of touch with modern
chemical practice. This project develops physical chemistry laboratory
experiments that teach the application of physical principles, particularly
thermodynamic principles, in chemical problem solving. It also introduces
students to research-grade instrumentation that they are likely to encounter in
their career, whether in industrial or academic research. Additionally, it
incorporates chemical materials that are most relevant to the diverse modern
practices of physical chemistry, particularly biomolecules, liquid crystals, and
polymers. The project is using a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) to
design three new experiments for the physical chemistry laboratory courses. The
strategy is to use a standard method for solving multiple problems, thereby
shifting the focus from complex experimental setups to the chemical systems of
interest. The new experiments include learning the use of a DSC and applying it
to simple enthalpy measurements, comparative DSC studies of the thermal behavior
of different complex substances at and near phase transitions, ald applying DSC-
derived phase diagrams to specific design problems in macromolecular and
biomolecular mixtures.