* 9650178
* Integration of Gas Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry       troughout the Chemistry Curriculum in a New Major
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Timothy Friebe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 07/31/1998
* USD 33,704.00

In response to recent national mandates to improve undergraduate science
education with innovations in teaching and laboratory experience for students,
the department recognizes the need for modern equipment and computer
applications in the undergraduate laboratory. The two distinct goals of this
project are to integrate modern instrumental and computer methods throughout the
chemistry curriculum and to achieve ACS accreditation for the new major. These
goals are totally complementary, and somewhat synergistic, in their
implementation. To move forward on this commitment, this project uses a benchtop
gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) system to bring innovation and
excitement into the laboratories at three different levels. The appeal of a
GC/MS system is that it is a multipurpose instrument capable of capturing the
imagination of students and motivating them in new and diverse ways. As an
introduction, students observe demonstrations illustrating molecular behavior
and are then guided through personal use of GC/MS in structure determination in
the organic laboratory. In advanced laboratories, they study gas phase reactions
and learn how to do more complex trace analyses and discover more about the
power of the computer system. Finally, they have an opportunity to discover the
value of GC/MS as a research tool and learn to appreciate its role in the
undergraduate laboratory. The department sees a GC/MS system as an instrument
well suited to motivating students to pursue a career in chemistry and as a tool
that provides them with many skills they need to succeed in either industry or
academia once they graduate.