* 9650619
* Modern Steady-State and Time-Resolved Flourescence in the   Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Steven Gravelle, Saint Vincent College
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 38,055.00

Through acquisition of a fluorimeter and a pulsed laser fluorescence system,
this project incorporates fluorescence and time-resolved pulsed laser
spectroscopy experiments into six laboratory courses in the Chemistry
Department. Until now, the department has lacked equipment for introducing
students to laser-based or fluorescence spectroscopy techniques that have become
increasingly important in the undergraduate curriculum. The objectives of the
sequence of experiments in this project are to introduce students to important
concepts in steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy and to
provide students with firsthand experience with corresponding applications in
diverse areas of chemistry. To achieve these objectives, the project
incorporates fluorescence and time-resolved laser spectroscopy into courses
spanning the curriculum in quantitative analysis, in biochemistry, and in the
advanced integrated chemistry laboratory. The topics of new or modified
experiments to be introduced through the project are Ca2+ ion determination,
chymotrypsin denaturation, introduction to ELISA, ethidium bromide binding,
static versus dynamic quenching, time-resolved fluorescence of aromatic
compounds in water, fluorescence control in zeolites, and luminescence decay
rates of Eu3+. Because each of the chemistry degree programs (chemistry,
biochemistry, and environmental science) requires students to take several of
the courses involving these experiments, all majors are able to develop a solid
understanding of fluorescence spectroscopy. Information and laboratory materials
generated by the proposed experiments can be presented at professional meetings.
Precollege teachers have access to the planned experiments through workshops and
curriculum projects of the Saint Vincent College Teacher Enhancement Institute
and the BRIDGES Project.