* 9650191
* High-Performance Liquid Chromatography in the Analytical andOrganic Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* William Grossman, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Grushow
* 12/31/1998
* USD 84,459.00

Chromatographic separation methods are of enormous importance in analytical and
synthetic chemistry. Students who will be employed as chemists or biochemists
often find that knowledge of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is a
condition for employment. Science students have not previously had the
opportunity to use HPLC equipment in their undergraduate chemistry labs. The
objective of this project is to give students that opportunity. The plan is to
introduce experiments that permit students extended use of state-of-the-art
liquid chromatographs. Preprofessional students, as well as Chemistry and
Biology majors, have access to these instruments. The availability of powerful
separation techniques makes it possible to analyze more fully the results of
syntheses in Organic Chemistry courses. This improves their pedagogical value
and broadens the range of systems that can be studied. Students in Analytical
Chemistry courses learn the capabilities and limitations of HPLC-based analyses
and are able to compare HPLC methods with others. Their experience of analytical
methodologies and modern equipment is being substantially extended. Separations
are a major area of chemistry, and separations data are important components of
regulatory and public health decisions. Adoption of the materials developed in
the project may result in students who have a more realistic idea of modern
chemistry and who are better prepared for graduate training or available jobs in
chemistry. Those who go on to teach could be better able to convey to their
students the impact of chemistry on their lives.