* 9650222
* Acquisition of Updated Equipment for an Integrated Cell and Molecular Biology Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* James Garey, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 04/30/1998
* USD 33,627.00

Until recently, the upper-level Biology core curriculum consisted of four
separate lecture courses in Cell Chemistry, Cell Biology, Genetics, and
Developmental Biology, along with their associated laboratories. This strategy
for laboratory experience was expensive in terms of faculty time, was redundant
in terms of course content, and did not provide students with an adequate view
of the integrated nature of cellular, molecular, and developmental biology. The
department has since replaced the four separate (1-credit) laboratories with an
integrated 2-semester (4-credit) laboratory sequence. All Biology majors enroll
in Lab I: Experimental Biology, where they learn basic biotechnological methods.
They then have the choice of enrolling in one of three second-level labs where
they use the techniques learned in Lab I to carry out investigations in an area
of their interest. The Department of Biological Sciences has purchased equipment
and supplies to establish and upgrade the microscopy, computing, and
spectrophotometry resources available. As a result, students are able to get
hands-on laboratory experience with equipment that accurately reflects present-
day scientific investigation. All of the protocols and reagents developed in
these labs are being made available for distribution to colleagues at other
institutions. In addition, the students, as part of their second semester
projects, post summaries of their project results on the World Wide Web page
established for this course. Students are encouraged to further their research
experiences, as they have in the past, through summer projects in individual
investigator's laboratories.