* 9650645
* Mathematics and Statistics Computer Classroom
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* I-Lok Chang, American University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/1999
* USD 23,680.00

This project is developing a computer classroom in which mathematics and
statistics classes meet to use interactive computer activities. The laboratory
has three main objectives: (1) to increase the accessibility of computer
classroom time for computer activities that are in current use, (2) to meet the
increasing demands of mathematics and statistics instructors for facilities to
offer these kinds of activities in their courses, and (3) to promote the use of
new software technology to acquire, modify, and refine existing activities and
to create new activities for mathematics and statistics classes. The third of
these is focusing on newly available software called Mathwright. This is an
authoring tool for highly developed windows style interactive lessons called
workbooks. Mathwright workbooks feature high quality graphics, animation, sound,
data entry and manipulation, and symbolic operations in a point and click
setting. Mathwright enables the teacher to create these workbooks using an
interactive composition facility. The project is providing a development site
for these workbooks, holding a faculty workshop on Mathwright software, and
providing a laboratory assistant trained to use Mathwright and to retrieve
Mathwright activities from the national library. They are also holding a local
conference to demonstrate our Mathwright creations for faculty from other
institutions.