* 9650167
* A Microcomputer Laboratory for Facilitating Undergraduate   Psychology Students' Research Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Thomas Green, Elon University
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 06/30/1998
* USD 28,000.00

The Psychology Department is currently in the second year of implementation of
a new 4-hour curriculum aimed at facilitating student understanding of the
research-based, scientific nature of psychology through the inclusion of an
experiential laboratory component in all psychology courses. Although the
students are currently able to learn basic research design and methodology, they
are not being provided the opportunity to learn computer-assisted methodologies,
which are central to the areas of learning, memory, perception, and cognition.
Consequently, this project provides equipment and software for a microcomputer
laboratory that can be used by students to design and conduct original and
replication research in these, as well as other areas. The project provides for
21 personal computers installed with a variety of software and connected to a
laser printer, the college's mainframe computer, and its Novell network. In
conducting research projects, students use the equipment to access the mainframe
computer for literature searches (campus holdings and Internet sources), design
and conduct experiments (using MEL and Conduit software), perform statistical
analyses (using SPSSX on the mainframe computer), and write research reports
(using Microsoft Word on the Novell network). In conjunction with these
traditionally sound methods utilizing on-campus research participants, the
students can use the equipment to involve other college students in active
research participation and exchange of ideas over the World Wide Web (WWW), as
well as involving local high school students by on-site participation.
Evaluation of project benefits involve comparisons of students' scores on the
ETS Major Field Achievement Test and the number of student presentations and
publications before and after project implementation. Empirical results of this
project can be communicated by undergraduate student presentation and
publication of their research findings, as well as through electronic
dissemination over the WWW. Pedagogical results can be communicated through
faculty publications and presentations and departmentally sponsored yearly
workshops in which area college and high school faculty participate.