* 9650091
* Computer Simulations Versus Real Experiments in a Portable  Engineering Mechanics Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Richard Behr, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 07/31/1999
* USD 252,046.00

Laboratory instruction is under siege because space, capital equipment funds,
and faculty time are all in short supply. In response, computer simulations
commonly replace hands-on laboratory experiences. Computer simulations are
powerful tools, but they must be linked directly to physical phenomena if they
are to teach the physical realities of engineering. The purpose of this project
is to develop simulation software and matched experiments that will enable
students of statics and mechanics of materials courses to conduct side-by-side,
real time comparisons of Analytical and Experimental results of small-scale
model tests in a portable, PC-controlled laboratory called "ANNEX." ANEX has
been developed and implemented successfully in junior-level structural analysis
courses at UMR and the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor. Newly developed
software and matched experiments (called "MECH-ANEX") will extend ANEX to
address a broader audience of lower-division undergraduates, thus increasing the
utility of ANEX stations and the probability that ANEX will make a national
impact on undergraduate laboratory instruction. MECH-ANEX software will include
lecture reinforcement and case study modules tailored to several engineering
disciplines that typically require statics and mechanics of materials courses in
their curricula. In addition, a complete set of matched, bench-scale experiments
will be developed. MECH-ANEX will be integrated into the UMR curriculum,
assessed over a multi-semester trial period, and presented in a series of
national seminars and workshops. This project will produce an innovative model
for lecture and laboratory integration with potential applications across the
engineering and science disciplines.