* 9650105
* The Generation and Analysis of Genetic DNA Sequence         Information in the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* James Johnson, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 25,750.00

This project concerns the acquisition of a safe, reliable, and cost-effective
DNA sequencing instrument that can be used in undergraduate education and
research. The evolving biotechnology curriculum in the Department of Biological
Sciences has three components: recombinant DNA techniques, the generation of
genetic sequence information, and the analysis and manipulation of genetic
information. The project focuses on meeting the instrumentation needs of the
second component by obtaining a fluorescent-based DNA sequencer that uses a new
capillary matrix electrophoresis technology. This instrument meets all of the
project's requirements in being safe (no radioactive nucleotides and no
acrylamide gels), reliable (fluorescent nucleotide chemistry is a standard
technology in the genome projects), and cost-effective (DNA sequencing reactions
are performed using a polymerase chain reaction sequencing kit at a cost of
about $5 per reaction). All biology undergraduate students can learn how
biotechnology is performed by gaining hands-on experience in structured required
laboratory class exercises and in doing independent, faculty-sponsored research
projects. For students to prepare for the careers of the future and for their
taking on leadership roles after graduation, it is imperative that undergraduate
students majoring in biology have a firm understanding of what biotechnology is
and how this discipline is affecting science and society.