* 9650033
* High-Field Multinuclear NMR In Undergraduate Education at   Washington and Lee University
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Steven Desjardins, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 05/31/1998
* USD 99,500.00

This project supports development of a series of undergraduate experiments
involving high-field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). These new experiments are
being employed throughout the curriculum, ranging from general chemistry to
undergraduate research. Many of the experiments are designed to make links
between courses. For example, in collaboration with the Waymouth group at
Stanford, a suite of experiments for undergraduates involving new oscillating
Ziegler-Natta polymerization catalysts is being implemented. This experiment
begins in organic chemistry with the synthesis of ligands and concludes in
inorganic chemistry with the synthesis of the catalyst and the study of the
polymerization process. Similarly, cross-disciplinary experiments are being
developed involving porphyrin synthesis, spectroscopic characterization, and
metallation. Routine use of 1H NMR becomes possible in the large organic class,
and regular use of 13C NMR and two-dimensional NMR techniques is possible in the
spectroscopy class. Pre-existing undergraduate research programs in synthesis,
catalysis, and protein structure can flourish with the acquisition of the new
high-field NMR, and new research initiatives in polymer chemistry are being made
possible. The new experiments currently under development, as well as those
being planned, can be disseminated in the educational literature as laboratory
manuals and journal articles, as well as presented at conferences. Research
results may generate both student and faculty presentations at conferences and
scholarly papers in the chemical literature.