* 9650748
* 3-D Visualization in a Computer-Mediated Design and         Communicational Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Barry Jackson, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 12/31/1998
* USD 43,595.00

This project addresses improving students' ability in three-dimensional (3D)
visualization in courses now under development. Courseware for these courses has
application in multiple disciplines and as such enhances the possibilities for
student and faculty cross-discipline interaction and collaboration involving
Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Architecture, Economics, and
Interactive Media Technology. The focus of the project is the creation of a
completely computer mediated environment, where students can work on their
designs and problems, communicate with each other and others more distant, and
receive courseware at the workstation. The innovative aspect of this project is
that it is interdisciplinary and that it is being designed from the beginning in
a comprehensive manner to provide the format for the perpetuation, replication,
and dissemination of the project in a continually upgradeable hypertext format
that allows for the combination of Distance Learning and Internet browsing.
Computer-based tools are being used to provide conceptual organization and
structure to laboratory work and to establish unbreakable links between the
lectures and the laboratory. The major equipment being used to nourish the
growing use of visualization and analysis software in the laboratory includes
four high-speed graphic workstations, a software and hardware system that links
computer monitors in the teaching environment, and one video production
workstation with supporting peripherals. The increased scope of 3D visualization
in the interdisciplinary courses made possible by the equipment in this project
will serve as the catalyst for increasing the scope and effectiveness of 3D
visualization in other disciplines as well.