* 9650128
* Mathematica Laboratory for Upper-Level Science and          Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Sheryl Gracewski, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 06/30/1998
* USD 31,089.00

In the past 6 years, the Department of Mechanical Engineering has developed a
set of six upper-division undergraduate courses in applied mathematics. These
courses combine training in traditional mathematics with strong and frequent
connections to engineering and scientific problems. The courses meet a major
need and have grown to a combined yearly enrollment of about 265 students. They
are taken to satisfy degree requirements in Mechanical Engineering,
Geomechanics, Physics, and Optics and as electives for some majors in Electrical
Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and Mathematics. The objective of this
project is to add a Mathematica Computational Laboratory to all of these
courses. This laboratory can also be used in the Mechanical Systems course and
other traditional engineering courses that feature a strong mathematical
component. The numerical and graphical capabilities in Mathematica allow for the
weekly assigning of more interesting problems and more realistic term projects.
The symbolic capabilities of Mathematica allow extensions of traditional
analytical techniques. The notebook interface makes it possible to supply each
group of students with material of exactly the right level. Beginning students
can simply execute notebooks with various parameter choices, whereas more
advanced students can be asked to extend the given notebooks to handle more
complex problems. This Mathematica Laboratory can be used by several hundred
students a year. These students can gain greater insight into the use of
mathematics in visualizing and analyzing physical processes. The students can
also acquire skills in Mathematica, a mode of computing now essential in science
and engineering.