* 9650056
* Linking Mathematics and Physics With Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Marie Baehr, Elmhurst University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/1998
* USD 25,862.00

The Elmhurst College Mathematics and Physics departments plan to develop a small
computer laboratory dedicated to assisting students with learning the
mathematics and physical concepts in two courses: Electricity and Magnetism in
physics and Applied Analysis in mathematics. The courses will be linked through
the use of similar teaching styles and close cooperation between the two faculty
members, including attendance in each other's classes, planning meetings for the
two courses, and mutually developed student projects for both courses. The
emphasis on technology-based projects in each course will reinforce concepts,
allow for exploration and discovery, increase analytic and communication skills,
and break down the perception that physics and mathematics are unrelated
disciplines. Elmhurst College has been a leader in the use of projects and
technology in both the physics and mathematics classrooms. The mathematics
department has used computer algebra systems, spreadsheets, graphing
calculators, and other course specific software in all of its major courses.
Since 1989, the physics department has used computers in its laboratories for
acquiring data, building models, and analyzing collected data. Both of the
departments wish to expand their programs with added technological and
pedagogical links between the two departments, thus building upon each other's
strengths. The technological link will be a small laboratory consisting of five
networked, 120 MHz Pentium based workstations, a file server, a printer, a
classroom computer with a display system, two instructors' workstations, and
supporting software. The two instructors will accomplish the pedagogical link
through summer development and concurrent sabbaticals which will be partially
used for project development. Both departments see this as a natural step toward
further strengthening their technological foundations.