* 9650557
* Improvement of Field and Laboratory Instrumentation for     Environmental Hydrogeology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Marek Zreda, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 07/31/2000
* USD 50,000.00

Undergraduate environmental education for students majoring in hydrology, other
environmental science and engineering disciplines should be centered around
practical applications. Students must understand the critical scientific and
engineering issues and become proficient in solving multidisciplinary problems
using high-technology tools. The department is significantly improving existing
field and analytical facilities to provide such tools to undergraduate students
from several departments. Faculty have taught undergraduate environmental
courses with laboratory components, in which the practical aspects of
environmental science and engineering were emphasized. This project provides for
the field equipment needed to improve the current disciplinary laboratory
courses and to initiate new multidisciplinary courses that aim to develop in
students the ability to integrate knowledge across traditional disciplines. The
facility consists of a field site equipped with pumping/injecting wells,
monitoring wells, and related monitoring equipment such as pressure transducers,
a time domain reflectometry unit, tensiometers, suction lysimeters, a Wellmac
logging system, and combination gamma/resistivity/temperature probe. Field
experiments deal with water flow, water resources evaluation, water chemistry
and quality, and geophysical methods. The following courses are using the field
and laboratory facilities: hydrogeology, subsurface hydrology, water chemistry,
vadose zone monitoring methods, vadose zone hydrology, groundwater resources
evaluation, well logging, and environmental monitoring.