* 9651215
* Non-Destructive Testing and Instrumentation in a Concrete   Lab
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Amir Mirmiran, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 07/31/1998
* USD 13,390.00

The focus of this project is to improve the quality of undergraduate concrete
education by enhancing the concrete laboratory to include new modules for Non-
Destructive Testing (NDT) and Instrumentation. Concrete is the material of
choice for most construction projects in Florida, and students too, often choose
concrete courses over similar steel design courses. However, without a complete
laboratory and field experience, students can not fully appreciate various
aspects of design and construction with a heterogeneous material such as
concrete. With the growing state of deterioration of the nation's
infrastructure, the necessity for including NDT techniques and field
instrumentation in civil engineering curriculum has become more apparent than
ever before. The undergraduate program at UCF includes two 3-credit concrete
courses; Reinf. Concr. Struct., and Concr. Design, with the second course
emphasizing on an actual design project. A two-semester laboratory is developed
to parallel the lectures within these courses. The laboratory experiments will
include pull-out tests, rebound methods, probe techniques, bond strength mapping
reinforcement topology in concrete, measurement of corrosion activity in
reinforcement, detection of various forms of flaws in concrete, resonant
frequency method, impulse radar technique, ultrasonic methods, maturity
functions, acoustic emission, and instrumentation of concrete members. It is
believed that the new laboratory will significantly increase student's interest
in, and learning from, the concrete coursework. Approximately, 100 students per
year will have the opportunity to learn state-of-the-art NDT and instrumentation
techniques for concrete in a hands-on laboratory and field experience. UCF has a
track record on research in NDT, and the proposed improvements will allow the
transfer of knowledge to undergraduate students. UCF is committed to provide:
(1) 100% matching funds for acquiring the equipment, (2) continued support for
upgrading and mainta ining equipment on a regular basis, and (3) assigning
specialized technician to take care of acquired equipment.