* 9651374
* Graphical and Qualitative Investigations In Multivariable   Calculus, Linear Algebra, and Differential Equations
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* David Arnold, College of the Redwoods
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/1998
* USD 35,898.00

The purpose of this project is to change the mode of instruction in
multivariable calculus, linear algebra, and differential equations. Currently,
these courses are taught using the traditional lecture format. Although
applications are often cited, students have very little hands-on experience with
real-world applications. By using only traditional pencil and paper methods to
solve equations, students experience minimal insight into the graphical and
qualitative nature of solutions. Changes in technology over the past 10 years
have opened new and exciting doors in the field of mathematics education. New
graphing technology allows huge amounts of information to be assimilated in a
matter of seconds by examining the graph of a solution. The graphs of solutions
provide compelling visual evidence of theoretical deductions as well as an
understanding of the qualitative properties of solutions. The hardware and
software utilized in this project support the development and implementation of
classroom demonstrations and interactive lesson plans that encourage students to
take a more active role in their education. Laboratory activities make use of
the Matlab software package. Experiments using the Calculator Based Laboratory
units from Texas Instruments enable students to observe how physical systems are
modeled by differential equations. All developed materials are shared with
colleagues as they develop by posting them on the college's home page on the
World Wide Web. This project is significant because it can dramatically change
the way college-level mathematics courses are taught. The new curriculum can
generate both enthusiasm and a better understanding of these subjects, resulting
in increased retention and enrollment.