* 9651355
* Geographic Information Systems Laboratory for Undergraduate Instruction and Research
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Scott Linneman, Lewis-Clark State College
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 06/30/1998
* USD 16,812.00

This project is improving the education of undergraduate students by adding a
fully functional geographic information systems (GIS) laboratory facility. The
improvements are being made by purchasing computer hardware and software and
placing them under the administration of a GIS professional. These facilities
integrate and complement the already well-developed technological infrastructure
of the college. This college is charged by the state of Idaho to provide
education and training that is relevant to the economic situation of North Idaho
and that is accessible to nontraditional students. These students include Native
Americans, single parents, displaced workers, first-generation college students,
and people who can only attend school at places or times not served by other
institutions. The economy of North Idaho relies on natural-resource industries
including agriculture, forest products, and minerals, and the government
agencies that oversee them. All of these employers rely heavily on spatial data
in their decision-making. All natural-science students currently receive
technology-based, field-oriented instruction. Formalizing the manipulation and
analysis of spatial data in the context of GIS is a logical complement to this
educational philosophy. The GIS lab enables the college to offer formal courses
in GIS, to use GIS in other courses across many disciplines, to incorporate GIS
into student research projects, and to engage students in professional GIS
activities. All of these benefits are available not only to students on campus,
but also to the place- and time-bound students served by the college's distance
education projects. The GIS facility itself will add data-serving capacity to
the college's existing network infrastructure. Education incorporating GIS is
inherently interdisciplinary, exposes students to real-world problems, actively
involves them in learning, and exposes them to technology that is used by the
major employers of the region.