* 9651038
* Development of Curricular Tools for Quantitative            Estimation in Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Bruce Emerson, Central Oregon Community College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/1998
* USD 19,872.00

This project uses equipment to address a curricular need that exists in this
department and in physics programs nationwide. One of the express goals of
introductory physics courses is to prepare students to apply physics to the
world around them. Students should be capable of thoughtfully performing back-
of-the-envelope calculations to reach valid conclusions about physics as it is
observed. Rarely, if ever, do teachers validate this skill by testing students.
The outcomes of those tests that have been employed are disappointing.
Therefore, this department is developing methods to ensure greater student skill
in these estimation processes. If students are going to learn to make valid
estimations, they need to practice. It is crucial that they have quick feedback
about the accuracy of their estimates. To this end, eight computer-based data
acquisition systems are being used along with suitable probes and modeling
software. Together with structured learning activities, this hardware provides
the immediate feedback that is needed to develop student skills in estimation.
Simple modeling exercises enable the students to discover which aspects of the
problem are most critical. Because of the growing numbers of physics classes
with access to microcomputer based labs (MBL), the tools and resources developed
are easily transportable to schools nationwide.