* 9651412
* Increasing Curricula Content Through "Lecture-Laboratory"   Experiments
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* William Thomson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1998
* USD 27,915.00

This project answers the question, How can additional material be added to the
undergraduate curricula without the addition or subtraction of courses? The
thesis is that the inclusion of lecture-laboratories is one way of accomplishing
this goal. To evaluate this thesis, the project teaches catalysis at more than a
cursory degree at the undergraduate level by including a related set of
laboratory-based homework assignments as part of the senior-level chemical
engineering kinetics course. However, for this goal to be achieved, it is
absolutely necessary that the laboratory apparatus be user-friendly, have the
capability of demonstrating the important concepts in catalysis, and be
compatible with short, focused assignments. All of these attributes are features
of the compact, flexible apparatus being used here. Not only can students be
exposed to basic catalysis background in the lecture-laboratories, but the
equipment is also totally compatible with the open-ended 6- to 8-week laboratory
assignments that characterize the Unit Operations Laboratory course. This
project serves as a potential model for addressing similar problems in other
engineering disciplines. Finally, it should be pointed out that this particular
project is totally compatible with the recent commitment on the part of the
Chemical Engineering Department to totally rethink and refurbish its
undergraduate laboratories.