* 9651404
* Capstone Courses and Projects in Applied Mathematics and    Statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Bonnie Ray, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 06/30/1999
* USD 28,724.00

This project addresses the establishment of an undergraduate computational
laboratory, which also contains facilities for performing simple physical
experiments, in the mathematics department. The laboratory is used in the
development and implementation of capstone courses and projects for
undergraduate applied mathematics and statistics majors. These courses and
projects help students learn to combine experimental methods, mathematical and
statistical modeling techniques, mathematical analysis, and computational skills
to study physical problems and processes. The project provides students the
experience of integrating different areas of their education in order to develop
the technological and critical-thinking skills necessary in today's workplace.
The courses, one in Applied Mathematics and one in Statistics, are implemented
using lectures, physical experimentation, data collection, and computer
laboratory sessions. Case studies are used during the first semester. This
course is followed by a second semester of faculty-guided student research
projects. The students learn to model real-world processes and to analyze the
models by implementing available computational algorithms and making necessary
modifications to them. They are also required to communicate project results
orally and in writing. The undergraduate lab is administered as an extension of
an existing faculty and graduate student computer lab, which allows graduate
students to serve as mentors for undergraduates. The case studies and student
projects developed for the course can be made available to other universities
(via the World Wide Web) that have expressed interest in the project and can be
presented at appropriate conferences. The capstone courses and projects can
significantly strengthen the undergraduate mathematics program by improving
students' critical thinking, analysis, and synthesis skills and by better
preparing students to enter industrial, government, or graduate research
environments.