* 9651084
* Instrumentation Stations for Integrated Engineering         Fundamentals and Design Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Aaron Collins, Mercer University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,117.00

This university's innovative engineering design thread, which begins with a
freshman design project and culminates with an interdisciplinary senior capstone
design project of some significance, is one of the stronger such design
sequences. Unfortunately, the capabilities of the laboratories have not been
sufficient to properly support the program. As part of a comprehensive
curriculum upgrade opportunity, this project further strengthens the
curriculum's strongest component. All freshmen are being introduced to virtual
instruments and to measurements concepts, an idea not achievable with discrete
instruments. All sophomores take a broad sophomore instrumentation laboratory
based on the same software with extended hardware capabilities. Statistical
analysis of data, sampling for quality control, transient capture, frequency
domain analysis, and filtering of data are all components of this laboratory.
The broad coverage of instrumentation concepts is made possible by the
participation of faculty from all engineering departments. Finally, junior and
senior laboratories gain similar data acquisition and processing capability,
which students should already know how to use, and students in (required) senior
capstone design projects are given access to the automated data acquisition
hardware and software which they have been using for 4 years. The 4-year design
sequence, which terminates in an interdisciplinary senior capstone design
project, is already out in front of the ABET 2000 proposed design criterion.
With the new laboratory support, it could well serve as a model program for the
new team-based, interdisciplinary, 4-year design experience being proposed by
ABET. The participating faculty can perform longitudinal evaluation of the
project.