* 9651245
* Development of Hands-on Student Experiments to Use ICP-AES  in the Analysis of Real Samples
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1998
* James Ingle, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 11/30/1998
* USD 44,900.00

This department is developing several new experiments in modern inductively
coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) with an aim to motivating
and inspiring curiosity in undergraduate students enrolled in two analytical
service courses, quantitative and instrumental analysis for nonmajors and in the
Integrated Laboratory program for chemistry majors. Students are learing first-
hand how to prepare real samples by microwave digestion and the power of
quantitative multi-elemental analysis for all important metals. Since the advent
of the first commercial ICP in 1975, the spectrometer has experienced a redesign
and growth due to the use of composite materials instead of steel to make the
spectrometer lighter, microcomputers to control the instrument and display
results for multi-element analysis, and the use of a solid-state radio frequency
generator to produce an Argon atom plasma that can reach 6,000 to 9,000 degrees,
a temperature sufficient to atomize and excite significant emission from almost
any element. There are several new generation spectrometers that are appropriate
for use in the undergraduate teaching laboratory. Since fast sequential
detection of 10 to 20 elements is possible, the technique is very well suited to
the analysis of major, minor, and trace constituents found in real but complex
environmental samples such as rocks and soil, foods and biologicals water, and
air.