* 9651124
* Enhancing Student Chemistry Learning by Changing Instructionand Assessment Practices:  A Proposal for a Computer        Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Howard Williams, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 40,831.00

A computer laboratory is being developed for interactive pre- and post-chemistry
laboratory assessment and instruction of students in general and organic
chemistry, and to provide computer laboratory teaching experiences for
preservice high school chemistry teachers. The computer laboratory enables
teachers to reinforce learning by showing students how "wet" laboratory
experiences can be integrated with lecture ideas in terms of concepts being
covered and laboratory skills being practiced. Quicktime movies allow
presentation of, and questioning about, reactions that are too dangerous to have
students do in the laboratory. Students view, and are quizzed on, Quicktime
video clips on safe use of laboratory equipment. For prelaboratory instruction,
the computer environment provides an opportunity for students to take part in
interactive questioning to determine whether they have the knowledge needed to
complete the laboratory successfully. The "wet" laboratory environment is an
important part of chemistry that is not to be replaced by computer facilities.
Students are using calculator interfaced laboratory methods of acquiring and
analyzing data from "wet" lab experiments as a part of this project. The
postlaboratory computer lab can be a place for students to be assessed on their
learning of the laboratory material, to extend their learning, and to be guided
by further work if deficiencies are revealed. The facility also provides
preservice teachers an avenue for developing and using instructional and
assessment materials to facilitate chemistry learning. The 2-year implementation
period includes both formative and summative evaluations that enhance
instruction and quizzing practices used in the project. Materials from the
project are being made available to others through computers (World Wide Web),
workshops, and print.