* 9651347
* Developing Mobile and Industrial Electrohydraulic and       Electropneumatic Technical Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Robert Vogt, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 12/31/1998
* USD 71,454.00

Competencies in the areas of fluid power, electrical, and electronic systems and
controls are essential for technicians' understanding of manufacturing processes
and other dynamic industries including transportation, construction,
agriculture, power generation, and petrochemical. The artificial separation of
electrical/electronic and fluid power systems curricula does not adequately
prepare students to design, troubleshoot, repair, and service electrohydraulic
and electropneumatic systems. This project integrates the electrical/electronics
and fluid power technical curricula to foster synthesis of the knowledge and
produce graduates with necessary skills and competencies. The goal of this
project is to develop mobile and industrial electrohydraulic and
electropneumatic technical education to produce more broadly-trained and
competent technicians, as well as increase the knowledge of the incumbent
workforce and technology teachers with an emphasis on experiential learning
using state-of-the-art technology. The curricula will be redesigned to integrate
these disciplines into four courses with a team teaching approach for students
majoring in electrical and electronics technology, heavy equipment and vehicles,
air conditioning and refrigeration technology, engineering graphics technology,
and manufacturing technology at OSU-Okmulgee. The key to teaching this
interdisciplinary technical curriculum is a unique hydraulic and electronic
trainer which permits experiential learning opportunities in laboratory
exercises. This project will serve many non-traditional students: the campus'
average student age is 26.9 years and the racial distribution is more diverse
than the state population. Curriculum developed for this project will be
produced on multi-media and packaged for distance learning applications for the
incumbent workforce. Results of this project will be disseminated to academic
and fluid power professional associations, through the Internet, and on an
electronic bulletin board.