* 9651311
* Improvement of Undergraduate Molecular Biology Laboratory   Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Craig VanBell, Edinboro University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 20,579.00

The primary objective of the Molecular Phylogeny project is to introduce a
unifying concept into several courses in the curriculum. It is inculcating a
thorough understanding of evolutionary concepts by complementing traditional
teaching styles, concepts, and materials with modern approaches, including
discovery-based learning, modern phylogenetic approaches, and the materials and
methods used by scientists in the field. Instruction in molecular evolution and
phylogenetic analysis begins in the freshman course with a discovery-based
exercise on the classification and evolution of organisms. Students are given
the 5S rRNA sequences of several invertebrates, asked to make pairwise
comparisons between species, and asked to construct plausible evolutionary
trees. Discordance between morphological- and molecular-based phylogenies are
discussed. In this exercise, students develop an intuitive grasp of the
principles of molecular phylogeny that will be studied in detail in later
courses. As a follow-up to this exercise and a prerequisite to subsequent
studies, students are given an introduction to molecular biology databases and
software on the Internet. Specifically, they are directed to the NIH and EMBL,
the Ribosomal Database Project, and the CLUSTALW and PHYLIP programs. Homework
assignments involve searching and aligning selected 5.8S rRNA and short
polypeptide sequences. In Botany, students explore the relationships among
nonvascular and vascular plants using small and large subunit rRNAs and rbcL
sequences. They obtain sequences from the GenBank, align them using CLUSTALW,
then construct phylogenetic trees using PHYLIP. The students are guided
extensively through this exercise as they test a model of plant evolution. In
Zoology, students re-explore the relationships among phyla begun in the freshman
class, as they look in more detail at specific issues in animal evolution. In
advanced courses, the principal investigators work with the instructors to
identify discipline-specific p roblems for student exploration. Students are
encouraged to develop problems using models from the literature. Directed
research projects are becoming possible through the acquisition of DNA
sequencing equipment. Specific projects enable undergraduate students to
investigate problems in diatom, ciliate, and crustacean evolution under the
direction of experts in these areas. Results from the project can be
disseminated through the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania University Biologists, on-
line bulletin boards, and traditional education journals. Other universities
that still have a traditional organismic bias to their freshman and sophomore
curricula can make the transition to a concept-based curriculum more smoothly if
they proceed as this project.