* 9651224
* Development of Integrated Laboratories in Geography
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Sanjoy Chakravorty, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/1999
* USD 30,386.00

This proposal for the "development of integrated laboratories in geography"
seeks $ 60,772 (from the NSF and internal resources) to establish, improve, and
integrate the laboratories in the Department of Geography and Urban Studies on
the main campus of Temple University. The goals are to (1) establish a
laboratory for Physical Geography (PGLAB), (2) improve existing laboratories for
Cartography (CARTLAB) and Geographic Information Systems (GISLAB), and (3)
integrate the three laboratories physically and through teaching and research
projects. In the three labs, students will learn the use of maps as models of
the physical and built environment, create and import digital spatial and
attribute data (through scanning, digitizing, image analysis, data conversion
routines, etc.), transform the acquired data to appropriate projections and
scales, create professional level output (in the CARTLAB), and conduct spatial
analysis using overlays (in the PGLAB and GISLAB). The MacIntosh based CARTLAB
facilities will be expanded, the 486 33 PCs currently serving the GISLAB will be
moved to the PGLAB and replaced with Pentium 133's. In addition, some data,
peripherals (for networking and data storage), and updated software licenses
will be acquired. The PGLAB will serve as the primary point of entry and
exposure to the world of digital mapping and spatial analysis through an
University-wide core course on the physical environment. Interested students
will then further specialize in mapping in the CARTLAB, and/or analysis in the
GISLAB. Eighteen courses (including seven graduate undergraduate cross-listed
courses) that will be wholly or partially taught in the labs are offered. Each
year about 200 students, including about 140 undergraduate students, will
receive training in and be familiarized with the use of computers in geography
in the three teaching labs.