* 9651195
* A Knowledge-Integrated Virtual Reality Machining            Laboratory for Innovative Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Judy Vance, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/1999
* USD 188,000.00

A common problem in teaching undergraduate manufacturing courses involving
machining is the difficulty to arrange appropriate machining experiments for a
number of possible reasons such as: limitations on laboratory facilities,
insufficient support of technicians, large size of class, limited funds for
running the costly experiments, and safety considerations. Lack of physical
understanding about the machining undermines the learning effectiveness in this
course. The goal of the proposed project is to develop a virtual reality (VR)
machining laboratory integrated with computer graphics animation, process
knowledge and predictive machining models. The specific objectives are to help
students in obtaining important hands-on" machining experience, enhance their
physical understanding of machining principles, and promote their latent
learning capability to the maximal possible extent. In such a virtual
environment, all the students have a ' one-to-one" opportunity to "physically"
operate various kinds of machines (both conventional and CNC) on their own and
observe and study the on-line simulated dynamic machining performance by
choosing different process parameters. The significance of the proposed project
is that it can be used as a national model for future machining laboratories
with the advantages of significant cost-effectiveness, knowledge-integrated
interactive learning environment, great flexibility for various machining
operations and, C-based software for easy portability. The results should be
very attractive to other colleges for setting up a similar system and should
have a significant impact on current teaching practices of manufacturing
courses. The effectiveness of the VR system at different development stages will
be evaluated through four consecutive teaching semesters of the course ME322
Manufacturing Processes (offered every semester). As a national model for future
machining laboratories, the results of the proposed project will be publicize d
through conferences, publications and the World Wide Web.