* 9651272
* Positioning and Mapping Instruments for Environmental       Science Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Donald Stierman, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 08/31/1998
* USD 13,950.00

The objective of this project is to develop applications of modern positioning
and mapping technology to environmental investigations. Approximately 120
undergraduates per year will be impacted, including multidisciplinary majors in
new environmental sciences programs as well as geology majors. Because many
students declaring these new majors express interest in ecology or hydrology,
field laboratory exercises are developed around these themes. Two new instrument
systems are requested. The Electronic Total Station system will allow
undergraduates to make maps of an appropriate scale and detail needed for many
environmental projects and to make non-intrusive measurements that locate remote
positions. Global Positioning System (GPS) techniques and applications will also
be taught, first through laboratory exercises in which GPS is the focus and
later through routine use of GPS in support of other field laboratory projects.
These laboratory exercises also introduce students to information available over
the Internet, demonstrate to students the use of computers to process and
display data, expose the students to field projects that might inspire senior
thesis ideas, and require students to apply their mathematical training as they
use geometry and trigonometry to answer questions of an ecological nature.
Undergraduates will use these instruments as appropriate in support of senior
research projects required as the capstone for the bachelor's degree in
environmental sciences. Laboratory manuals developed for use of these
instruments will be available through the WWW and results of this and of
students' projects will be reported at regional meetings of professional
societies.