* 9651207
* Development of a Digital Cartography/Remote Sensing         Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Roy Stine, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 07/31/1998
* USD 30,000.00

This project expands and develops the Cartography and Remote Sensing Laboratory.
The increased number of computers, advanced software, and peripheral equipment
allows for more hands-on experience for undergraduate students enrolled in
remote sensing, cartography, and geographic information systems (GIS) courses in
the analysis of satellite imagery, creation of spatial databases, mapping, and
the use of GIS. Rapid advances in both software and hardware have provided
students and faculty with powerful new tools to address environmental issues,
urban and regional planning problems, and the modeling of the Earth's physical
systems, as well as enabling students to work in innovative areas such as
animation and interactive mapping and to develop their knowledge of the nature
of spatial data and its presentation. Sophisticated software in remote sensing
and GIS gives students exciting tools for creating and analyzing spatial data,
for the analysis of radar imagery, for the creation of three-dimensional models,
and for the use of statistical algorithms for image classification and
enhancement. The enlargement and modernization of the laboratory not only
results in the improvement of the laboratory experience, but also enables more
students to be included in the existing courses, improves the content of the
courses, and expands the current course offerings in these areas. The impact of
the laboratory improvements on student performance, as well as satisfaction with
the program, curricular offerings, and enrollment are being carefully monitored.
Results can be presented at professional conferences and then submitted as an
article to a professional journal. The article can detail the impact of the new
equipment and software on the program and can include suggestions for the
development of similar laboratory facilities.