* 9652116
* Revitalization of Undergraduate Mathematics and Science:    A Thematic Systems Approach
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Francis Spano, Middlesex County College
* Continuing Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 09/30/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Middlesex County College proposes a radical restructuring of mathematics,
science and technology curricula for non-science majors. Numerous reports and
studies have deplored the low level of scientific and technological literacy in
our society. College students enrolled in non technical majors programs are
required to take mathematics and science courses to fulfill general education
requirement for graduation, but these courses bear no relationship to their
major program. Additionally, for the most part, the mathematics, science and
technology courses that are available to fulfill general education requirements
for majors in social science, humanities and business programs are designed to
meet the needs of the mathematics and science-based majors and are of little
interest to non-science majors. The goal of the project is to provide non-
science majors with the breadth and depth of understanding in mathematics,
science and technology to enable them to participate as informed citizens in
discussion and decisions on critical issues facing the nation. The College will
take an interdisciplinary, integrated systems approach that fosters
understanding of a variety of mathematics and science concepts in an applied
context and that is grounded in issues and problems that have a science concepts
in an applied context and that is grounded in issues and problems that have a
clear impact on the lives of students and can, thus, be seen to be relevant by
the most"unscientific". It will incorporate the integration of social science
and humanities concepts to provide a context for consideration of the social
import of the mathematics and science concepts presented. To accomplish this
goal, faculty, working in interdisciplinary teams will create, pilot-test and
implement module-based courses that incorporate instruction in mathematics,
science and technology within the context of two themes: the environment and
telecommunications. These courses will form the models to an additional four
themes tha t will be developed by the College subsequent to this project. These
integrated offerings will replace current curricula choices for non-science
majors. The restructured curricula will provide non-science majors with
opportunities for learning mathematics, science and technology that are relevant
and meaningful. As a result, students will be more likely to continue to learn
and read about current issues in which the sciences and technology play major
roles, and will be capable of making informed decisions regarding scientific and
technological questions. The College has individually, and consortium with other
institutions, participated in major mathematics and science education
initiatives to ensure that both students enrolling in programs and those
graduating, have the knowledge and technical skills necessary for successful
employment and further education. This project is an extension of those efforts