* 9652888
* Creating a Modern Physics Course:  Visualization and        Computation for Undergraduate Physics Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1997,07/31/2001
* Dean Zollman, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2001
* USD 314,600.00

Science and engineering majors first encounter a serious study of Twentieth
Century physics, frequently called Modern Physics, in their third semester. The
Modern Physics course has a unique role in the education of future scientists
and engineers. Physics students begin their study of topics of interest to
contemporary physicists; engineering and other science majors have their only
opportunity to study physics related to micro-and nano-technology - areas which
will be of importance to their careers. Yet, the present course has changed
little to reflect knowledge about student learning, computational technology, or
recent research advances in fundamental quantum physics. We are building on
existing work (primarily Visual Quantum Mechanics) to create a new Modern
Physics course. This modern Modern Physics course will utilize contemporary
teaching-learning methods which are based on research into how students learn
physics, computational and visualization techniques, and recent fundamental
research results. Included in the materials to be developed are tools which will
help students visualize the concepts of quantum physics, simple hands-on
activities, and templates for computational tools. Many of these materials will
be expansions of Visual Quantum Mechanics materials. By beginning with these
existing quantum teaching-learning materials the project will be able to
complete this effort at a relatively low cost. The project will receive advice
and direction from an advisory committee whose members have been selected for
their knowledge and previous work in teaching modern physics. Before the
materials are released for commercial distribution extensive testing will be
completed by field testers who will use the materials in classes throughout the
country. The result will be a set of modern learning materials which provide the
opportunity for science and engineering students to learn about contemporary
physics.