* 9652784
* Connections: Integrating Mathematics and Science General    Education Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Edward Hansen, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 11/30/2000
* USD 172,168.00

This project is for the development of an integrated, mathematics/science,
general education, two-course sequence. This sequence is aimed at that large
group of students who encounter mathematics and science courses as part of their
general education requirements, but all too often find these courses neither
engaging nor relevant to their course work or their life outside of academia.
The mathematics course Mathematics in Public Discourse will focus on the skills
needed to critically interpret the type of mathematical and scientific
information commonly found in public discourse and positions of leadership or
responsibility. Students will be able to pair this course with one of two
science courses: either The Atmosphere and Environmental Change or Biological
Resources and Environmental Change. The science courses will build on and expand
the skills introduced in the mathematics course. All of the courses will use the
same mathematical material (simple functions, interpretation of graphs, basic
statistics), pedagogical techniques (class discussion, collaborative learning,
investigative laboratories) and technology (graphing calculators). Problems and
examples will be taken from sources, such as newspaper articles and company
reports, that are encountered outside of academia. Two mathematicians and two
scientists from Hope College will work on teams to develop, pilot and revise
these courses. In order to test the transferability of the model of paired
science/mathematics courses, two Kalamazoo College faculty will work with the
PI's to develop courses for their institution. Both the course materials and the
model of paired mathematics/science courses will be disseminated through journal
articles, presentations, commercial publications and workshops. The development,
piloting, revisions, evaluation and dissemination of this project will occur
during a period of 31 months. The project should serve as both a local and
national model for integrating mathematics and non-mathematics courses.