* 9652855
* Optimizing a Windows-Based Computer Data Acquisition and    Reduction System for the General Chemistry Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Edward Vitz, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 12/31/1999
* USD 156,981.00

The product of this project will be a Windows-based data acquisition and
reduction system for general chemistry laboratories that is based on
inexpensive, generic hardware and standard software. The DOS-based LIMSport
system which it will succeed has been used for years in our laboratories with
success, and has been disseminated nationwide by means of seven, week-long
NSF/UFE Summer workshops. Most universities are now converting to Windows-based
software. This necessitates a revision of LIMSport, but it also offers an
opportunity for substantial improvement. Our system is unique in that it adds
data acquisition capability to the most popular spreadsheets (Excel and Lotus),
so that students learn standard, transferable methods of data analysis in the
laboratory, and teachers can use the system as an authoring language to create
their own experiments involving direct data acquisition. We will prepare
spreadsheet templates for a number of typical general chemistry experiments
which illustrate ways of using the powerful graphical and numerical methods
built into modern spreadsheets to reveal trends in real-time data as they are
collected. An extensive evaluation plan has been developed to determine which
computer methods are most effective in promoting student learning in the
laboratory. A laboratory manual will be written for the new Windows/Excel
version of LIMSport which incorporates the results of our work as well as
features suggested by the large body of research on educational chemistry
laboratories. The manual will provide background information for about 30
experiments which are suitable for General Chemistry, using the capability of
LIMSport to utilize small quantities of relatively innocuous chemicals.