* 9652823
* Multimedia Simulation Package for Teaching Manufacturing    Processes in a Virtual Environment, Phase I
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Joseph Stanislao, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2000
* USD 200,000.00

A substantial number of graduates of engineering, business, and technology
programs in the U.S. go on to jobs in the manufacturing sector. These jobs often
require the design, and/or management of complex, information-intensive
manufacturing systems. But most engineers and business majors have very little
exposure to manufacturing processes. This project will result in the first phase
of development of comprehensive simulation software for teaching operational
strategies and manufacturing processes in a virtual environment. The package
will include a graphical, animated user interface for selection and input of all
necessary variables, parameters and process control information; process models
to simulate changes in materials as they are shaped into products; and
graphical, multi-media procedures for indicating the results and providing a
platform for impact analysis on other enterprise elements such as cost and
quality. It will be used by a variety of engineering, technology, and business
students in any college or university where manufacturing process courses are
part of the curriculum. It will also be used by design/build teams for
manufacturability analysis in capstone engineering design. The system developed
will be analogous to a flight simulator for training pilots. Potential pilots
spend many hours in flight simulators "learning to fly" without burning an ounce
of fuel. Students who use this system will spend time 'learning to manufacture"
by experiencing manufacturing processes where actual costs and time demands are
usually prohibitive. Incorporating the software into the curriculum will result
in orders of magnitude improvement in the relevance of the educational
experience compared to job expectations. Experience gained by using this
software will permit newly hired engineers, technologists and future managers to
be more productive and creative in industry in a shorter period of time.