* 9652973
* TLC Design:  Integrating Team Learning, Computing, and      Design in Undergraduate Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* Hermann Gruenwald, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 02/29/2000
* USD 121,000.00

Evaluations of existing undergraduate engineering programs continually cite
three weaknesses: graduates lack technical literacy; graduates lack oral and
written communication skills; and graduates lack design experience. To address
these weaknesses, the School of Civil Engineering and Environmental Science
(CEES) at the University of Oklahoma, is proposing a systemic reform initiative
that will incorporate a single design project integrated throughout the
curriculum. The common design project, entitled "Sooner City," will be
introduced during the freshman year and continue for the entire curriculum.
Design tasks range from population estimates to the water supply system. A
common design project can unify the curriculum and allow material learned in
early courses to carry forward. Another advantage is that the students will have
a professional design portfolio that can be presented to perspective employers.
The design project will be taught using the just- in-time learning paradigm. By
focusing on real-world applications up front, students will be interested and
motivated to learn. The involved courses will be restructured to incorporate
team learning and group presentations, which enhances the students'
interpersonal and communication skills. In addition, starting in fall of 1997,
all incoming engineering freshman will have a laptop computer with wireless
communication technology so that each classroom becomes a networked computer
lab. A primary goal of the project is to produce graduates who are self-
disciplined, responsible, computer literate, and who can communicate effectively
with fellow engineers, management, and the public. It is anticipated that the
reformed curriculum can serve as a paradigm for engineering programs throughout
the country. Interactive design modules and hypertext tutorials will be
disseminated to other institutions through a CD ROM, the world wide web and
through traditional outlets such as conferences and journal articles.