* 9652950
* Scientific Imaging and Visual Expression: A New and         Powerful Approach to Learning, Teaching and Communicating   Science
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* J. Kim Vandiver, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/28/2001
* USD 235,843.00

Modern communication of scientific results makes frequent use of images and
figures, however, research scientists are rarely trained in the creation of
images and frequently give little consideration to their communicative power.
This is a proposal to develop a curriculum and methodology to make new use of
the power of imaging to communicate science and to provide a new channel for
scientific creativity. The process and the methods will change the way
undergraduates, faculty and researchers in science and engineering see and image
their work. The project is an unusual collaboration between the faculty and
staff of the MIT Edgerton Center, research scientists at MIT, Harvard, and the
Scripps Institute and a highly regarded photographer/imager of science. MIT's
Edgerton Center, which will develop the subjects and materials, has a long
tradition of scientific photography and enjoys considerable support of industry
in equipping the Center with modern image processing equipment. A sequence of
modules on various topics in image creation and visual communication will be
developed in small undergraduate seminar classes during the first year and a
half. The materials and methodologies developed in the seminars will become the
basis of working course notes/teacher's guide to be prepared in the summers and
during the fourth semester. The guide will facilitate the export of the methods
to other research universities. Workshops will be offered to introduce the
methods to teachers. The new materials and methodologies will: 1) make students
technically proficient in photographic and digital imaging and encourage a
clarity in thinking about production of figures and images; 2) teach future
scientists to communicate better the results of their work to the non-scientific
community by bringing an aesthetic component to their imaging; 3) expose
undergraduates to current research, by involving them in the process of
obtaining informational and compelling images in laboratory settings; 4) provide
opportunitie s to understand science through the imaging process; 5) introduce
faculty and students to a new way of thinking about science by the creation of
visual constructions of scientific principles; and 6) introduce the powerful
potential of the Internet to create a bi-coastal collaboration (Scripps and MIT)
in imaging science and engineering.