* 9652675
* Community and Ecosystem Dynamics of a Northern Temperate    Forest Exposed to Elevated CO2 and O3 in a FACE System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Kurt Pregitzer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 588,406.00

9652675 Karnosky The greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide (CO2) and ozone (O3), are
increasing globally and are closely tracking population growth. Little is known
about how these two gases will impact forest communities, as, until now, studies
with these gases were done in artificial environments created by exposure
chambers. In this, project we are using a state-of-the-art Free-Air Carbon
Dioxide Enrichment (FACE) facility to facilitate long-term exposures of
regenerating forest stands to elevated CO2 and O3, alone and in combination. The
facility is being constructed on United States Forest Service land near
Rhinelander, Wisconsin. A multidisciplinary team of scientists will examine
mechanisms and responses in trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides), sugar maple
(Acer saccharum) and paper birch (Betula papyrifera) in various competitive
combinations. Of particular interest are: (1) tree physiology, growth, survival,
and productivity; (2) competitive interactions among genotypes and species; (3)
tree and stand carbon and nitrogen allocation; (4) pest and stress tolerance as
regulated by foliar defense compounds; and (5) carbon and nitrogen cycling and
ecosystem carbon storage. Three replicate FACE rings are being established for a
factorial combination of treatments (control, CO2, O3, CO2, + O3) in a
randomized complete block design. Our research strategy will include parallel
experimentation and modeling. Thus, response data from these treatment
combinations will be used to parameterize and refine an existing whole-tree and
stand level process model. Our experimental design will allow us to address
specific hypotheses using species of contrasting life-histories, while also
affording the largest possible scope of inference for model parameterization.