* 9652110
* A New Integrative Model for Undergraduate Education:        Achieving General Education Through the Major
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Gerard Voland, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 08/31/1999
* USD 215,250.00

Many of the problems identified in undergraduate science education--
fragmentation of knowledge, overspecialization, inadequate emphasis on student
learning--parallel those in other disciplines. Some, such as the inability to
communicate well, result from deficiencies in what is traditionally called
`general education.` Yet the very separation of gen-ed from specialization in
the major creates fragmented learning. Nowhere is this problem more intractable
than in large universities like Northeastern University (NU), where independent
colleges offer a wide array of programs to students with differing expectations.
NU proposes a new model for undergraduate education that, by fully integrating
gen-ed and the major and placing responsibility for the former with the faculty
charged with the latter, holds transformational promise for all of undergraduate
education. Through a consultative process, the NU community has identified the
shared general education goals that will undergird the new model. Applicable to
all our programs, they include a set of skills, contexts, perspectives, and
connections, translatable by departmental faculty into field-specific
objectives. Students will achieve the goals in a cumulative manner by following
pathways designed by the major department faculty using disciplinary and liberal
arts courses, modules, and non-classroom experiences (e.g. cooperative
education). Within the project's goal and broad objectives, the principal
specific objectives for the two grant years include: 1. Launching implementation
of the new model in the Colleges of Engineering and Computer Science, the School
of Engineering Technology, and the science departments within the College of
Arts & Sciences. 2. Advancing implementation of the science-related shared goals
(information literacy, quantitative reasoning, and an understanding of the
natural world) in the non-science units. Evaluation and assessment, both of
student learning and of programmatic success have been built into the project
from the outset. Northeastern requests $200,000 over a two-year period from the
NSF to support predominantly faculty development (in competency-based education,
teaching gen-ed skills in disciplinary contexts, assessment, and the use of
interactive pedagogies) and released time/stipends for curricular modification
in the science and technology areas of the project. The model should be of
particular interest to other complex universities and NU intends to continue
sharing widely its experiences.