* 9652581
* Free-Air CO2 Enrichment of a Closed-Canopy Deciduous Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Elizabeth O'Neill, Department of Energy Oak Ridge Operations Office
* Interagency Agreement
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/2000
* USD 1,200,000.00

9652581 Norby The response of natural ecosystems to an increasing concentration
of CO2 in the atmosphere is a key component of analyses of the current and
potential impact of global change. Efforts to understand how eastern deciduous
forests will be affected by CO2 enrichment of the atmosphere have heretofore
been addressed by studying components of the forest system (individual small
trees, specific processes), but it is now time to take the critical leap to
measuring the integrated response of an intact forest ecosystem with a focus on
stand-level mechanisms. A free-air CO2 exposure (FACE) facility being assembled
on the Oak Ridge National Environmental Research Park provides a mechanism for
studying stand-level responses. The facility in a closed-canopy, 11m tall
sweetgum monoculture will expose trees continuously to CO2 concentrations 200
PPM above ambient. The scientific tasks are organized around an interconnected
set of hypotheses that address the essential features of a forest stand and how
these features could influence responses to CO2. The objectives of these tasks
are to characterize aboveground tree growth and leaf area in relation to CO2
concentration and interannual variation in other environmental factors;
determine physiological mechanisms of response, including foliar gas exchange,
plant water relations, respiration and tissue biochemistry; quantify fine root
density and turnover and other components of soil carbon cycling; quantify the
critical components of the nitrogen cycle and their response to CO2 enrichment;
and use a mechanistic, process-based, soil-plant ecosystem model to develop and
refine hypotheses of ecosystem response to elevated CO2. The results of these
analyses will be used for modeling and assessment of potential global change
impacts. The Oak Ridge FACE facility will be a user facility, open to
researchers from universities and other research laboratories who are interested
in pursuing other questions relevant to forest response to elevated C O2.