* 9652983
* A New Course: "The Social Dimensions of Science"
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Wendy Katkin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Dorothy L. Stout
* 08/31/1999
* USD 51,843.00

This proposal seeks to develop and implement an innovative, introductory-level
(second year) multidisciplinary course on The Social Dimensions of Science
geared specifically for prospective SEM researchers and teachers who have strong
science and math backgrounds. The course will be designed to accomplish two
primary objectives: 1) help students become aware that science does not occur
within a vacuum, but operates within a context that is shaped by a complex array
of factors relating to societal, cultural, political, economic and personal
aspects; and 2) provide this awareness through a curriculum that provides
traditional academic instruction and a "field experience" in which students
relate these factors to work by active scientists, as well as to the scientists'
personal experiences. The course will involve an interdisciplinary examination
of various aspects, as well as a field project in which students link the
academic content with the real, going scientific/technological practice of
scientists at Brookhaven National Laboratory. Through such linkage, they will
gain an appreciation of how science operates in a "real world" context and be
more effectively prepared for the scientific and technical environments of the
future. The Social Dimensions course seeks to address the limitations of typical
undergraduate SEM curricula, which seek primarily to impart a disciplinary-based
foundation and technical skills, but do not prepare students for the real world
in which science has a history, functions in relation to society's values and
activities, derives its support from patrons who perceive its product as
beneficial, and is carried out by individual human beings who are absorbed and
preoccupied by their work and who operate within or against socially-mediated
"paradigms." While most universities, including Stony Brook, have general
education requirements intended to broaden students' perspectives, they tend to
offer a spectrum of choices from which science students rarely find courses tha
t fill their need to understand their own discipline. The proposed course seeks
to fill this gap. The course is innovative in its establishment of partnerships
with scientists outside of the university to serve as teachers and role models.
In its emphasis on social issues, its should be especially beneficial to women
and minority members. Moreover, since all of the BNL scientists are women, the
students will gain insight into the unique position of women in SEM environments
and into ways successful women have responded or accommodated themselves to
these environments. Other related objects are: 1) to train a cadre of Stony
Brook faculty and BNL scientists in key disciplines (SEM, Philosophy, Political
Science, Sociology, History) who endorse the interdisciplinary thrust of the
proposed course, are knowledgeable of the issues being addressed by it, and are
capable and committed to teaching it; 2) to foster and facilitate ongoing
collaborative teaching and mentoring arrangements with scientists at BNL and
other regional research/development establishments in ways that use their unique
perspectives and personal histories and enrich the scientists' experiences as
well as those of the students; and 3) to create a model, using a
multidisciplinary and collaborative approach, that can be readily integrated
into the regular Stony Brook SEM curriculum and replicated or adapted for SEM
students at other universities.