* 9652787
* Undergraduate Research and Education Through Radio          Astronomy at the Haystack Observatory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,12/31/1999
* Joseph Salah, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1999
* USD 800,000.00

Undergraduate science and engineering students nationwide need the opportunity
to incorporate state-of-the-art research into their educational experiences.
This project presents a new initiative in response to a national goal of linking
science and engineering education with research. The objective is to develop a
novel center for undergraduate research and instruction at MIT's Haystack
Observatory, operated by the Northeast Radio Observatory Corporation (NEROC)--a
consortium of non-profit educational institutions. The recent growth in Internet
connectivity offers a new opportunity: to provide remote access to the 37-meter
Haystack radio telescope, one of the largest in the world, and to give students
the educational background, support, and instrumentation necessary to pursue
challenging and exciting experiments in astrophysics. These experiments will
allow students to utilize diverse concepts from physics, chemistry, mathematics,
computer science, and engineering, and learn to solve multidisciplinary
problems. A low-cost 3m-radio-telescope kit is also being developed as a
complement to observations with the 37m-telescope. Construction and operation of
this small telescope will provide students with valuable hands-on experience
with microwave and computer technology. This project provides support for the
development and implementation of an educational program that includes the
preparation of educational material, tutorials, and tools to provide students
the necessary background in radio astronomy. Support for the planning and
conduct of research projects is included. Workshops will be held for both
faculty and students. This educational program will be implemented through a
phased approach, starting with a pilot project between MIT and University of
Massachusetts, Lowell. The program will then extend to regional colleges to
further test the developed materials and techniques prior to the ultimate goal:
national access to the telescope. This program will expand research and
undergraduate education nationwide. This activity is jointly supported by the
Division of Undergraduate Education, the Division of Astronomical Sciences, and
the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.