* 9652803
* ThermoNet: Interactive Internet Resources for               Introductory Engineering Thermodynamics
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Ofodike Ezekoye, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 03/31/2000
* USD 99,832.00

Faculty from the Colleges of Engineering and Education will collaborate to
produce and evaluate interactive multimedia learning resources deliverable over
the Internet for instruction in introductory engineering thermodynamics. The
project will create two related resources: a site on the World Wide Web and a
UseNet newsgroup. Using the Web home page, students will branch from a list of
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ's) to various learning modules, each of which
will combine text and graphics to explain conceptual points that are common
points of confusion in thermodynamics. The Web site will also include a "hot
link" to the newsgroup. A moderated newsgroup will be established in which
thermodynamics students can post questions or comments and obtain help from one
another and from instructors. In addition to providing a dynamic resource of
"virtual consulting" on thermodynamics questions and problems, the newsgroup
will be a valuable source of instantaneous and continuous feedback to the
project team in identifying common points of confusion among students for
development of future learning modules. The project will build on a large
archive of video, sound, animation and still graphics of thermodynamic subject
matter which has been compiled in a previous NSF- sponsored project. Newly
developed Internet delivery tools such as Java and Shock wave will be used to
provide true interactive multimedia capabilities that have hitherto been too
cumbersome to effectively deliver on-line.