* 9652146
* The Capstone Project: An Integrated Approach to Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Robert Kimball, Wake Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 06/30/1999
* USD 199,949.00

Wake Technical Community College seeks National Science Foundation funding to
expand the capstone project currently required in three engineering technology
departments. A capstone project demonstrating student skills will help resolve
the problems of students graduating who are unable to integrate curriculum
components into the high-tech workplace. Today employers hire those capable of
assimilating their technical and general education to perform with competence in
the workplace. Expanding the project from there A. A. S. curricula to 27 A. A.
S. curricula demands revision and development of required courses to emphasize
an integrated, practical approach to learning, one in which students are active
participants in the educational process. The objective of the reform initiative
include : (a) requiring a team of students to complete an applications-oriented
capstone project, (b) integrating mathematics, engineering technology, science,
and communications skills early in their education, (c) creating a partnership
with workforce representatives to assure validity of the projects, (d)
establishing an annual Presentation Day, (e) and collaborating with other
community colleges to spread the initiative using the College's project as a
model. The reform effort will be evaluated at each stage including: instructor
evaluation of classroom performance, evaluation of each student team's written
reports, evaluation of the team presentation, assessment of the program by
graduates, and an evaluation of their training by employers. The special
features of the reform initiative include integrated, participatory approach to
education culminating in the team presentation of the capstone project to an
evaluation panel and to invited guests. Additionally, integrating curricula
early in a student's curriculum will provide a broad-based practical education.
Finally, requiring the capstone project as a culmination to the students'
education will showcase their knowledge to their peers, instructors, admin
istration, and prospective employers; it will also showcase the programs offered
at the College.