* 9652834
* Inverse Problems:  A Curricular Resource for the First Two  Years of Mathematical Science
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2002
* Charles Groetsch, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 02/28/2002
* USD 64,037.00

Curricular materials are being developed that complement mathematics courses in
the first two years at colleges and universities throughout the nation. The
unifying theme of these materials is the subject of inverse problems in the
mathematical sciences. All materials are designed to integrate scientific
knowledge with mathematical analysis and basic modeling and the units will
exploit graphing calculators and modern mathematical software when appropriate.
The aim is to provide a seamless blending of mathematical analysis and basic
physical principles. The curriculum guide has the goal of providing instructors
with tools for kindling physical intuition, fostering model building,
encouraging conjecturing, stimulating the application of basic mathematical
analysis, and generally promoting critical thinking by their students. The
courseware is classified by mathematics course level and cross-indexed by
application area and mathematical tools used. It consists of modules of related
exercises, projects, and computational experiences, all inspired by (but not
necessarily strictly limited to) inverse problems. In addition, software
programs are provided in some modules. The material will be widely disseminated
in print and electronic forms. A network of undergraduate teachers who took part
in the Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement Workshop on the Mathematics of Inverse
Problems, the regional Mathematical Association of America special session on
Inverse Problems in the Undergraduate Curriculum, or the Mathematical
Association of America's Mini-course on Inverse Problems in the Undergraduate
Classroom will form the core group for initial distribution and testing of the
materials.