* 9652145
* Liberal Education in a Technological Age: The Education of aScientifically-Literate Society
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* William Green, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 198,110.00

Recently adopted changes in the curriculum at the University of Rochester
requires every Humanities and Social Science major to take at least three
cohesively related courses in the Natural Science / Engineering / Mathematics
area (a Cluster). It presents the University with an opportunity to examine the
educational experience of non-majors in this area and to change the way the
Sciences, Engineering, and Mathematics are presented to non majors. This
proposal has brought together a cross-disciplinary group of Natural Science /
Engineering / Mathematics faculty to explore the development of a new curriculum
that can produce an institution-wide reform in undergraduate science education.
This proposal is a natural extension of significant changes in undergraduate
science education for science majors that were achieved with the introduction of
Quest Courses. The funds requested will be used to initiate similar changes in
the science curriculum for non-science majors. The courses that will be
developed as part of this program will apply an inquiry-based approach in which
students will be exposed to the scientific method. They will address the larger
view of science, by exploring what constitutes a scientific theory, by providing
students with the opportunity to engage in scientific hypothesis testing in the
laboratory, and by examining the writings of scientists and their humanist
contemporaries about the worldview that science provides. Rather than "show and
tell'' we will focus on the process of discovery. This process will not only be
used to teach the basic principles of science, but will also be studied from a
historical perspective. Most of the funds requested for the development of these
courses will be used to provide teaching relief for the faculty involved,
providing them with an opportunity to focus on course development for one
semester. In addition, we will create study/writing groups to support the
students taking these courses, and to carry out an in-depth assessment of the
succe ss of the envisioned innovations. The courses developed will be offered
for at least three consecutive years and workshops will be organized at the end
of each year to evaluate the success of our innovations. Computer technology
will be used extensively in several of the proposed courses, and the University
will provide matching funds for the purchase of the required equipment. These
funds, and the waiver of indirect cost recovery, combined with the funds that
were invested by the University in the Quest Program clearly indicates the
commitment of the University to institution-wide reform of undergraduate
education.