* 9652775
* Incremental-Improvement Design Case Studies
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/1998
* Michael Mavrovouniotis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 01/31/1998
* USD 54,457.00

While design is gaining emphasis in engineering curricula, a disproportionate
part of this emphasisis placed on designing new products and processes. In
practice, in engineer is faced with an imperfect existing process (or product)
far more often than with a requirement to build a new one. We propose to address
this discrepancy between curricula and engineering practice, by developing
process-improvement modules to be incorporated in engineering courses ranging
from freshman-level through intermediate courses to the capstone design courses.
The process improvement modules will be based on industry-inspired case studies,
and will be targeted to chemical engineering for the initial scope of this
project. The instructional modules will cultivate problem-solving strategies
that enhance a key ability of an engineer: The ability to examine an existing,
operating process or industrial system and identify ways in which it can be
improved in the broadest sense (including cost reduction, better quality,
improved reliability or flexibility, etc.), without a complete redesign of the
process. Incremental process improvement is eminently suitable for the freshman
or sophomore levels because design-from-scratch is usually complicated by the
lack of engineering science background. Process improvement retains many of the
advantages of a design activity but comes in more manageable problems. In
incremental improvement, the students have from the outset an entire feasible
design (which would be impossible for them to derive on their own without
comprehensive engineering-science background). The instruction mode for
identifying and implementing process improvements will involve class discussion
much like a meeting of an engineering team. The students will float ideas about
process limitations and areas of improvement, and the team discusses the pros
and cons of each idea. This enhances the students' ability to constructively
participate in meetings and exchange ideas and critiques in that setting. This
will improve communication skills, as well as encourage critical thinking in the
context of continuous review and proactive improvement. The deliverables of the
project will be 6 case studies in process improvement, which will be synthesized
based on a review of industrial process improvements. The case studies will
cover a cross-section of chemical engineering topics and suitable for courses at
different levels. Some case studies will include computer simulations, while
others will be suitable for laboratory experimentation. For each case study, we
will provide comprehensive information on the initial process and a series of
potential improvements, with numerical results, rationale, hints that can be
offered to the students, and class discussion topics. The introduction of
modules in existing core courses (rather than the development of a new course)
has the advantage that many more programs (at other institutions) are likely to
adopt at least a portion of the modules. The course modules will be promoted in
forums that include selected professional conferences, publications of the
American Society for Engineering Education (such as Chemical Engineering
Education and the Journal of Engineering Education), and the non-profit
organization Computer Aids for Chemical Engineering Education.