* 9652936
* Top-Down, Object-Oriented, Active, Collaborative Learning   Approach to CS1, CS2
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* H. Harry Zhou, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Ernest L. McDuffie
* 02/29/2000
* USD 170,000.00

This work will produce a greatly needed, major revision of the first sequence in
Computer Science. Business and industry are not satisfied with the current
graduates of Computer Science Programs. They need graduates who are 1) fully
capable of working in teams, 2) understand problem solving and how the solution
fits into the environment of the organization, and 3) possess a thorough
understanding of object-oriented analysis, design and implementation. In order
to prepare students to meet these requirements we propose to have them begin in
the very first course to work together in teams, to look at realistic problems,
and develop top-down problem solutions. To implement this solution the current
bottom-up orientation of the beginning sequence will be replaced by a top-down
approach. Students will be introduced to problem solving with objects which are
available to them. Only later will they learn to modify and still later to
create their own objects. Currently students spend most of their initial course
on the syntax and semantics of the language they are using to implement the
solutions to algorithms they develop. Most of their time is consumed in
developing a fluency in a particular language. We propose a true top down,
object-oriented, collaborative approach for students in the first course. We
will develop a library of objects, detailed notes for students, and laboratory
exercises to support this top down, active, collaborative learning.