* 9652889
* Decision Making and Technology:  A Case Study Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Laurence Peterson, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 266,210.00

This course is designed to make fundamental changes in chemical education and
address chronic problems involving science reasoning, understanding the impact
of chemistry in our society and retention of science majors. A curriculum and
instructional materials (text, and most importantly, case study modules) are
being designed for science, pre-med/pharmacy and engineering majors, dealing
with contemporary chemical technology. The curriculum has a decision-making
orientation and uses the case study method that has been successfully employed
in business and law schools. The subject matter is chemical innovations, namely,
the process of taking an idea in the research laboratory through to
commercialization. The course teaches chemical concepts while addressing the
competitive advantages of materials, environmental constraints, toxicology
issues, intellectual property rights and economic considerations using products
familiar to students where innovation has been driven by technical, market and
environmental issues. The curriculum highlights the major hurdles facing the
inventor(s) in translating a research idea into commercial reality. The course
includes a laboratory component and provides an alternative to a second semester
of general chemistry. The curriculum and course materials being developed can be
tailored to the specific interests of any class through selective use of case
study modules containing sufficient tutorials in chemistry to assure
comprehension by students having as little as one semester of college chemistry.
The course brings to the classroom, through case studies and video tapes,
culturally representative role models who can provide inspiration and career
direction to aspiring science and engineering majors.