* 9652161
* Integrating Student-Centered Teaching Methods into the FirstYear SMET Curriculum: The University of Hartford Model for  Institution-Wide Reform
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Mako Haruta, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 12/31/1998
* USD 179,987.00

Despite the influx of an increasingly diverse, often under-prepared student
body, institutions of higher education have not sufficiently reassessed and
revised their curricula and teaching methodologies in Science, Math, Engineering
and Technology to accommodate the varying cultural backgrounds and levels of
preparedness of these students. All too often students' first encounter with
college level work in these challenging areas is through classes taught in a
lecture-format in which little or no attention is paid to encouraging active
learning, attending to differing learning needs or to exploring the human and
social dimensions of science and technology. As a result, students can become
indifferent or hostile to these fields, avoiding further SMET work. This problem
is further complicated by the fact that students who do persevere beyond an
initial course are not afforded a consistent, coherent, interconnected education
as they move among the various SMET courses. The University of Hartford's reform
proposal aims to attract more students, particularly female and minority
students, to SMET fields by improving teaching and learning in introductory
courses as well as by fostering increased curricular and pedagogical
coordination and consistency within SMET disciplines particularly within the
first years. Employing a synergistic combination of innovative teaching
practices and technologies, faculty will reform entry level SMET courses. The
objective of these reforms is to create environments in which students engage in
collaborative learning projects, work in groups with specially trained peers,
and employ appropriate educational technologies that increase interactivity and
foster intellectual synthesis. Within the two- year period of the grant 10 to 12
introductory SMET courses (offered in four colleges of the University) will be
transformed. Furthermore, the project will create a strong cross- collegiate
framework within SMET disciplines for facult y collaboration and professional
development, The reform builds upon and integrates five highly successful
programs already in place at the University of Hartford. The first is the reform
of "gateway" mathematics courses in the College of Arts and Sciences to
incorporate the use of graphing calculators, applications based exercises, group
work, and peer facilitation. The second is a program for women in SMET funded by
the US. Department of Education at Hartford College for Women. In supportive
classroom cultures, women engage in collaborative learning; outside of the
classroom they attend "metacognitive sessions " which nurture scientific
thinking and study skills applicable to SMET fields, while combating culturally
induced anxieties about working in these fields. The third is a faculty
development project for innovative pedagogies in the natural sciences sponsored
by the Keck/PKAL which introduced science faculty to collaborative and problem-
based learning techniques, effective interactive multimedia tools, and
pedagogical methods most responsive to the needs of women students. The fourth
innovation is the College of Engineering's reconceptualization of its first-year
curriculum to include work in teams on small scale, practice-oriented research
projects and experience with current technologies. Finally, the Advanced
Education Computing Grant funded by FIPSE has trained a cadre of faculty (70 by
the end of AY 1996) in the authoring and use of interactive multimedia in the
classroom in order to foster student-centered learning. The University expects
to develop a national model of excellence in SMET education at small
comprehensive universities; this model will enhance consistency and coherence of
students' experience of science, encourage student-centered learning
experiences, foster greater student success in introductory SMET courses, and
encourage increased persistence among students in pursuing further SMET work.
Its uniqueness stems fr om a realistic assessment of the process of change,
experience with successful small scale change initiatives, and institution-wide
commitment to reexamining the first year experience and reallocating resources
to introductory level courses and support services.