* 9653224
* Revitalizing Classroom Teaching and Learning: A Beginning   for Two-Year College Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Elizabeth Higgins, Greenville Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 01/31/2000
* USD 99,799.00

This project is providing a model for curriculum reform that focuses on
problem-solving and real world applications in introductory mathematics at two-
year colleges. The courses of focus are college algebra and statistics, two
courses of great importance for the technical workforce. Three objectives are
being accomplished: 1) revision of the mathematics curriculum, incorporating
work-based experiences technology, an interactive learning environment, and
traditional curriculum development activities; 2) expansion of faculty dialogue
throughout the mathematics community (secondary, two- and four-year
postsecondary); and 3) provision of faculty development opportunities to support
collaborative teaching methodology, student engagement in learning, and
curriculum development. Methods used to accomplish these objectives include: 1)
interaction with local businesses and industries through site visits, shadowing,
and internship opportunities; 2) participation in professional development
activities to increase teamwork and interaction; 3) increase in understanding of
learning styles, collaborative learning, and use of technology as a tool for
problem-solving; and 4) team efforts to develop, pilot, refine, and implement
new teaching methods, work-based problems, and student interaction. Diaries of
math applications in the workplace are being kept by faculty participants as
they visit, shadow, and intern with local businesses and industries. Teaching
portfolios are being developed by faculty participants for dissemination,
detailing the types of learning activities and methodologies introduced into
classes, what was successful and why, and students' reactions.