* 9653064
* Electronic Homework and Intelligent Tutoring on the World   Wide Web:  Course Delivery Tools for Large Enrollment       Classes
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Roberta Day, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2000
* USD 383,000.00

The major challenges in teaching large-enrollment math and science courses are
(1) providing continual feedback to students even in the face of acute staff
shortages and (2) dealing with a diverse student body that has become more media
oriented and less amenable to conventional instructional methods. The chemistry
electronic homework system, that has been used for over a decade at the
University of Massachusetts, has demonstrated that electronic homework is an
effective means of engaging science and engineering students, and that its use
requires far less faculty time than conventional alternatives when administered
and delivered electronically. This project is developing a web-based electronic
homework and intelligent tutoring system suitable for large enrollment chemistry
classes, and a tool set which will allow it to be used both by other
universities and other disciplines. The system is interactive and incorporates
elaborate feed-back, multimedia elements and automatic record keeping. In
addition to extensive testing of the electronic homework system in our
introductory undergraduate chemistry classes, the chemistry software is being
tested at Boston University and at SUNY Stony Brook. A non subject-specific
shell and electronic homework system has been developed, with authoring
capabilities, that is used by our mathematics and physics departments as a test
of the portability of this technology to other disciplines. The effectiveness of
the system will be carefully evaluated and improved in chemistry classes over a
two year period. Once developed, it can be used for on-line placement testing or
in distance learning environments. Because students will have considerable
freedom in choosing the ways in which they interact with this software, it will
also address the challenges associated with teaching increasingly diverse
student populations. It will be promoted via demonstrations and distributed
widely through a publisher. NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)