* 9653149
* A Multimedia Based Laboratory Course for Environmental      Engineering Fundamentals and Process Design
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Lynn Katz, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 02/29/2000
* USD 85,000.00

Many undergraduate environmental engineering curricula across the nation are
being re-designed to emphasize fundamentals of environmental engineering process
dynamics and to acquire familiarity with the procedures for obtaining and
determining design parameters for design of full scale systems for treatment and
remediation of water and wastewater. The objective of this proposal is to build
on the P.I.s' previous course development efforts by developing and promoting
the use of multi-media learning tools for undergraduate education. Specifically,
the proposal will focus on the development of interactive multi-media laboratory
modules for a course titled "Pollutant Fate and Transport." The modules will
include did actictutorials covering process theory and methods for estimating
design parameters from laboratory data, an interactive video/animated laboratory
in which students collect data by sampling "bench-scale reactors" displayed in
the video, and an annotated spreadsheet for analysis of the data collected in
the interactive video. The module development will be overseen by an advisory
committee consisting of senior environmental faculty from a number of
universities who offer similar courses. One of the unique features of the
proposed courseware is that it will allow institutions that do not have the
time, money or other resources to develop an environmental engineering
laboratory to provide students with a visual, active learning experience without
the time or expense associated with developing and equipping a laboratory.