* 9653407
* A Program to Enhance Faculty Development Through Outreach   and Participation in Regional Computer Science Education    Conferences
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Janet Hartman, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* Stephen R. Cunningham
* 02/28/2001
* USD 36,777.00

This project is a cooperative effort between the ACM Special Interest Group on
Computer Science Education (SIGCSE) and the Consortium for Computing in Small
Colleges (CCSC) to provide outreach services to Computer Science faculty in
various regions of the United States. These two cooperating organizations share
a primary priorities of improving faculty teaching skills, increasing awareness
and knowledge of current issues in computer science education, and providing
opportunities for faculty to share ideas. SIGCSE conducts a very well-known and
highly successful annual technical symposium; but the organization has no
appreciable regional presence. CCSC, on the other hand, has been providing very
successful regional conferences for over a decade; but conducts no national
conference. The two organizations are, therefore, quite complementary. In an era
of reduced or nonexistent travel budgets, especially for faculty in
undergraduate institutions throughout the country, this project seeks to involve
these faculty in many of the most current and relevant national CS education
issues and concepts. The two-year project is to offer SIGCSE Technical Symposium
workshops at each of the six regional CCSC conferences each year. This will
allow more faculty to take advantage of the high-quality workshops from the
national Symposium, but within the context of a less expensive regional
conference, closer to home. The effectiveness of the project will be ascertained
by two separate evaluations from participants: one immediately following the
workshops, and one six months later in order to determine impact on courses,
curricula, and professional development in CS education. It is noteworthy that
due to the success of earlier federally sponsored outreach activities, the
SIGCSE Board has decided voted to allocate up to 25% of its annual budget
surplus to fund these export/outreach activities to regions (though not limited
specifically to CCSC conferences). Thus we have a sort of "matching" funds to
repo rt as part of the present application.