* 9653068
* CalcLab:  A Hands-On Learning Environment for Enriching     Students' Understanding of Calculus
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1997,10/31/2000
* Ricardo Nemirovsky, TERC Inc
* Continuing grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 10/31/2000
* USD 441,750.00

This project will develop, refine, and investigate a calculus learning
environment, called CalcLab, which is based on a set of interactive physical
devices, with computer interface. In this environment, students will be guided
by written materials in activities that involve exploration, experimentation,
and problem solving around the central concepts of calculus and thereby enrich
their understanding of these concepts. Such a learning environment will be
helpful in giving access to calculus to those students who have traditionally
not been well-served by courses in the subject, as well as deepening the
understanding all students have of it. This project builds on themes underlying
the current calculus reform movement and implements research findings of the
Principal Investigators on a research project funded for the last four years by
the National Science Foundation. In addition to those students in college
calculus courses who will be helped by the CalcLab learning environment, pre-
service and in-service high school mathematics teachers will benefit through the
opportunity to think more deeply about the central concepts of calculus than
they have in their past training. The principal activities over the 2 1/2 year
funding period are that the CalcLab devices will be made more robust, materials
that will guide students in the use of these devices will be written in
collaboration with college calculus teachers, an instructor's manual will be
written based on these collaborations, in-depth studies of students' learning in
this environment will be carried out and published, and instructors'
professional development in connection with the use of such environments will be
undertaken.