* 9653731
* Inquiry Project Courses:  Real Science Investigations for   All Students
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Ann McNeal, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 165,420.00

The science and mathematics faculty of Hampshire College are revising and
refining their program of Inquiry Project Courses (IPCs), which constitute the
introductory requirement in all science disciplines. The IPCs address specific,
often interdisciplinary, topics of interest to students in courses such as
Pollution and the Environment, The Biology of Fat, Human Gene Therapy,
AgroEcology, Optics and Holography, and The Structure of Randomness. Building on
this successful existing program of inquiry courses, the faculty are
systematically incorporating skill development so that each student can better
carry out, within the course structure, an original research project in the lab,
field or using the scientific literature. Students in the Inquiry Project
Courses are developing skills in several areas: critical thinking, quantitative
reasoning, asking and refining scientific questions, written communication and
revision, oral communication, and collaborative research. The emphasis on group
projects within courses is a critical new addition, providing a stronger basis
for launching students into scientific inquiry; previously, virtually all
student projects were started in courses but completed in individual tutorials.
Goals of the enhancements in Inquiry Project Courses include: I) improving
student access to science, 2) enhancing student learning through more
collaborative work, 3) supporting the college-wide curriculum with its emphasis
on research, and 4) making the research-based course model more adaptable for
faculty use at diverse institutions. The Inquiry Project Courses are being
refined by faculty and students working together in the. initial summer and then
implementing these improvements in the following two academic years. The
evaluation assesses whether the IPCs have achieved the same or better results
than tutorials in terms of engagement, skills, and drawing students into
science. The models of investigative laboratory courses are being disseminated
through regional and national workshops and talks, presenting both examples of
Inquiry Project Courses and general strategies for faculty at other institutions
to follow in designing investigative courses for all levels and types of
students.