* 9653728
* Science Cornerstone Project:  Institution-Wide Reform of    Undergraduate Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1997,03/31/2001
* Judith Ramaley, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 03/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

Portland State University has launched an institution-wide reform effort that
has attracted national attention as a potential model for other colleges and
universities. The heart of the reform is the University Studies Program, which
encompasses the general education curriculum for all students. Throughout this
reform, ongoing efforts to bolster science literacy for all students and to
develop and evaluate innovative approaches to teaching and learning in the
sciences, math, engineering, and technology have served as catalysts and guides
for the transformation of the curriculum. Over the three-year grant period, the
proposed Science Cornerstone Project will augment and extend these efforts by
establishing a flexible framework for interdisciplinary coursework aimed at
achieving science literacy for students majoring in fields outside of the
sciences, math, engineering, and technology. This project reflects the
university's mission as an urban institution serving a diverse population to
improve educational opportunities and success for all students. The specific
outcomes will include eleven innovative upper-division course sequences (each
sequence comprising two four-credit courses offered during consecutive terms).
Each two-course sequence will include a laboratory, practical, or field
experience. Existing courses will be refined or replaced in order to create
courses that involve students in an in-depth examination of a particular theme
or project (e.g., Water in the Environment or The Science of the Atmosphere).
The evaluation plan will produce objective qualitative and quantitative data to
gauge the project's effectiveness as a model of systemic reform.