* 9653975
* Puerto Rico Excellence in Science and Mathematics Teacher   Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1997,04/30/1998
* Ivelisse Padilla, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 04/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Eight of the universities that prepare over 80% of all K- 12 science and
mathematics teachers in Puerto Rico have formed an alliance with the Puerto Rico
Department of Education, through the Resource Center for Science and Engineering
to carry out a strategic planning process for the reform of science and
mathematics teacher preparation programs as part of the ongoing K-16 systemic
educational reform. Building on the Puerto Rico Statewide Systemic Initiative
and the Puerto Rico Alliance for Minority Participation, a Blueprint for
Achieving Excellence in Science and Mathematics Teacher Preparation in Puerto
Rico will be developed through the collaborative efforts of these eight
institutions and K-12 teachers participating in the standards-based reform.
Three island wide conferences will be implemented during a six month period to
facilitate and strengthen the inter-institutional strategic planning process.
The main topics of the three conferences will be: I) defining and building
consensus on the central issues and specific changes needed to align Teacher
Preparation Programs (TPP) with Content and Professional Standards for science
and mathematics; 2) facilitating a strategic planning process at the
institutional level to reform TPP, that will ensure a highly participative
process that harnesses the creative capabilities of faculty; and 3) the
elaboration of a Blueprint for Achieving Excellence in Science and Mathematics
TP in Puerto Rico, which will integrate the diverse institutional strategic
plans. Broad participation in these conferences will be promoted to ensure the
involvement of stakeholders at all levels and from all institutions, including
faculty, students and administrators, staff from the Department of Education and
K-12 teachers participating in the reform, and representatives from the local
chapters of the National Council of Mathematics Teachers (NCTM) and the National
Science Teachers Association (NSTA). Up to 200 participants are expected to be
directly involved in this endeav or, who will impact others within their
institutions. PR-SSI/PR-AMP staff will be in charge of the implementation of the
project and will support the institutional planning process at each institution
and promote inter-institutional collaboration and articulation through periodic
meetings between conferences. The Blueprint produced through this project will
serve as the basis for the reform of science and mathematics teacher preparation
in Puerto Rico, fostering their alignment with standards of excellence, and
ensuring high quality in the preparation of the future instructional workforce
needed to sustain the reform.