* 9653190
* Campus Ecology:  Experimental Field Sites as Tools for      Teaching Ecological Principles
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1997,01/31/2001
* John Moore, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 01/31/2001
* USD 99,884.00

The goal of the project is to improve 6-16 biology education through the
production and dissemination of a manual describing small scale campus-based
long-term ecological research sites (school-based LTER sites). A common feature
of ecology curriculum at the high school level and in many instances at the
undergraduate level is a lack of an experimentally-based field experience.
School-based LTER sites will allow pre-service and in-service teachers to be
actively involved in ongoing short- and long-term ecological research. The
manual will detail how to establish LTER sites on school grounds and provide
examples of experiments that could be conducted at the sites. The approach
differs from traditional uses of school yards by presenting experiments
patterned after those in the literature. For the Rocky Mountain West, long-term
experiments are presented to address the effects of nutrient availability,
enhanced water availability and grazing on short grass prairie succession.
Experiments that have greater relevance to other regions of the country will
also be developed. Regardless of the questions asked or size and budget of the
LTER sites, all the experiments will be simple in design, low in cost, low in
maintenance and will be explicitly tied to national standards and benchmarks
(AAAS 1993, NRC 1996). The University of Northern Colorado views this project as
central to its mission as the science education leader in region and to this end
has committed over $20,000 in the form of graduate stipends, tuition, and
equipment dollars towards its development and implementation (see Budget
Justification for details). The manual will be developed over a three period by
a team that includes the PI's, and a group of invited in-service teachers,
biology researchers and science educators from different geographic and
demographic regions of the US. The PI's for this project represent a blend of
researchers in ecology and biology education, including experience in
theoretical eco logy, population ecology, animal behavior, and student learning.
Moreover, they possess over 20 years experience teaching at the middle and high
school levels. The input from additional team members is critical to the success
of the project and to insure that the manual be applicable to the widest
possible audience. While teachers, researchers and science educators share
common interests, the reality is that they write to different levels and
communicate to different audiences through different venues. The team will meet
once per year in a workshop setting to develop the manual. In year one, the team
will setup the demonstration plots and activities relevant to each team member's
region will be developed. In year two, the team will meet again to refine the
exercises. In year three the team will finalize and submit the first edition of
the manual. The manual will be disseminated through a national publisher in
coordination with the University of Northern Colorado Research Corporation (see
Dissemination Plan). Additionally, results will be published in professional
journals and presented at national professional meetings. As an added bonus, the
campus-LTER sites will also be used to enhance the current ecology and science
methods curriculum at UNC. Students (a large percentage of which are pre-service
teachers) will be active participants in both short-term and long-term
experiments. The pre-service teachers will be exposed to a potent instructional
tool that they might integrate into their curricula. Sites will also offer
opportunities for faculty and graduate students interested in pedagogically
based research. The University of Northern Colorado is well positioned to
conduct this project. The University has a long tradition of leadership in
science education. Department of Biological Sciences includes faculty
specializing in both biology content and pedagogy.