* 9653267
* Revitalizing the Study of Probability Through Applications, Technology and Collaborative Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Robb Muirhead, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2000
* USD 180,001.00

Over the past ten years, there has been a substantial effort (sponsored by the
National Science Foundation) to revitalize the undergraduate curriculum in
mathematics, science, and engineering. While a lot of attention has been focused
on the reform of Calculus and Statistics courses, very little effort has been
directed toward the revitalization of Probability courses. At the same time, the
importance of Probability in many programs has increased substantially. New
technology such as the Texas Instruments TI-83 statistical calculator and
sophis- ticated numeric and visualization software packages like Excel and
Mathematical now make it possible to present Probability from an experimental
perspective and to dispense with archaic processes (like using tables to
evaluate normal distribution functions). At the same time, new applications
permit the subject to be presented in a more concrete and less theoretical way.
Unfortunately, there are few instructional materials available which are
suitable for discovery learning and which incorporate technology in an effective
way. The goal of this project is to produce a comprehensive
textbook/workbook/instructor resource manual/computer lab manual which
encourages students to learn Probability by discovery and gives them an
appreciation of the wide range of applications of the subject; which enables
non-specialist faculty not experienced in collaborative learning and not aware
of current applications to become knowledgeable in these areas; and which makes
full and effective use of the technology currently available in a way that
enables students to learn through visualization and experimentation. The
immediate impact of this project on the quality of undergraduate education at
the University of Michigan will be significant, since all engineering
undergraduates and a large number of undergraduates in the sciences are now
required to take probability. The mate- rials developed under this initiative
will be disseminated widely using both traditional and electronic means, and
will provide a basis for revitalizing Probability courses nationwide.