* 9653145
* An Integrated Multi-Level Twenty-first Century Physics      Learning System
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2001
* Alan Van Heuvelen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2001
* USD 400,000.00

Abstract The Problem: The ineffectiveness of lecture instruction in helping
students acquire conceptual knowledge and real world skills in complex problem
solving, collaboration, and communication. This problem exists at the
introductory level as well as in the upper level courses for physics majors.
Objectives: Implement group-based active learning instructional systems at the
introductory, and sophomore levels. Methods: Using an active group learning
format, we will build a conceptual foundation leading to the solution of complex
problems with interesting context. The instruction will involve tools such as:
interactive computer simulation questions and problems; computer visualization,
modeling and problem solving; and conceptual and more complex experiment
problems. Special audiences: Engineering students, undergraduate physics majors,
and underrepresented groups in physics, including women and domestic minorities.
Collaborations: Through participation in a restructuring program in the College
of Engineering, faculty in engineering, math and chemistry. Significance/impact:
The project will develop a teaching approach, complete with teaching kits and
materials, whose full implementation will result in a major modification of
first and second-year instruction for students in physics, chemistry and
engineering. Through participation in restructuring in the introductory
engineering curriculum, the pedagogy will be disseminated beyond physics.
Dissemination of the materials nationally will help promote active learning
nationally. Completion rates for groups traditionally underrepresented in
physics will improve with no sacrifice in learning. The means for achieving
these goals and impacts are described in greater detail in the full proposal.