* 9653672
* Cross-Discipline Integration in Science, Mathematics,       Engineering, and Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1997,11/30/2000
* Laura Precedo-Choudhury, Broward College
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 11/30/2000
* USD 197,315.00

Abstract: Traditional education is designed so that each discipline has
curricula which is independent of other disciplines. This tendency to
compartmentalize knowledge effectively negates the inherent interconnections of
"real-world" problems. In today's information age, we need to teach our students
to exploit the vast amount of information available by providing a global
overview that stresses the importance of the interconnected parts. One of the
objectives of this project is to reverse the tendency to separate academic
disciplines by demanding that students engage in studying problems of a
multidisciplinary nature using technology as a tool. Broward Community College
(BCC) will accomplish this objective by implementing a curricular reform which
integrates the disciplines of Mathematics, Science, Engineering, and Technology
(MSET) into a comprehensive curriculum. Students in the MSET-Web will interact
in the completion of multi- course projects that share common goals. Interaction
will be facilitated by the creation of an Exploration Center where students will
work cooperatively with other students, faculty, and variouq businesses and
government agencies. Through these projects students will engage in the
collection, analysis, image processing, and modeling of field data. The Center
will also serve as a virtual meeting of the minds through the establishment of
an Intemet Homepage for the compilation and dissemination of information
generated by the projects in the MSET-Web. This initiative is an affirmation
that an understanding of the interconnections of knowledge is more important
than the independent pieces. This new approach to learning through integration
will significantly impact future learning at the college level. Inclusion of
teacher re-certification courses in this initiative will also help disseminate
this innovative approach to learning to precollege students. Graduates at all
levels will be capable of extrapolating concepts from one area of knowledge to
another, and therefore b e better prepared to succeed in the real world.