* 9653256
* Integrating Multiple Disciplines in an Environmental        Engineering Curriculum with Field Excercises
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Gary Litton, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 06/30/2000
* USD 37,657.00

The proposed project will develop field exercises to integrate
multidisciplinary elements of science and engineering in lower and upper
division environmental engineering courses. The field exercises will be
developed and implemented with the input of practicing professionals in the
field of environmental engineering and science. The goal of the project is to
provide experiences throughout the environmental engineering option for
undergraduate students that imitate real-world problems in an authentic setting.
These exercises will be designed to 1.) stimulate student interest and knowledge
in real problems, 2.) develop the ability to synthesize information from
different disciplines, 3.) impart confidence to find information and resources
independently, 4.) provide opportunities to apply science and technology to
practical problems, 5.) motivate students to work effectively in a group, and
6.) improve communication skills. The field exercises will be implemented
primarily in the introductory courses of the environmental engineering
curriculum. Undergraduates will be exposed early in their academic careers to
actual environmental projects and problems so as to stimulate interest and
enthusiasm, two elements critical for recruitment and retention. Two lower
division courses, "Aquatic Chemistry for Environmental Engineers" and
"Environmental Biotechnology", and the students' first upper division
environmental engineering course, "Introduction to Environmental Engineering and
Water Resources", have been targeted for five of eight field projects proposed
here. The remaining exercises will be implemented in upper division, analysis
and design electives. While the individual projects are site specific, the
exercises are readily adaptable to other locations by other undergraduate
institutions. The effectiveness of these field exercises will be evaluated by
faculty, environmental professionals participating in the project, and the
student s. The project will provide undergraduates with a unique experience
designed to stimulate interest in environmental engineering and science and
provide an unmatched preparation for professional practice.