* 9653687
* Reform of Undergraduate Science &amp; Engineering Education at  The City College of New York
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Yolanda Moses, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract: The City College of the City University of New York proposes an
initiative to reform the undergraduate experience of science and engineering
students. The project builds upon the experiences of several curriculum
development projects at the College, using their methods as widely applicable
curricular models and their faculty as mentors to colleagues. A central aim of
the proposed initiative will be to increase the engagement of faculty in
undergraduate education. Strategies will include: changing the reward structure
for faculty in support of innovative teaching; formal faculty training in
curriculum design, assessment, uses of technology and other topics; a faculty-
to-faculty mentoring and support system; and providing immediate opportunities
to participate in cross-disciplinary curriculum development teams. The following
outcomes will be achieved: a college-wide plan for curricular reform in SEM will
be defined; an active SEM faculty teaching caucus will meet regularly to
promote, advise upon, and evaluate curriculum reform initiatives; a faculty
resource center, the Center for Teaching and Learning, will be operational and
serving as a stimulus for specific curricular reform activities; model
curriculum modules and other instructional innovations will be in place in five
science and engineering courses; an increased number of science and engineering
faculty will have expertise in curriculum reform; and a new system for
developing faculty members' expertise in teaching and for assessing their
candidacieq for tenure and promotion will be in effect. The institutional reform
project at City College is expected to significantly enhance the College's
success in the recruitment and retention of SEM undergraduates, substantially
improve the number and quality of SEM baccalaureates, better prepare graduates
for the SEM professional workplace, establish the administrative structures
necessary to ensure the long-term operation of new programs and activities, and
provide an SEM educational mode l which can be replicated at other institutions.