* 9653119
* In Search of Nature:  Edward O. Wilson on Conservation      Biology and Biodiversity; and Multimedia Teaching Tools     for Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/1999
* Edward Wilson, Center for Resource Economics/Island Press
* Standard Grant
* Nancy L. Pruitt
* 02/28/1999
* USD 50,000.00

While science plays a critical role in helping to resolve some of our most
complex problems, science literacy among young Americans remains inadequate. To
ensure that students actively pursue and receive an education grounded in
science, new mechanisms are needed that make science less intimidating and more
accessible. To accomplish this task, scientists and educators must collaborate
proactively in the development and implementation of new educational
technologies. Island Press is working with Dr. Edward O. Wilson to produce and
disseminate new materials dedicated to science education and featuring
interactive, multimedia CD-ROM. We are drawing from Dr. Wilson's experience in
instructing Harvard undergraduates to create a series of CD-ROM teaching and
learning tools that will enable the user to actively explore the biological
sciences at a variety of levels of depth. Over the years, Dr. Wilson has
accumulated and developed a series of "teaching aids" that he and his teaching
assistants employ in lectures, sections, and labs. These aids include computer
simulations to demonstrate the workings of important ecological processes and
equations, as well as a library of top-knotch slides. We plan to harness this
experience to create the next generation of teaching aids embodied in one CD-
ROM, entitled "Teaching Tools for Biology." The CD-ROM will provide a collection
of multi-media simulations, animations, and other computer-based tools that
biology professors will use to enhance their teaching of key concepts in
introductory and mid-level college biology classes. It is our experience that
the most important concepts in biology, and those that are often the most
difficult for students to learn, often discuss change over time, whether within
individual organisms, populations, species, communities, or ecosystems. Through
"Teaching Tools for Biology," we will provide tools that will enable teachers to
present this material dynamically. In addition to giving educators new methods
of deliv ering concepts, and providing students new ways of grasping these
concepts, the CD-ROM will offer the same opportunity for exploration and student
engagement that Dr. Wilson injects into his course. "Teaching Tools for Biology"
will be an important resource for teachers in a wide array of classes, including
introductory organismic biology, evolution, ecology, genetics, and conservation
biology, among others. The CD-ROM will include a printed Teacher's Manual with
instructions on using the CD-ROM and recommendations on incorporating the tools
into curricula and instruction. We also plan to provide explanation via
"dialogue boxes" within the CD-ROM itself, and will provide online assistance
via our Web site. A non-profit organization dedicated to information
dissemination and education in science and the environment, Island Press will
work with Dr. Wilson to develop the substance of the package. We have entered
into a partnership arrangement with Adobe Systems, Inc., which will work with us
to develop the software. And our advisory committee will provide guidance on
quality control and content.