* 9653413
* Dissemination Efforts to Promote Course and Curriculum      Change Using C++ and the Closed Laboratory Model
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1997
* Jane Prey, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 12/31/1997
* USD 77,000.00

The objective of our NSF grant (USE 91-56112) was to support the development and
evaluation of a new curriculum and supporting materials focused around the
practice of computing. The keystone of our new curriculum is a four-course core
sequence which incorporates closed laboratories. Lecture materials and content
are supportive of the laboratories rather than the other wayaround. We are
presently in our fourth year of development with the first three core courses
firmly in place and with the fourth course taught for the second time this
Spring, 1996 semester. We are ready to begin active dissemination efforts. We
are conducting a Workshop for Course Curriculum Change Using C++ and the Closed
Laboratory Model this Summer, 1996 (NSF-DUE-9554715). Based on the overwhelming
response we received, we propose to offer this workshop again and other
dissemination efforts during Summer, 1997. This proposal requests support for a
more aggressive dissemination effort. Specifically, we propose a four-prong
approach: 1. A Mini-Workshop for the participants of this year's (1996) NSF UFE
Summer Workshop for Course Curriculum Change Using C++ and the Closed Laboratory
Model (DUE-9554715) to assess the impact of the Summer, 1996 workshop. Two new
workshops for Summer, 1997: 2. the first one (Workshop for Course &amp;
Curriculum Change Using C++ and the Closed Laboratory Model) will be similar to
the Summer, '96 workshop for faculty who have a working knowledge of C, but not
C++ and are interested in implementing the closed laboratory model in their CS
curriculum. 3. the second workshop (Workshop for C++ Syntax and Course and
Curriculum Change Using the Closed Laboratory Model) will focus more on the
specific needs of Community College faculty, high school Advanced Placement
Computer Science teachers, and faculty from colleges and universities who do not
know C or C++. 4. Panel Presentations at regional small college computing
conferences by workshop participants and UVA faculty. We believe these efforts
will enable the participants' schools to enhance their computer science
curricula in a contemporary and efficient manner and will help other schools to
begin thinking about their curricula needs.