* 9653427
* Molecular Visualization in Undergraduate Biological Science Education
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2001
* Eric Martz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 01/31/2001
* USD 180,000.00

Free molecular visualization software of truly excellent quality became capable
of running "movie" scripts (RasMol) and web-based tutorials (Chime) during the
past year. This makes it feasible for every student of the biological sciences
at the high school level and beyond to produce colored, space filling, 3D images
of biological macromolecules (DNA, RNA, proteins, etc.) on PC's/Macs, whenever
they are studying them or have an interest. Faculty can now accompany lectures
with attention-getting projections from the PC screen, showing scripted
tutorials of real molecular structures, and students can later review them.
Rotation of the structure effectively conveys 3D relationships without the need
for stereo images or special glasses. Student and faculty responses to lectures
accompanied by pilot scripts have been extremely positive, with immediate demand
for scripts covering a wider range of topics. The goals of this project are to
(1) hold 3-day workshops in the Northeast to prepare undergraduate faculty to
use molecular visualization in their classes; (2) demonstrate "movie" scripts
and web tutorials at large national meetings of biological scientists/educators;
(3) develop a series of new tutorials on topics designed by faculty for use in
large undergraduate classes; and (4) to make the resulting resources freely
available through Internet web sites. Workshop participants will be given
follow-up support, encouraged to share experiences and educational methods
through an email listproc. Each participant will be required to mentor two
additional faculty at their home institution in the use of educational molecular
visualization.