* 9653466
* Interdisciplinary Summer Institutes on Puget Sound
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Robert Knapp, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 02/28/2001
* USD 163,439.00

Interdisciplinary Summer Institutes on Puget Sound The proposed project focuses
on Puget Sound, a 200 mile waterway extending from Vancouver Island and the
Canadian border to Olympia, Washington. This waterway has a rich history and
provides an ideal environment for studying a variety of interdisciplinary topics
and issues. The purpose of the project is to upgrade the technical content of
faculty from two- and four- year colleges in Washington State relative to the
cultural history, current environmental issues, and the ecology of Puget Sound;
to provide the opportunity to learn about new interdisciplinary curricular
designs, and to learn and try out new field techniques and new pedagogical
approaches. Three six- or seven-day interdisciplinary summer institutes focusing
on Puget Sound will be offered over the two-year period of the grant. The three
institutes will have a total of 75 faculty participants from two- and four-year
colleges. Follow-up activities after the institutes include a small seed grant
program, follow-up sessions, an end-of-project symposium on Puget Sound, and
communication among the participants via Internet and a newsletter. Various end
products include a slide set, an annotated bibliography and a resource guide.
The Summer Institutes, which are the core of the project design, are miniature
versions of some of the most successful interdisciplinary programs in the state.
They provide a "high challenge" curriculum and are based upon pedagogical
principles that are recommended by an increasingly convergent literature on
improving education in the sciences.