* 9653095
* Symmetry Across the Curriculum:  Symbolic and Visual        Learning In the Arts, Mathematics, and Basic Science
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2002
* John Miller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/2002
* USD 330,500.00

The long-term goal of this project is to propose strategies for development of
multi-disciplinary courses that are streamlined to convey the cumulative impact
of several subjects, including mathematical analysis and modeling, to address
and solve a scientific or environmental problem of broad societal interest. The
objective of this phase of the project is to propose a method for development of
such new materials by taking advantage of a unifying concept of exceptional
perceptual appeal and human affinity, namely symmetry. To facilitate widespread
impact of the project, it is important to address at the same time the related
problem of updating the existing courses thus, gradually transforming them into
such multi-disciplinary topics of contemporary relevance. To accomplish the
above-mentioned objectives, a sequence of course-modules will be developed to
cover a variety of topics in which symmetry, geometric transformations and
geometric structures play a key role in an interdisciplinary context. The
modules will be sufficiently flexible in content and format, and their
interdisciplinary nature serves to fashion interfaces and links to other
modules, a factor that will prove essential for ease of assembly and multitude
of modular combinations. The instructors select a number of modules from the
Arts, Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics and Psychology to form a coherent
multi-disciplinary general undergraduate course with their targeted audience in
mind. By design, such courses emphasize symmetry and geometric structures as a
unifying underlying theme, thus containing substantial analytic and visual
content. The modules have two components: (a) text and other forms of multi-
media materials that convey information regarding the topic at hand ; (b)
software pieces that encourage the students to experiments hands-on
computational aspects of the topic, through simplified numerical and symbolic
computations, and visualization. The purpose of the software components is to
enhance the lectures in t he course by instructor-supervised computer lab
sessions that engage the students in the process of discovery and active
participation to explore the quantitative aspects. The lectures are intended to
be expository and accessible to a general audience, and when possible, leaving
in depth exploration as part of projects that should be dealt with in the lab
component. The modules do not require mathematics and science beyond standard
high school level, thus aiming to attract primarily the students who have not
majored in mathematics and the physical sciences. Special emphais will be placed
to attract future teachers of science and mathematics, and to encourage them to
experiment with similar course-development ideas, proposing modifications of the
software and the text to suite K-12 audience that they will plan to teach. The
evaluation plan includes teaching pilot courses at University of Wisconsin
(Madison) and Montana State University (Bozeman), and Rutgers University (New
Ark). In the course of pilot courses, besides soliciting standard evaluation
responses from the students, instructors, and reviewers, assessment of student
learning and attitude improvement, creativity in lab projects, and facility with
computer-assisted quantitative problems will be studied (and where applicable,
it will be followed up in the subsequent year and compared to standard courses.)
Further, a number of modules will be incorporated in existing courses at the
participating institutions: Clemson University, UW Madison, UC Berkeley, Montana
State University, and Illinois Institute of Technology. The dissemination plans
include publication of a text and accompanying multi-media software through
major commercial companies, active recruiting of future users through
demonstration and training sessions that will be organized in conjunction with
national and regional professional meetings, in particular in Montana and
Midwest. The materials will be available on the WWW, and much of the software
will be developed using platfo rm-independent languages such as Java, to
encourage wider exposure and adoption. It is expected that the courses resulting
from this project would be attractve to a wide audience from the arts,
humanities and soft sciences as alternatives to standard undergraduate
requirements for quantitative reasoning, and to attract them to develop a
stronger background in science and mathematics. On the other end of this
equation, the modules illustrate how art and humanities enrich teaching of hard
sciences. In addition, some of the course-modules are suitable for adapotion in
alternative educational programs, e.g. using distance learning or in the context
of extended and informal education.