* 9653366
* Linguistics and the Language Sciences:  New Computer Based  Methods and Materials for Undergraduate Education
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/1999
* Barbara Lust, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 02/28/1999
* USD 61,517.00

DUE-9653366 PI: Barbara Lust Cornell University - Endowed Title: Linguistics and
the Language Sciences: New Computer Based Methods and Materials for
Undergraduate Education This proposal is to conduct a 6-day Workshop at the
national Linguistic Society of America biennial meeting, to be held in Summer
1997, at Cornell University. At this workshop, which is expected to attract
between 500-700 linguists, including both faculty and students, the major goals
are to (i) provoke rethinking of current approaches to undergraduate education
in linguistics; (ii) redirect attention to the fundamental properties of
linguistics as a science, and as a medium for teaching essential concepts of
scientific inquiry; (iii) introduce, disseminate and exchange current
developments involving computer assisted teaching materials which foster this
essential aspect of the field of linguistics. Participants will be able to gain
experience with these recent teaching materials through the use of a newly
equipped network of computer labs at Cornell. Within the last decade, a number
of curricular efforts have emerged that attempt to utilize linguistics as a
vehicle for undergraduate science teaching. This project will bring together a
number of these efforts, introducing their design philosophy and results to a
wider audience. Three current projects will be featured in curricular part of
this workshop. The project called "Grammar as Science" started by Professor
Richard Larson at SUNY-Stony Brook is one of these. This has reached the point
of publishing software called Semantica and Syntactica for high school seniors
and lower division undergraduates, which is available now through MIT Press. A
second focal point is the Teacher Training Program at Wheelock College -- a
participant in the Boston Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation,
and one of the largest producers of K-12 teachers in Massachusetts. This program
is focused on the objective of discovering how implicit knowledge of languag e
can be used to develop an explicit grasp of the constructivist nature of
scientific inquiry. This is being done by developing the use of linguistics as a
tool for teaching scientific inquiry to 7th to 11th graders, and teaching
undergraduates preparing for teaching careers in this method. The third project
to be featured will be the Cornell University Network of Language Labs in the
Cognitive Studies Program, which has been supported by an ILI grant from the
NSF. This program is currently seeking to coordinate the study of linguistics
with related subfields of Cognitive Studies -- psychology, computer science, and
philosophy, by developing a unified, laboratory-based curriculum.