* 9653676
* Creating Linkages through Institution-wide Reform of the    Science Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1997,12/31/2000
* Mauri Ditzler, Millikin University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2000
* USD 200,000.00

Millikin University will engage in a three-year curriculum development project
with extensive participation by faculty from the departments of biology,
chemistry, physics, and mathematics to continue our efforts to link the above
disciplines. We will develop a set of introductory science courses which: * Link
the sciences to the rest of academe * Link the sciences with each other; and *
Link our students and the courses with the surrounding community. These goals
have arisen from challenges we have encountered at Millikin. One challenge is
that undergraduates are often not skilled in discerning the applicability of
fundamental principles across disciplinary boundaries. Millikin has already done
much work to bring the sciences together within our university community.
However, this task is large and challenging as a consequence of the tendency in
traditional science courses to mask the common methods and purpose shared by all
science disciplines. Hence, much remains to be done. This tendency towards
specialization has also tended to isolate students from addressing important
community problems and issues that would benefit from closer attention and
assistance from the Millikin students and faculty. Our community needs a
stronger partnership with the University. We are engaged in developing a set of
introductory science courses which allow students to study a specific
discipline, to explore fundamental methods of inquiry and principles important
to all sciences, and to learn how these methods and principles are relevant to
both the chosen field and also to the other science disciplines. Each course
section will focus on a particular area of inquiry, such as stars or prairie
ecology. A set of common laboratory exercises will be developed by the faculty
involved in teaching each of the various sections being offered; each exercise
will present an interesting question drawn from the contributing professor's
discipline yet will explore a fundamental method of inquiry or principle
important to all fields of science. After the students complete each exercise,
the illustrated principle or method of inquiry will be explored in the context
of each section. Students will also develop exercises to present to local school
children in grades K to 12. The planned reform is an integral part of
institution-wide planning at Millikin University. It has the broad support of
the faculty and the administration. It will build on prior activities of the
faculty and administration that lead naturally in this direction. The principal
investigator, Dr. Mauri Ditzler, lead the development of the "Discovery
Chemistry" curriculum at the College of the Holy Cross in the early 1990s, with
support from the NSF. The Millikin department chairs are wholly supportive of
this effort. The chair of the Physics department is developing just in time
laboratory modules under an NSF ILI award ("Fundamental Constants - Modern
Physics Laboratory, 9552171). The chairs of biology, chemistry, and physics are
currently working under NSF support in "Integrating the Sciences through Common
Laboratory Experiences," (9555029). Millikin is successfully raising funds for a
new science building that will house undergraduate laboratory facilities
designed to incorporate these methods of instruction and learning. Millikin also
conducts a summer research program for undergraduate students.