* 9653715
* Reform in Science, Math, and Engineering Technology         Education - Connections
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1997,02/29/2000
* Louise Squitieri, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/29/2000
* USD 199,352.00

The traditional presentation of mathematics and science requires that students
reason their way to the connections between these fields. This expectation is
particularly challenging for many urban high school students and nontraditional
college students. New York City Technical College, of the City University of New
York, is building on its successes as a partner in CUNY's Alliance for Minority
Participation and as a principal in the NYC Urban Systemic Initiative with a
project that helps students make these connections and succeed. The project
team, including engineering technology, math and science faculty is revise the
ten math and science courses in the core curriculum. They are 1) explicitly
identifying the mathematics and science connections in and among these courses;
2) developing problems that integrate science and math in experiential contexts
and cultivating well-developed critical thinking skills; 3) identifying the most
effective pedagogical strategies and technologies; 4) reviewing the sequencing
of topics in the core mathematics, science, and introductory engineering
technology courses students typically taken concurrently; 5) creating a database
of common concepts and terminology, and 6) designing a program of training for
full-time and adjunct faculty which includes video tapes. This project is
institution-wide, systemic and significant for much of the nation's higher
education community, especially its technical colleges.