* 9660647
* SBIR Phase I:  Computer Interactive Plant Biotechnology     Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Karen Graf, EDVOTEK Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9660647 Graf This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be
carried out by EDVOTEK, Inc. will investigate the exploration of computer
interactive plant materials which have not been traditionally utilized in
science education. The project will amplify the use of resources already
established and supported by Federal funds by utilizing plant material obtained
through genetic and germplasm stock collections. These materials will be used to
develop experiments with problem-based approaches for teaching and learning
various concepts in biology and biotechnology. The project places emphases on
incorporating information and feedback from science educators and strives to
maintain consistency with the published aims of major science curricula reform
strategies to enable students to develop higher-level critical thinking skills.
The focus of research will be on identifying and testing new plant resources
which can be used for problem-based experiment activities. During the next phase
of the project, these activities will be tested at three levels by engage
practicing educators in evaluating the performance and reproducibility of
experiments outside the research laboratory environment; by evaluating the
performance and reproducibility of experiments in classrooms by students; and by
assessing the efficacy of prototype experiments for meeting educational
objectives. It is anticipated that this project will help promote a
revitalization and renewal of interest in plant-based studies in science
education. Products will include computer interactive plant-based biotechnology
education experiments, plants, sees and related reagents, laboratory manual,
teacher training workshops, and products for informal science education for the
high school and college levels and for technology training. ***