* 9660007
* SBIR Phase I: Chemical Vapor Deposition-SiC-Coated Ceramic  Bearing Elements of High Damage and Wear Resistance
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Jan-Fong Jue, MATERIALS & SYSTEMS RESEARCH INC
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,890.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop
alternate ceramic bearing elements that can deliver the performance of silicon
nitride (Si3N4) at significantly reduced costs. Hybrid bearings incorporating
hot-isostatically-pressed (HIPed) or sintered and HIPed Si3N4 elements (balls or
rollers) have demonstrated excellent performance in the machine tool industry,
the chemical processing industry, in vacuum pumps, vapor deposition and
molecular beam epitaxy equipment and centrifuges and high-speed testing
equipment. Despite this demonstrated performance the total world-wide market for
Si3N4 bearing elements is discouragingly small (- $ 25 million in 1995). The
single-most important factor limiting the use of Si3N4 elements is cost. The
premise of this research project is that bearing surfaces of SiC deposited by
chemical-vapor deposition (CVD), and toughened by designed residual surface
compression, will have the required microstructural homogeneity and surface
toughness to deliver rolling-contact fatigue and wear resistance comparable to
Si3N4 at lower cost. The cost of the SiC bearing elements should be lower than
that of Si3N4 because of the lower cost of the powders, processing and surface
finishing. SiC elements are also expected to show improved performance in severe
environments due to their superior corrosion and oxidation resistance as
compared to Si3N4. Specific objectives of Phase I are to (1) optimize the
magnitude of the residual surface compression in SiC coatings by tailoring the
thermal expansion of pressureless-sintered SiC-TiC substrates, (2) establish
optimum CVD conditions to avoid deleterious coating substructures, and (3)
demonstrate life and wear resistance of SiC in RCF tests comparable to current
bearing-grade Si3N4. Phase II will address further lowering of the cost of
manufacture of substrates and designing economical methods for SiC coating of
balls in fluidized bed CVD reactors. The CVD-SiC-coated balls and rollers to be
developed will be used as bearing elements in hybrid ceramic bearings. Hybrid
ceramic bearings, in turn, will be used in the machine tool industry where the
low density of the ceramic elements can lower the centrifugal thrust forces, in
the chemical process industry to take advantage of the corrosion resistance of
the SiC elements, and moderate temperature applications. Cam followers in the
automatic industry is another potential area to exploit the CVD-SiC coated
rolling elements.