* 9660676
* SBIR Phase I: Supercritical Fluid Viral Inactivation in a   Varying Potential Electrical Field
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Trevor Castor, Aphios Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

A number of approaches have been employed for the inactivation or removal of
viruses in therapeutic proteins derived from human plasma. These techniques are
not always effective against a wide spectrum of human and animal viruses, are
encumbered by process specific deficiencies, and often result in denaturation of
the biologicals which they are designed to protect. Some of these methods are
effective in inactivating enveloped viruses, such as HIV, but none are effective
against non enveloped viruses such as HAV. Aphios has developed a rapid and
generally applicable virus inactivation technique for both enveloped and non
enveloped viruses based on supercritical fluid technology. In the proposed
effort, we plan to enhance this technique by utilizing a constant, discharging
or varying electrical field. The worldwide marketplace for human plasma and
animal serum products is estimated to be S15 to S20 billion by the year 2000.
The potential viral inactivation marketplace is estimated to be about 5% of this
malt, approximately $0.7S to $1.0 billion. Combined demand for these
therapeutics (fresh frozen plasma, fibrin glue, immunoglobulins) as well as
transgenic proteins and recombinant therapeutics from mammalian cell culture
will increase marketplace size and demand for cost efficient and generally
applicable virus inactivation technology.