* 9660900
* SBIR Phase I:  A Multi-Function Heat Exchanger for Control  of Temperature, Moisture, and Air Quality
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Gerald Martin, XETEX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 96-60900 Martin The proposed system will be used to recover otherwise wasted
energy by transferring heat and moisture between the fresh ventilation air
stream entering a building and the outgoing exhaust ventilation air. While
performing this function, it will suppress the transfer of pollutants which
would otherwise ride piggy-back atop the transferred moisture and thereby
undermine the quality of the ventilation air. Present heat and moisture
exchangers permit free transfer of pollutants between the air streams, and are,
therefore, unsuitable for air-qualitysensitive applications. The current
research objective is to obtain a thin, microporous film or selective semi-
permeable membrane that will serve as the basis for an innovative, non-
polluting, air-to-air exchanger. The selected material must permit high rates of
water vapor transfer between two streams of air, but must prevent the transfer
of airborne gaseous pollutants. Promising materials will be both acquired and
fabricated, and their permeabilities to water vapor and four representative
pollutants will be determined using novel mass transfer experiments. This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase I project will provide the technology base
for a new type of energy recovery system. If successful, the research proposed
here will significantly enlarge the opportunities for energy recovery in
residential, commercial, and industrial ventilation applications. ***