* 9660463
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Speed, In-Line Gas Monitoring for       Control of Gas Mixing in Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD)    Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,09/30/1997
* Chad Nelson, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 09/30/1997
* USD 74,889.00

*** ABSTRACT 9660463 Nelson This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will develop a high-speed, in-line gas monitor for control of Gas Mixing
in chemical vapor deposition systems. CVD has emerged as an important
fabrication technique for advanced semiconducting and optoelectronic thin film
materials. Without real-time monitoring and closed-loop control of the growth
chemistry, it is extremely difficult to fabricate structures with multi-layered
and graded compositional profiles. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy has
been demonstrated for process monitoring and recent innovations have improved
the ruggedness and signal-to-noise ratio while reducing the size, weight, and
cost of commercial instruments. In many applications, however, a long optical
pathlength is required to achieve the desired measurement sensitivity. The use
of standard, long-path "White" cells can significantly increase the pathlength
while simultaneously increasing the sampled volume. This increased volume can
increase the response time from spectral measurement and data analysis time to
the time it takes to fill the cell with a representative sample, which can be on
the order of several minutes. This Phase I project will develop a fast-response,
in-line optical system to be used in conjunction with an advanced FT-IR
spectrometer to provide real-time process and quality control in low flow
systems such as CVD reactors. In addition to process and quality control in CVD
and other chemical reactors, the proposed analysis system will be capable rapid
measurement (&lt;1 sec) of other gases such as automobile exhaust, waste-site
effluents, and fugitive emissions. The rapid response time will improve the
efficacy of FT-IR and other spectroscopic techniques for detecting process
upsets, fires, explosive atmospheres, and hazardous workplace conditions. ***