* 9660571
* SBIR Phase I:  Single-Switch Access to Science Software
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,09/30/1997
* Warren Lacefield, Academic Software Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1997
* USD 74,959.00

9660571 Lacefield This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be
carried out by Academic Software, Inc.(ASI) seeks to provide single switch
access to science software. Utilizing WinSCAN--an innovative programmable
single-switch control access interface lot PCs developed by ASI--in conjunction
with existing high-quality science software, the project seeks to establish the
capability of students with severe multiple disabilities to use this software to
perform the same science activities in the classroom as their peers without
disabilities. Custom WinSCAN scanning control displays and detailed lesson plans
for learning activities will be developed specifically for three selected
science programs and for exploratory Internet access to science study. These
materials will be field-tested by mainstream classroom teachers and children
with and without disabilities. Given evidence of the scientific and technical
feasibility of the methodology in Phase 1, a fully and independently accessible
set of supplemental science curriculum materials, lesson plans, and activities
for children in grades K-5 covering a broad range of science topics and pursuits
will be developed in the next phase of the project. These materials will assist
children with severe disabilities gain the hands-on experience needed to
appreciate and gain confidence and competence in early scientific and technical
training. When fully integrated with curriculum materials, the single-switch
access to science software will be of substantial value for early science
education experiences for children with disabilities in kindergartens and
elementary classrooms throughout the country. Moreover, the materials will also
benefit parents and children in homes which have access to inexpensive PCs and
mass information utilities such as America On-Line. ASI plans to market the
modules through its own network of assistive technology dealers and to explore
the interest of larger educational publishing houses which supply curriculum
materials and software to schools and school districts on a national basis.