* 9660674
* SBIR Phase I:  Liquid Crystalline Thermoset (LCT) Adhesives for High-Temperature Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Andrea Hoyt, Adherent Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,974.00

*** 96-60674 Hoyt This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims
to develop adhesives with thermal and mechanical properties suitable for
applications in the aerospace industry. The ideal requirements for these
materials are rather stringent. The materials must exhibit high strength and
high fracture toughness, good chemical resistance and long-term thermal
stability somewhere in the range 150 C-370 C. While there is a significant
research effort in high-temperature adhesives, currently available materials
fall well short of the ideal requirements. We propose to investigate liquid
crystalline thermoses (LCT) systems to be applied as adhesives suitable for use
in high-temperature, high-performance environments. LCTs, like their liquid
crystalline polymer (LOP) analogues, are expected to offer significant
enhancements in thermal and mechanical properties and chemical resistance over
their non-liquid crystalline counterparts. In addition, the inherent low melt
viscosity of liquid crystalline materials should bring about several processing
advantages in adhesive applications. The materials investigated will be
generally modeled on known examples of melt-processable or thermotropic LCTs.
Reactive endgroups will be chosen based on standards in the industry; some
proprietary endgroups will be tested. The major product of Phase I is the data
required for system optimization and extended bond testing in Phase II. These
data should also provide information on structure-property relationships in LCTs
and for adhesives in general. If this work is successful, a new type of adhesive
for high-temperature applications should be realized. While the application of
these materials is initially focused on the aerospace industry, there is
potential for use in other areas such as lightweight structural materials for
bridges and in high speed transportation systems. *** ??