* 9660708
* SBIR Phase I:  Intelligent Prevention and Information System for Earthquake-Induced Fires (IPIS-EF)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Gui-Zhong Qi, InfraTech Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,975.00

This Small Business Innovation Phase I project focuses on technology for
prevention, control and rapid extinguishing of the earthquake-induced fires in
urban regions and is particularly important in earthquake hazard mitigation. The
objective is to develop an Intelligent Prevention and Information System for
Earthquake-Induced Urban Fires (IPIS-EF). Earthquake hazards are serious threats
and have caused heavy damage and casualties. In addition to the shaking, the
`fire` following an earthquake is a major cause for loss of lives and
properties. An earthquake has the potential for initiating a chain of events
that can turn a moderately damaging seismic event into a holocaust of disasters.
IPIS-EF consists of three components: (1) Automatic Shut-Down System(ASDS) for
gas and electric power lines: ASDS is for prevention of the ignition of fires
following earthquakes; (2) Advanced Tele-Communication System (ATCS) for prompt
and accurate report of fires: The recent advance of sensor and telecommunication
technologies has lent the possibility to transmit information from sensors via
satellite to the emergency response center almost instantaneously; (3)
Intelligent Expert System for Signal Process (IESP): the ATCS component provides
prompt and accurate report of fires following a strong earthquake. The remaining
crucial point is the evaluation and interpretation of the fire signals properly.
IESP component will be developed to achieve this goal by using modern signal
processing techniques. The potential commercial applications of IPIS-EF are
numerous. Users of the system would include public agencies responsible for
safety at all levels of government, and heavy equipment factories and industrial
plants. IPIS-EF can also be used for prevention and extinguishing of
conventional, non-seismic induced fires. This hi-tech product can also be
exported to foreign countries in earthquake disaster prone cities and regions
over the globe. The commercialization of IPIS-EF can save lives and properties
in both seismic and non-seismic regions and enhance the competitiveness of
American business.