* 9660730
* SBIR Phase I:  Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) of Copper    Alloys from Bimetallic, Single Source Precursors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Thomas Baum, Advanced Technology Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,999.00

*** 96-60730 Baum This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will
achieve chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of copper (Cu) and copper-alloy films
via thermal decomposition of bimetallic, single source precursors. A novel class
of bimetallic single source Cu(1)(13-diketonato) complexes will be synthesized,
characterized and optimized for CVD film growth of doped copper films (alloys).
Both the Lewis base, which contains the second metal center, and 13-diketonate
ligand identity will be altered to "tailor" the precursor properties for the
deposition of high-purity copper alloy films. The copper complexes will be
studied to correlate structure -property relationships and utility for CVD.
Using this approach, conformal, doped Cu films can be explored as high-
performance interconnects in integrated circuits. A CVD metallization process
for the deposition of copper alloys will provide a mechanism for the formation
of high performance integrated circuits. Using low resistivity interconnects, in
tandem with low dielectric constant materials, provides a pathway to superior
device performance. Further, copper alloys can dramatically improve both the
electromigration and thermal stability of the submicron sized interconnects. In
Phase II, collaboration with a major IC manufacturer and CVD tool vendor will be
used to evaluate the commercial potential of the interconnect process. This
Phase I research will facilitate fabrication of high performance logic and
memory devices. World-wide commercialization in Phase III is expected to impact
a sizeable market.