* 9660710
* SBIR Phase I:  Use of Carbon Disulfide to Generate Peptide  Sequencing Ladders for Analysis by Matrix-Assisted Laser    Desorption/Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* George Tarr, PProSeeQ
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1997
* USD 65,000.00

*** 9660710 Tarr This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
explore the feasibility of peptide and protein sequencing coupled to high
throughput mass spectrometry using a novel methodology resembling the Edman
chemistry. Preliminary experiments suggest that the several problems arising
from the attempts by others to adapt the conventional Edman degradation to
produce truncation sets ("ladders") for mass spectral analysis will be
circumvented by this alternative chemistry based on carbon disulfide. Issues of
generality with respect to amino acid residues and to the physical/chemical
characteristics of different peptides will be addressed. Reaction conditions,
control, consistency (repeatability, predictability), and adequate basis for
later automation will be established and optimized. Kits enabling this chemistry
would be desirable to researchers using peptide maps and sequence information to
identify novel proteins, confirm sequences predicted from the DNA, locate sites
of post-translational or experimental modifications, analyze bioactive peptides,
tie spots observed on 2D gels to information in DNA databases ("proteome"
research), and provide quality control of recombinant proteins. An automated
instrument from Phase II would compete well with conventional Edman sequencers.
***