* 9660054
* SBIR Phase I: Electroplated Iridium Oxide Coatings for      Functional Electrical Stimulation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Urszula Twardoch, EIC Laboratories Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 96-60054 Twardoch Iridium oxide is becoming the material of choice for
electrodes in functional electrical stimulation (FES) because of its corrosion
resistance, low impedance, and high charge injection capacity. Use of Ir metal
electrodes which can be anodized, however, is not always possible. Alternative
deposition methods of Ir oxide films such as sputtering or thermal decomposition
of Ir precursors are unacceptable for many of the complex and thermally
sensitive devices such as cochlear implants and neural cuffs. The objective of
this research is to develop a process for electrodepositing Ir oxide at
temperatures below 100 C to produce conformal coatings. Manufactured electrodes
for a variety of FES applications can be "retrofitted" with the coatings, or the
coating procedure can be integrated into the production process. The Phase I
project will investigate both electroplating of thin, nonporous Ir followed by
anodic "activation" and direct deposition of Ir oxide. Advanced tools for
optimizing electrodeposition protocols will be employed, including computer-
controlled potentiostatic waveforms and the electrochemical quartz crystal
nanobalance. The physical properties of the coatings will be evaluated as well
as their suitability as stimulating electrodes. The methods producing the best
quality films will be used in the next phase to coat electrodes currently used
in FES research and commercial products. The proferred significant improvement
in the technology of electroactive prosthetic devices will be used in commercial
medical electrodes for treatment of neural functional impairment such as hearing
loss, incontinence, sexual dysfunction, limb paralysis, and spasticity and in
equipment for coating electrodes. ***