* 9660049
* SBIR Phase I:  An Integrated Sensor System for Autonomous   Monitoring of Carbon Dioxide Exchange and Transport at the  Air-Sea Interface
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Kisholoy Goswami, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1997
* USD 74,987.00

*** 9660049 Goswami Carbon dioxide is a major end product of fossil fuel
combustion and many other energy-related terrestrial activities. It is also an
important pollutant. How CO2 is assimilated and transformed by terrestrial and
marine ecosystems is unclear, but it is known that the world's oceans are the
single largest sink for atmospheric CO2. It is very important to monitor
CO2-related processes and parameters, because the results of such monitoring are
critical to chemical oceanography, to atmospheric science, to marine biology,
and to the direction of future energy policies. Physical Optics Corporation
(POC) proposes a completely integrated sensor system for long term (at least a
year) autonomous buoy-based monitoring of CO2 transport and exchange at the air-
sea interface. This fixed/flowing fiber optic chemical sensor (F30CS) system
employs a miniaturized buffer flow coupled to a dual fiber optic optrode. CO2 is
sensed using a pH sensitive indicator such as mete cresol purple. Dissolution of
CO2 leads to reversible modulation of the buffer pH. The pH indicator is
permanently entrapped in porous polymer spheres. A replenishable buffer solution
eliminates the irreversible changes that have previously prevented the
realization of long lived CO2 optrodes. This sensor system is an instrument of
particular importance to science and to the national critical technology area of
pollution minimization and remediation. It will significantly advance chemical
oceanography, marine biology, atmospheric science, and ecosystem science. In
addition to marine-based monitoring, the instrument could be used in such
terrestrial aquatic ecosystems as lakes, rivers, and reservoirs, and in water
quality and general environmental applications. Other applications include
monitoring at severe/waste water discharge points, sewage treatment plants, and
fish hatcheries. ***