* 9660988
* SBIR Phase I: Multi-ViewPoint Clustering Analysis for       Validation of Knowledge-Based Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Mala Mehrotra, Pragati Synergetic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,890.00

*** 9660988 Mehrotra This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
to develop a semi-automated tool, based on the Multi-ViewPoint Clustering
methodology to perhaps discover significant underlying structures of such
complex systems from multiple points of view. By presenting different
perspectives of the system one can gain significant insight into different
interrelationships across the exposed structures. The ability to develop and
maintain large, reliable, complex knowledge-based systems in a cost-effective
manner is still a challenging problem. A viable tool to structure knowledge-
based systems before they become operational, will enhance their reliability and
maintainability. Phase I of the effort will look at the feasibility of
automating the analysis process in the MVP-CA software and design an interactive
interface for useful information exchange between the user and the system. Such
information will prove an invaluable aid for many software life cycle activities
such as verification, validation, testing and maintenance of a knowledge-based
system. MVP-CA tool will be a significant advantage to software developers and
maintainers. It is expected that this tool will be integrated as a value-added
product into software development environments to support the following
activities: verification, validation, testing, maintenance reengineering and
migration of knowledge-based systems software to object-oriented platforms. ***