* 9660014
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-time Spectroscopic Ellipsometer for Thin Film Process Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Shankar Krishnan, Containerless Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9660014 Krishnan This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will test a novel method for spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) which is capable of
lower cost and higher response rates than conventional SE instruments. SEs are
used to measure thin film thickness, chemical composition, and defect
concentrations in multi-layer films. However, speed and cost limit the use of
SEs for real-time thin film process control applications. The proposed research
exploits the facts that a diffraction grating not only disperses incident light
into a spectrum, but also provides several orders of diffraction that contain
information about the polarization state of the light. These two characteristics
of gratings make it possible to design a Grating Division of Amplitude
Photopolarimeter (G-DOAP) for spectroscopic ellipsometry. The G-DOAP is capable
of (i) high temporal resolution and (ii) low cost manufacture because it
contains no moving parts and has fewer optical elements than conventional SE
equipment. In Phase I, this firm will develop and characterize the performance
of a laboratory breadboard G-DOAP. They will also investigate analytical and
numerical methodologies to achieve feedback control of thin film deposition
using SE data. The G-DOAP is a recent invention, initially developed with NSF-
DMR funding, and patented in 1995. The G-DOAP's spectroscopic capabilities have
yet to be demonstrated and are a key issue for the proposed Phase I research.
The research will be performed in collaboration with the University of New
Orleans. If successful, the research will show feasibility of low-cost, high-
speed spectroscopic ellipsometry for intelligent control of thin film deposition
processes. The proposed spectroscopic ellipsometer (SE) would impact state of he
art MBE, MOVPE, and MOCVD techniques by allowing growth of semiconductor
materials under high-speed, real-time control, currently unavailable.
Appreciable market share for the SE is also anticipated in semiconductor ex-situ
chara cterization applications. ***