* 9660693
* SBIR Phase I: Sky Explorer: A Low-Cost Telescope/CCD Camera System, Incorporating Interactive Software, to Enrich High  School Science and Technology Learning in Astronomy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* George Tucker, Boston Engineering Services
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,129.00

*** 9660693 Tucker This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be
carried out by Boston Engineering Service takes advantage of falling costs and
increasing performance of small computer-assisted telescopes and charged coupled
diode (CCD) cameras to achieve a new, lower cost design that is optimized for
student learning and affordable for all schools. Such a system of telescope and
camera, combined with user friendly, interactive software that acts as an
"intelligent tutor" in showing how to use the equipment and do projects, can
allow high school students to perform projects of genuine scientific discovery,
previously only attempted by adults with scientific training. Such projects
include Johnson-Morgan standard (UBVRI) photometry of variable stars and the
discovery and tracking of asteroids. The research objective is to arrive at a
suitable telescope/camera design and an effective software user interface to
meet cost objectives and student needs. The research consists of extensive
experimentation by a software developer and instrument designer with a group of
high school students using a prototype of such a telescope/camera system on a
set of astronomy projects. This project offers students the opportunity to
participate in scientific discovery and to become knowledgeable about the latest
technology. Potential commercial applications are a marketable educational
instrument for secondary, middle and elementary schools, for universities, and
the amateur astronomy and public education audiences. ***