* 9660720
* SBIR Phase I: Digital In-Phase and Quadrature Converter for Wide-Band Digital Beamforming
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Steven Kaplan, HYPRES, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,976.00

*** ABSTRACT 9660720 Kaplan This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will develop a multi-chip superconducting digital beamforming (DBF)
system for ground station communications with satellites. DBF leads to a
significant improvement in communication systems performance by enhancing the
reception of signals from a number of specific directions. The increase in
performance will lower the power required of satellite transmitters, thereby
reducing payload weight. The novel digital communications technology under
investigation enables beamforming for wide-band and spread-spectrum
communications signals, which cannot be performed by present narrow-band
systems. The reliance on digital rather than unclog components ensures higher
signal fidelity and signal-to-noise. During the Phase I project, a Digital In-
Phase and Quadrature converter (DIQC) will be developed for the proposed
beamforming system. The digital IQ circuit will avoid the imbalances in gain,
phase, and time delay experienced by conventional communications and RADAR
systems. The digital signal processing elements for the DIQC circuits will
utilize Rapid Single Flux Quantum (RSFQ) multipliers, accumulators, and other
arithmetic logic circuits. These circuits have already been successfully
demonstrated at HYPRES at multi-gigahertz frequencies. The multi-chip DBF system
developed in Phase II will subsequently be commercialized in wide-band digital
beamforming communications and RADAR systems, with bandwidths up to 2.5 GHz at
carrier frequencies up to 20 GHz. Commercial applications of the technology
under development include wide-band narrow-beam satellite communication links,
secure communication systems, multi-functional conformal antennas arrays for
surveillance, intercept, and tracking. The digital signal processing functions
developed in this program will benefit any application limited by processing
speed, such as commercial spectrum analyzer and digitizer instruments, as well
as digital electronic warfare s ystems. ***