* 9660789
* SBIR Phase I:  Commercialization of a Mechanical Testing    Instrument with In-Situ Surface Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Lane Wilson, Microsystems of Buckhannon, Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 73,668.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a compact
physical design and integrated control system to commercialize a recently
developed high temperature mechanical testing instrument equipped with an in-
situ surface analysis capability. The base structure of the instrument consists
of an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) chamber which combines mechanical tensile testing
and high temperature heating with careful control of the gas phase environment.
In-situ analysis is added to the mechanical testing in the form of Moire-
interferometry (measuring solid mechanics full field surface deformations), and
scanning electron microscopy with spectroscopic chemical mapping (measuring
microstructural morphology and chemical transformations). The integrated
instrument will provide detailed in-situ experimental information applicable to
both continuum mechanics modeling and microstructural materials science
investigations of material systems exposed to harsh high temperature and
reactive gas environmental conditions. The scope of Phase I research, initiation
of commercialization of the instrument, will be to improve the mechanical and
optical design for smaller size, greater affordability, and increased
performance. The control of the various analytical components will also be
integrated to enhance real time data interaction and remove redundancies in the
control electronics. The mechanical testing system with in-situ surface analysis
is attractive to researchers studying high performance alloy systems with
attention to both their solid mechanics and microscopic behavior in extreme
environments of high temperatures and reactive gases. The commercialized
instrument will be of utility in materials science and engineering R&D
laboratories as well as commercial materials testing facilities.