* 9661544
* SBIR Phase I: Coherence Based Commercialization Strategy    Decision Aid
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,08/31/1997
* Phyl Speser, Foresight Science and Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/1997
* USD 74,995.00

9661544 Speser This Small Business innovation Research Phase I project to be
carried out by Foresight Science and Technology, Incorporated builds a software
engine providing decision support for the development of commercialization
strategies. Commercialization strategy formulation can be viewed as a problem
that involves a set of elements that mutually constrain each other. Coherence is
philosophical method for maximizing a set of positive and negative constraints.
As a coherence problem, commercialization strategy formulation requires
discovering those strategies which best fit or cohere within a pattern involving
(1) the technology being commercialized, (2) the internal company environment,
(3) the external environment (especially the market), and, (4) the
commercializing firm's goal(s), and which best leverage elements in the internal
and external environments of the company and the technology, in order to attain
company goals by exploiting opportunities and neutralizing or avoiding threats.
To build this tool, Foresight Science and Technology, Inc. will specify the
elements in the knowledge domain based on relevant social scientific literature.
Research by Paul Thagard established that coherence can be computed via
connectionist networks (neural nets) and Thagard's codes will be adapted for
this project. The project proffers a decision aid for commercialization in Small
Business Innovation Research projects, federal labs, universities, and major
corporations and an analytical tool to allow investors to access the
commercialization strategies of companies with technology developments.