* 9661361
* SBIR Phase I:  Phytoremediation of Surface and Ground WatersUsing Sequential Rhizosphere - Thin Film and Periphyton     Filters
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Thomas DeBusk, Azurea, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,603.00

*** 9661361 DeBusk This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I Project
describes a study plan to develop sequential rhizosphere thin-film systems (RTF)
and periphyton filters (PF) for removal of excess nutrients and trace elements
from surface waters. It is hypothesized that the combination of high loading
capacity and high contaminant tolerance of a wetland macrophyte (Hydrocotyle
umbellata) with the higher affinity of periphyton for nutrients and trace
elements will provide key components of a sequential process train that will
effectively and economically treat large and variable volumes of water. The goal
is to design and test a phytoremediation technology to remove trace elements
from water to levels typical of natural ambient surface waters. Such treated
waters would meet all permit stipulations for release to surface waters. It is
proposed to optimize system design to take advantage of suspended particulate
retention and pH mediated precipitation to enhance performance above that
expected on the basis of bioaccumulation-binding mechanisms alone. The Phase I
study will determine the highest water concentrations of P, Cu, Pb and As
tolerated by the plants, the lowest routinely achievable contaminant
concentrations in effluent water under reasonable contaminant inputs, and
contaminant concentrations in biomass and associated solids. This effort will
both characterize performance of the RTF and PF processes, and define acceptable
strategies for handling harvested biomass. It is expected that successful
development of this phytoremediation technology will provide a cost effective,
rugged and broadly useful capability to remove trace element contaminants from
moderately contaminated surface waters and stormwater from various sources, e.g.
agricultural or urban runoff. Successful completion of Phase I and II research
efforts will result in, for the first time, an operationally simple, reliable
and relatively low maintenance technology to remove specific element
contaminants fr om surface and ground waters. The sequential RTF-PF is a useful
technology for government agencies (DOD, DOE, EPA). Private sector customers
could employ them to treat effluent streams characterized by high or variable
volumes and moderate metal contamination (~500 - 1000 microgram/L). This system
may also be useful for reclamation/recycling efforts for metals. ***