* 9661329
* SBIR Phase I:  Biodegration of the Gasoline Oxygenate       Methyl tert-Butyl Ether (MTBE)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Michael Shannon, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9661329 Shannon This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
involves the characterization of microorganisms capable of degrading the
gasoline oxygenate methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), and development of an in situ
bioremediation process for treatment of MTBE-contaminated soils and aquifers.
MTBE has been used since 1979 as a high-octane additive to reduce the more toxic
aromatic additives that have previously been used in gasoline. Almost 18 billion
pounds of MTBE were produced in the U. S. in 1995, and it accounts for up to 11%
of the reformulated gasoline used by consumers. Its widespread use has resulted
in its accidental discharge and the subsequent contamination of aquifers and
soils. The U. S. Geological Survey has estimated that MTBE is the second most
common water pollutant in urban ground waters. Few studies have been done to
evaluate the biodegradation and fate of MTBE. This research project will
investigate MTBE degradation by an MTBE-degrading propane-oxidizing bacterial
strain M. vaccae JOB5 and three MTBE-degrading strains recently isolated by the
firm. The study will determine rates and mechanisms of degradation, and
systematically characterize the conditions needed for in situ biostimulation
using model aquifers. The cost of remediating leaking underground storage tanks
has been estimated to be greater than $1.8 billion if we must rely on current
technologies. The in situ technology developed during this project will be
incorporated into the firm's existing remediation technologies to develop an
economically feasible system for degrading MTBE. The technology will be widely
applicable at both government and private sites. ***