* 9661512
* SBIR Phase I:  An Approach to Measuring and Assessing       Dependability for Critical Software
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Dong Tang, SoHaR Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9661512 Tang This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
investigates the feasibility of an approach that combines the operational
profile, rare conditions, importance sampling, stress testing, and measurement-
based dependability evaluation in the late testing phase or early operational
phase, to quantify dependability for critical software that requires very high
reliability (< 10-6) and availability (> 0.999999). Traditional software testing
methods combined with reliability growth models cannot measure and assess
dependability for software with such high requirements. The approach proposed
for this research applies importance sampling, a statistical method to reduce
sampling size while keeping estimates obtained from the sample unbiased at a
high level of confidence, to the operational profile to guide testing critical
operations or components of the software to accelerate the occurrence of rare
conditions, then transforms the failure rates measured in the testing to those
that occur in the normal operation by the likelihood ratio function of the
importance sampling theory, and finally evaluates reliability and availability
for the tested software system based on the transformed failure rates using
measurement-based dependability modeling techniques. When the acceleration
factor (likelihood ratio) is large (over 100), which is typical because the
occurrence probability of rare conditions in the normal operation is much lower
than in the importance sampling testing, it is possible to quantify a very high
reliability or availability in a test of reasonable duration. It is anticipated
that upon the completion of this research, a detailed methodology and a high
level design of tools for implementing the proposed approach will be available.
Real-time commercial production systems that use software to monitor, control,
and manage safety-critical equipment and physical processes (e.g., aircraft,
nuclear and chemical plants) and similar critical systems developed by
government agencies (e.g., space shuttle and air traffic control system) require
high reliability, availability, and safety. The approach and tools addressed in
this research can be applied to the software in these systems to quantify
dependability and to provide feedback to the design. The approach can also
contribute significantly to enhancing the quality of the systems by applying its
stress testing methods to the software. ***