* 9661006
* SBIR Phase I: Unique Biomaterial for Long-Term Culturing of Hematopoietic Stem Cells in Vitro
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Mark Pykett, CYTOMATRIX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9661006 Pykett In this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project,
Cytomatrix proposes to examine the ability of a unique three-dimensional
biomaterial, Cellfoam TM, to support the long-term culturing of hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) in vitro. The ability to culture stem cells in vitro over
prolonged periods is paramount to many areas of basic research and clinical
medicine, yet current culture systems have proven ineffective in sustaining HSCs
for extended periods, perhaps because traditional monolayer cultures lack the
natural three-dimensional topography found in vivo. Thus, there is urgent need
for the development of novel culture systems capable of sustaining HSCs.
Preliminary results have shown that Cellfoam is capable of enhancing short- term
stem cell survival in vitro compared to conventional systems without
compromising HSC survival or pluripotency. This project will evaluate the
ability of Cellfoam to sustain HSCs in vitro over extended periods and will
assess the impact of long-term culture on stem cell biology. Specifically, the
survival, phenotype, and multipotency of HSCs cultured for six weeks in Cellfoam
will be measured and compared to conventional systems. Based on previous
successes with short-term Cellfoam cultures, it is anticipated that Cellfoam
will improve the long-term maintenance of stem cell viability. The Phase I
research results will be instrumental in developing advanced culture systems for
the maintenance and manipulation of HSCs. Cellfoam TM systems will enable, for
the first time, the maintenance, analysis, and manipulation of hematopoietic
stem cells over extended periods. Commercial applications of Cellfoam devices
will take advantage of existing markets in basic science and clinical medicine
in which such systems are required but unavailable. Applications foster
fundamental advances in research and clinical fields, including gene therapy,
bone marrow transplantation, and transfusion medicine, and thus have the
potential for sign ificant impact on basic as well as clinical disciplines. ***