* 9661170
* SBIR Phase I: Scanning Wire Magnetometer for Nondestructive Evaluation for High-Temperature Superconducting Wire
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Sankaran Kumar, Quantum Magnetics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,764.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a new
instrument for the nondestructive evaluation (NDE) of high-temperature
superconducting (HTS) wires. A major obstacle to commercial development of HTS
applications is the inability to manufacture long lengths of wire reliably. One
conventional method to test long lengths of wire is to cut pieces from their
ends and perform critical current measurements. This leaves most of the wire
untested. The four-point resistivity method requires the attachment and
subsequent removal of contacts, which risks damaging the wire and provides poor
spatial resolution of defects. This project will develop the Scanning WIre
Magnetometer (SWIM) to scan the entire wire length's ac magnetic susceptibility
continuously, measuring critical current density noninvasively and with high
spatial resolution. Operated as an eddy current instrument above the
superconducting transition temperature, SWIM also evaluates the physical
integrity of the wire's silver cladding. In Phase I, the project will
demonstrate feasibility of scanning wire magnetometry using HTS wire samples
provided by two project collaborators, Intermagnetics General Corp. and the
State University of New York at Buffalo. In Phase II, an automated prototype
will be fabricated for testing at an HTS wire fabrication facility. This
specific NDE market aims primarily to facilitate the cost-effective production
of HTS wire, tape and thin film materials, with a secondary application to low-
temperature superconducting wire production. A direct commercial market for the
SWIM of the order of several million dollars per year is expected, but has the
potential to greatly accelerate the commercial development of HTS devices and
thus indirectly to generate much larger markets.