* 9661078
* SBIR Phase I: Low Cost Composite Plate for Proton Exchange  Membrane (PEM) Fuel Cell
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* David Bloomfield, Analytic Power Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,805.00

*** ABSTRACT 9661078 Bloomfield This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will investigate the use of titanium nitride coated aluminum in proton
exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell bipolar plates as a replacement to the carbon
and titanium bipolar plate parts currently in use. Simplified bipolar plate
fabrication methods will also be examined during the course of this research
effort. Although the power generation problems for PEM fuel cells have largely
been solved, problems with weight and cost remain. One of the heaviest and
costliest components in a fuel cell stack is the bipolar plate. During the Phase
I program, Analytic Power will determine the feasibility of using titanium
nitride coated low cost metals, the type(s) of plastic that can be used for seal
frames, and whether or not the plastic-to-metal bond is adequate for use in
pressurized fuel cells. The proposed materials and methods will be incorporated
into the fabrication of fuel cell stacks and flow distribution, water management
and sub-stack performance tests to evaluate the new materials and fabrication
methods will be conducted. Success in this program will lead to dramatic
reductions in PEM fuel cell stack costs. This reduction in cost will bolster
efforts underway to introduce PEM fuel cells into next generation vehicles. Cost
reductions achieved by this research effort will also further the
commercialization of PEM fuel cells as either stationary or portable power
generation units. ***