* 9661198
* SBIR Phase I:  Algebraic Multigrid (AMG) Software
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* John Ruge, Front Range Scientific Computations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 72,733.00

*** 9661198 Ruge This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project is
testing and development of robust algebraic multigrid software for solving
unstructured-mesh problems, designed to run in both serial and parallel
environments, and which efficiently incorporates local refinement strategies in
the solution process. Many commercial and government codes, including those in
hydrodynamics, heat conduction and multigroup thermal radiation transport,
require solution of second-order elliptic partial differential equations, and
often employ unstructured discretizations in order to resolve complex geometries
and to facilitate adaptive refinement. A common solution strategy is to set up
an outer iteration (e.g., Newton's or Newton-like methods, preconditioned
conjugate gradient, implicit time-stepping) in which each step requires the
solution of discretized second-order elliptic partial differential equations.
Current solution methods are limited, with convergence degrading with problem
size, time steps, and highly resolved local refinement levels, so that solution
of realistic problems is prohibitively expensive. To counter these difficulties,
algebraic multigrid (AMG) uses the principles of standard multigrid methods, but
with an automated preprocessing phase in which the various multigrid components
are constructed. This leads to a very efficient and robust solution method for
such problems which is ideally suited for unstructured grids since all of the
processing is based on the matrices, thus eliminating the usual multigrid
requirement that the user supply coarser discretization levels, which would be
prohibitive or impossible for most unstructured mesh applications. In Phase I,
the emphasis will be on testing existing AMG codes on problems of interest,
determining efficient ways to incorporate local refinement strategies in the
solution proven, and extending multigrid parallel implementation strategies to
AMG. Robust algebraic multigrid software that is easily combined with existi ng
codes has the potential to greatly enhance the range of problems (in size and
complexity) that can be efficiently solved. Unstructured meshed at used widely
in codes for bow the public and private sectors in many applications. and these
codes would benefit greatly by the availability of robust AMG solvers ***