* 9661182
* SBIR Phase I:  Ground Truthing Approach to Risk Assessment  and Communication Under Uncertainty
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Robert Knowlton, DecisionFX
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,000.00

9661182 Knowlton This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be
carried out by Decision TX focuses on the development of improved methods and a
related software system for assessing and communicating environmental health
risks, as well as estimating potential financial burdens associated with such
risks. The suggested methods will allow risk assessors and risk managers to
efficiently evaluate the accumulated risks at contaminated industrial and waste
management sites affected by parameter uncertainty and variability, while making
the best objective use of site contaminant data. The software system will
facilitate objective analysis of costs associated with remedial actions that
might be undertaken to remove contamination, and the associated financial risks
d liabilities imposed by the environmental contamination. A particularly timely
application of the proposed approach is to the numerous Brownfield sites located
throughout the United States. Many of the graphical constructs suggested for the
software system will greatly simplify the communication of risk issues to site
stakeholders. The methods proposed incorporate both established concepts and
recently-researched technologies; however, the Decision TX approach represents a
novel attempt to combine all of these complementary concepts into an easy-to-use
package. The technologies developed under this research can be applied to
streamline waste site investigations and remediation projects in both government
and private sectors. Entities standing to benefit from the tools include
commercial and industrial businesses whose sites fall under the purview of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA),
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and other environmental
regulations and drivers. In addition, these software tools would greatly aid the
legal, financial, industrial, insurance, and real estate communities, in
determining liabilities and financial risks associated wit h the purchase or
redevelopment of contaminated properties.