* 9661232
* SBIR Phase I:  Catalysts for Carbon Monoxide Removal During Automobile Cold Start
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Girish Srinivas, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** 96-61232 Srinivas This Project will develop a novel class of catalysts to
remove (Carbon Monoxide) CO from automobile exhaust during cold start. TDA
Research has identified a novel class of catalysts that effectively remove CO at
temperatures as low as 25 C. In addition to removing the CO, the heat generated
during the oxidation of CO to CO2 is used to heat the three-way catalyst faster,
leading to hydrocarbon oxidation. In Phase I, TDA will synthesize, characterize
and test the activity of the catalysts for the removal of CO under cold start
conditions. In Phase II, the catalyst will be supported on an inert carrier
(ceramic monolith) and tested on a car to determine the efficiency under actual
cold start conditions to bring the temperature of the catalyst up to operating
temperature. More than 40 million people, in 80 different cities, live in areas
with CO levels that exceed EPA standards. Automobiles are by far the largest
outdoor source of CO, and are also major sources of unburned hydrocarbons (HCs)
and nitrogen oxides (NOX). Since the advent of automotive emissions regulations
in the United States in 1973, the allowable emissions of all three major
pollutants have been continually reduced. Current three-way catalysts are not
effective in reducing emissions at temperatures below 200 C (during cold start).
Electrically heated catalyst, while effective, are large energy consumers,
heavy, expensive and inconvenient. This new approach offers a cost effective
alternative. ***