* 9661256
* SBIR Phase I: A CMOS-Based MicroElectroMechanical Systems   (MEMS) Fabrication Service
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Michael Emerling, Tanner Research Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,993.00

*** 9661256 Emerling This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
to develop a MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS) fabrication service that will
be self-supporting after Phase I. We will use a MEMS technology demonstrated
successfully by several laboratories. The process begins with a CMOS chip,
available from many vendors, and applies a relatively simple mask-less
postprocessing etch to produce pits, cantilever beams, and membranes.
Researchers have used this technology to demonstrate a variety of MEMS devices.
This MEMS process leverages existing CMOS fabrication to create MEMS devices
integrated monolithically with CMOS circuitry. The single postprocessing step
requires no photolithography and no expensive equipment. During Phase I
preliminary design rules, guidelines, and examples will be developed and
distributed to the MEMS community, and initial designs will be solicited. We
will install the fabrication equipment, and perform the processing of the
initial run, returning parts to researchers for testing. The proposed MEMS
fabrication service will enable the research and development to keep our nation
in the forefront of the commercialization of MEMS. The service will support
commercialization by providing cost effective prototype fabrication and volume
manufacturing. ***