* 9661214
* SBIR Phase I: Surface-Modified, Ultrahigh Strength          Polyethylene Fibers and Their Composites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Waleed Shalaby, POLY-MED INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,917.00

*** 9661214 Shalaby This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will
use a novel process for the surface-modification of organic polymers to
chemically activate ultrahigh molecular weight, high tenacity, polyethylene
fibers and determine their effectiveness in reinforcing organic polymeric
matrices and Portland cement. Phase I entails the surface activation of the
fibers to provide physicochemical compatibility with typical epoxy and acrylic
resin matrices characterized and then evaluated for basic and application-
relevant properties and compared with non-reinforced controls as well as
controls based on untreated fibers. Results of Phase I study will be used to
identify the most promising type (or types) of composites for further
development and optimization in Phase II. Successful development of the proposed
composites is expected to provide novel high-performance, cost-effective
materials. These materials have a broad range of applications including those
associated with structural epoxy composites (used in aircraft, automotive and
sports equipment), high toughness dental and orthopedic acrylic composites (for
prostheses), and impact-resistant cement composites (for construction of panels,
rehabilitation of deteriorating bridges, and installation or repair of
pavement).