* 9661323
* SBIR Phase I:  High Pressure Metalorganic Chemical Vapor    Deposition Growth of GaN and InGaN
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,09/30/1997
* Stanley Vernon, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 09/30/1997
* USD 74,899.00

*** ABSTRACT 9661323 Vernon This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I
project will develop an innovative, high-pressure metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition (MOCVD) reaction chamber for improved growth of Group-III nitrides.
Growth at pressures above one atmosphere will increase cracking efficiency of
ammonia, limit material desorption, lower the density of nitrogen vacancies, and
lead to better crystal quality by permitting higher temperature growth. Phase I
will demonstrate growth of GaN using a high-pressure MOCVD reaction chamber,
operating up to ten-atmospheres pressure. The chamber will be a vertical,
inverted-flow design to minimize convection. MOCVD growth of the first GaN laser
diode at Nichia used a configuration which simulates high pressure with a "push"
flow orthogonal to the growth stream. At Spire, high-pressure MOCVD has been
successfully employed for InP growth using substantially less phosphine than
normally required. In fact, InP with specular surfaces and good crystal quality
has been deposited at three atmospheres with a V:III ratio of 1:1, the lowest
ratio ever reported for the successful growth of InP. Phase II will develop
growth parameters for GaN, InGaN, and AlGaN device structures. Process
optimization will include use of nitrogen in the carrier gas to better confine
heat to the wafer surface by reducing thermal conductivity. The market potential
for GaN is tremendous, especially in optical storage (blue lasers and LEDs) and
high-temperature electronics. Products made from this material system are
already in large demand. If successful, high-pressure MOCVD may be the process
of choice for GaN growth. Spire will offer high-pressure reactors to device
manufacturers, while we use this technology to expand our optoelectronics
epitaxial service business to include structures for shorter-wavelength devices.
***