* 9661562
* SBIR Phase I: Net Shape Fabrication Technology for Fiber    Reinforced Composites Densified by Pressureless Sintering
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Mark Patterson, Ceramic Composites Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,955.00

*** 96-61562 Patterson This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project
will demonstrate the fabrication of dense, strong and tough ceramic laminated
matrix composites (CLMCs) through the in-situ alignment, seeding and growth of
acicular b DGG1 -Si3N4 particles in Si3N4 reinforcing fibers. These green-state
fibers will be incorporated into a a-Si3N4 green-state laminate matrix
fabricated by a tape casting and stacking procedure. The key advantage of this
processing technology is the ability to do pressureless sintering of the CLMC
material to full density thereby significantly reducing the cost and enabling
net-shape components to be fabricated. Since the toughening fibers are not yet
dense when incorporated into the matrix laminates, the composite structure can
be fully densified via pressureless sintering because the fiber and matrix
phases will undergo simultaneous densification. This unique materials system,
although pressureless sintered, will exhibit many of the characteristics of
fiber-reinforced composites sintered via pressure-assisted densification -
namely, high density, strength, and toughness achieved through crack bridging
and fiber pullout. The Phase I research will demonstrate (-Si3N4 fiber-toughened
laminates, thereby establishing a method of fabricating net-shape components
(via pressureless sintering) which will exhibit high density and high toughness
through mechanisms such as fiber pullout. Fiber-reinforced laminates will be
used to fabricate components for turbine engine applications such as combustors,
exhaust nozzles, shrouds, flaps and seals. It is anticipated that the successful
development of the (-Si3N4 fiber-toughened composite material will provide
significant cost savings for the fabrication of ceramic composites. *** Page: 1
DGG1