* 9661754
* SBIR Phase I:  Finding Value in Patent Portfolios Using     Co-Citation Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,10/31/1997
* Mary Ellen Mogee, Mogee Research and Analysis Associates
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/1997
* USD 74,710.00

*** 9661754 Mogee In this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project,
Mogee Research & Analysis Associates will apply co-citation analysis techniques
developed in the field of bibliometrics to patent data in an effort to identify
patents closely related in terms of subject matter that may represent valuable
licensing packages. Co-citation analysis techniques will be used to cluster the
U.S. patents assigned to two companies in two different technologies based on
citations they have received from U.S. patent examiners, European Patent Office
examiners, and patent applicants. The resulting patent clusters will be
evaluated by licensing professionals to assess how the clustered patents relate
to one another technologically and how valuable the clusters would be as
licensing packages. The co-citation clusters will also be compared to clusters
generated using other standard search methods such as word searching and
classification searching. The goal of this research is to develop a tool that
patent licensing professionals can use to group patents into valuable licensing
packages more quickly, cheaply, and accurately than they can using current
methods. A primary commercial application of this research would be a software
tool that could be licensed to companies or other organizations with large
patent portfolios or to technology licensing companies. This tool would help
them identify potentially valuable clusters of patents within their patent
portfolios and help them identify potential licensing partners. ***