* 9661638
* SBIR Phase I:  Terahertz Time-Domain Spectrometer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Edward Gabl, CLARK-MXR INC
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

*** ABSTRACT 96-61638 Gabl This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
program will develop a compact, reliable, terahertz (THz) time-domain
spectrometer. This instrument will be used to provide comprehensive far-infrared
absorption measurement. THz time-domain spectroscopy is conceptually a very
general technique. However, until now, the complexity of the required
femtosecond source has severely limited the diffusion of this spectroscopic
technique. This Phase I program addresses this main issue. During our Phase I we
will demonstrate a prototype THz spectrometer operating with one of our compact
femtosecond source. In our Phase II we will developed a field-portable Terahertz
time-domain spectrometer. The proposed THz time-domain spectrometer will use a
compact femtosecond laser to gate a coherent receiver. This approach offers
superb signal to noise ratios (108:1 in power). The coverage of this
spectrometer will extend continuously over a wide spectral range, from 0.1 to
greater than 6 THz, permitting the simultaneous detection of many species. This
THz source generates a well-collimated, low-divergence beam for which the
receiver has a corresponding small acceptance angle. Thus, the proposed
technique combined with mathematical techniques commonly used in tomography
should provide 3-D data. Our program goals will be reached in collaboration with
the inventor of THz time-domain spectroscopy, Professor D. Grischkowsky
(Oklahoma State University). THz time-domain spectroscopy has applications in
non-contact measurement of water vapor, non-contact measurement of doping levels
in semi-conductor wafers, non-contact monitoring of flame emission and flame
temperature, and detection of concealed explosives. ***