* 9661040
* SBIR Phase I:  Conductive Oxide Coatings on Aluminum Sheets for Low-Temperature Fuel Cell Stacks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Krishna Choudhary, Crystals & Ceramic Technology, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/1997
* USD 73,597.00

*** ABSTRACT 9661040 Choudhary This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will investigate the use of conductive perovskite-type oxide coatings on
aluminum sheets and plates for potential application in low-temperature fuel
cell stacks. The cost of low-temperature fuel cell stacks can be greatly reduced
if the bipolar graphite plates, which are used to connect the fuel cells in
series, can be replaced by aluminum plates with conductive and corrosion
resistant coatings. The conductive oxide coatings under investigation in Phase I
will be deposited on aluminum alloy substrates, coated with Ni/Cu bilayers, by
low-temperature organometallic chemical vapor deposition (OMCVD). The multilayer
thin film deposition scheme has been designed to reduce thermal stresses in the
films. The coatings will be characterized by X-ray diffraction, optical
microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. The corrosion resistance of the
conductive oxide protective coatings will be determined by acetic acid salt
spray test. During Phase I, the conductive, perovskite-type oxide coatings will
be synthesized at low temperatures (< 325 C) by OMCVD using organometallic
precursors and N2O (an oxidizer). The aluminum sheets and plates coated with
conductive perovskite-type oxide thin films will be used in low-temperature
(87-125 C) fuel cell stacks. The conductive oxide coatings are expected to
provide long-term corrosion resistance. The fuel cell stacks with conductive
oxide coated aluminum sheets and plates will have potential application in the
next generation automobiles, buses, watercraft and submarines. The conductive
oxide protective coatings can also be applied to aluminum parts for non-
decorative applications. ***