* 9661122
* SBIR Phase I:  A Non-Invasive Viscometer for Materials      Analysis and Process Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Geoffrey Barrall, Quantum Magnetics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 06/30/1997
* USD 74,922.00

*** 96-61122 Barrall This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will magnetic resonance (MR) viscometry and develop specifications for a
commercial MR viscometer. Many manufacturing and processing technologies depend
on the flow or rheological properties of fluids, suspensions, slurries, or
melts. For example, the steady-state shear-dependent viscosity of thermopolymers
is often indicative of key properties such as molecular weight and molecular
weight distribution. Viscometric measurement of molecular weight distribution
requires measuring shear viscosity over two or three decades in shear rate with
at least five points per decade. Current in-line and on-line viscometers are not
capable of making the required measurements quickly enough to allow real-time
process control. The MR viscometer will measure shear viscosity over two decades
in shear rate within one minute (about 30 times faster than the present state of
the art). It will be noninvasive, capable of investigating particulate-filled
systems (which can clog present viscometers), and amenable to large flow
streams. The MR viscometer will further be capable of simultaneously measuring
other important properties such as diffusion coefficients, of which present
viscometers are incapable. A low-cost, in-line system to measure viscosity over
several decades in shear rate will find wide application in industries that
process melts, slurries, and emulsions. Target markets include thermoplastics,
resins, petroleum derivatives, heterogeneous food products, coal, paper, and
waste disposal management. ***