* 9661259
* SBIR Phase I: Alternative Keyboard for Typists with Carpal  Tunnel Syndrome (CTS)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1997
* Peter McAlindon, McAlindon Enterprises Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1997
* USD 66,028.00

*** 9661259 McAlindon This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I is
proposing a new approach to typing for typists with CTS. A new alphanumeric
input device is proposed to address the ergonomic and efficiency needs of the
physically disabled user. The device uses a pair of devices, each comprised of
an inverted bowl upon which the hands comfortably rest. Its typing methodology
entails creating a keystroke via a combination of positions of the two bowls.
This combination of positions is called chording. Phase I evaluation will
investigate the ergonomic, biomechanical, and typing performances of the new
device. Such an evaluation will establish how effective the device may be in
providing an alternative means of typing to those with physical disability of
the upper extremity. Primary elements of evaluation include: character layout,
motor skill requirements, physical and workload evaluation and memory
requirements. The device's potential for commercial success is enormous. The
device's greatest commercial application lies in its ability to respond to any
user's needs. Outside of the disability realm, the device can be reduced in size
without losing any of its functionality. Portable computers could be made
smaller, for example. Another useful application of the device, because of its
self containment, is in hostile environments. The device can be completely
sealed and still be fully functional; it can even be used under water. ***