
* 0070465
* Interacting Particle Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2000,07/03/2002
* Thomas Liggett,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2004
* USD 242,464.00

This research addresses several problems in the area known as interacting
particle systems, and deals primarily with the exclusion process and spin
systems. The first problem involves relationships between symmetric exclusion
processes and negative correlation inequalities. This would be analogous to the
important known connections between positive correlations and spin systems. The
second attempts to understand the way in which local changes in the dynamics of
the asymmetric exclusion process can have global effects. The third problem is
to determine whether (and when) adding a large amount of a symmetric exclusion
interaction to an ergodic one dimensional spin system can render the combined
process nonergodic. The final one is to study reversible stochastic infection
models on random or inhomogeneous trees. Interacting particle systems is a
branch of probability theory that studies random models for situations in which
there is a large number of individuals (or particles, cars, molecules, cells,
bacteria, messages in a computer network,...) that interact in various ways.
Models of this type arise in many different areas of science, as indicated in
the parenthetical list above. The exclusion process has been used to model
particle motion, computer networks, traffic flow, and issues related to DNA-RNA.
Spin systems have been used to model magnetism, spread of infection, and
economic systems among others. The main issue in this area of research is to
understand how the local evolution rules affect the long time global behavior of
the system. This project will contribute to this understanding in a number of
ways.
