
* 0070382
* Limit Theorems in Probability Theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/2000,02/20/2002
* Evarist Gine,CT,University of Connecticut
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2004
* USD 74,995.00

0070382 Gine Work is planned on several topics from asymptotic theory in
Probability and Statistics. A main thrust of the research aims at deepening our
understanding of canonical $U$-statistics and $U$-processes by investigating
exponential and moment inequalities (what are the true analogues for
$U$-statistics of the Rosenthal-Pinelis and Bernstein's inequalities? is there a
uniform Bernstein, or uniform Prohorov inequality such as the recent inequality
of Talagrand for collections of sums of independent random variables?) and limit
theorems, particularly the law of the iterated logarithm. These results may be
obtained for generalized $U$-statistics, including multilinear forms in
independent random variables. Applications of these topics in Statistics,
particularly censored data, will also be pursued. A second object of study are
selfnormalized sums of independent random variables, particularly in connection
with the bootstrap and with the Student t-statistic. Finally, the P.I. is also
interested in exploring the application of the modern theory of empirical
processes and its techniques in different areas such as asymptotics of the
fluctuations of the occupation measure process for multiple particle systems,
and estimation and testing based on different functionals of the empirical
process. The empirical measure is shorthand for the description of a series of
data points. Sums of independent random variables and empirical processes can be
thought of as single integrals of functions of one variable with respect to this
measure, and $U$-statistics and $U$-processes, as multiple integrals with
respect to the empirical measure of functions of several variables. First order
asymptotic statistics is often based on limit theorems for sums of independent
random variables and processes, but more refined second order properties require
limit theory for $U$-statistics and processes (in a way, in analogy with the use
of higher order derivatives versus only the first derivative when studying
functions in Calculus). Although $U$-statistics were introduced in the forties,
their asymptotic theory has not been close to reaching its final form until
recently, in part due to previous efforts by this P.I. and collaborators; the
proposed research aims at completing this chapter of Classical Probability for
$U$-statistics, and at advancing the theory of $U$-processes, by obtaining best
possible distributional and moment inequalities and laws of the iterated
logarithm. This research will also include applications in survival analysis. In
another direction, it is accepted wisdom that normalizing sums of independent
random variables by certain quantities that depend on themselves rather than
numerical constants improves the convergence properties (in particular, then,
statistical procedures based on such selfnormalized quantities may have good
properties, the leading and oldest example of this being the famous Student
t-statistic and test). But this must be shown at each instance. The P.I. would
like to study some questions related to selfnormalized sums, particularly in
connection with the bootstrap. Empirical process theory vigorously developed
during the last two decades (with substantial contributions by this P.I.) and,
since then, its impact on different fields of stochastics has not ceased to
increase (in classical asymptotic statistics, information theory, neural
networks, machine learning, model selection, statistical mechanics, etc.), and
the P.I. would like to continue applying it to different statistics and
probability problems of current interest.
