
* 0071700
* Probability Measures on Vector Spaces: Theory and Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/15/2000,08/24/2000
* James Kuelbs,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 07/31/2003
* USD 90,000.00

Applications of probability in modern science frequently involve the study of
random quantities with many components (dimensions), or perhaps even of a
geometric nature. Thus they require probability estimates and limit theorems
which are applicable to random sets, or which are dimension free (hence, in
essence, infinite dimensional). A major theme in the investigator's previous
work, and in much of the current research, addresses both of these issues in a
variety of settings. As a first example consider the link between small ball
probabilities and metric entropy problems, which showed certain probability
estimates are equivalent to problems in approximation theory. This link led to
the solution of a long standing problem in approximation theory, and portions of
the proposed research involve important unsolved analogues of this problem.
Another example is the study of the Gibbs conditioning principle of statistical
mechanics for statistics with infinitely many components. To begin to handle
this type of problem one needs non-logarithmic estimates of large deviation
probabilities which are dimension free. These estimates depend critically on
dominating points and a suitable representation formula for the probabilities. A
variety of conditional limit theorems are to be considered. Additional problems
exhibiting these general features are also proposed, and connect with classical
geometry, analysis, and statistics. This work includes further non-logarithmic
large deviation probabilities for partial sums of independent random vectors, an
investigation of dominating points in a more general setting, and the
application of these results to conditional limit theorems for infinite
dimensional statistics. Limit sets for random samples of stochastic processes,
as well as related coverage problems will be examined, and a primary focus will
be to further examine the link between small ball probabilities and non-
classical functional laws of the iterated logarithm applicable to occupation
measures. Problems concerning vector valued partial sums, cluster sets, small
ball probabilities, self-normalized partial sums, and limit theorems for convex
hulls of Brownian motion paths are also to be considered.
