
* 0071486
* Diffusion Processes and Stochastic Analysis
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/2000,03/27/2002
* Krzysztof Burdzy,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2004
* USD 228,000.00

The PIs study several problems in stochastic analysis. The first problem
involves reflected Brownian motion in time-dependent domains and the
corresponding heat equation with the Neumann boundary conditions. The main
emphasis is on the existence and uniqueness of the solutions to the heat
equation and the reflected Brownian motion, and on the singularities of the heat
equation solutions close to the moving boundary. The second part of the project
is concerned with stochastic flows related to singular stochastic differential
equations. Flows of this type have interesting combinatorial properties not
present in flows corresponding to equations with smooth coefficients. The "hot
spot" conjecture states that hottest point in an insulated body lies on its
boundary. While this is not true in general, it is a widespread belief that the
conjecture holds in convex domains. The PIs are currently studying symmetric
convex domains. Finally, stable processes and related processes are studied from
the point of view of potential theory. Stochastic analysis was one of the most
important developments on the borderline of probability and analysis in the
twentieth century. It now provides the basis of studying fundamental properties
of real life phenomena which are random by nature. One of the most spectacular
recent successes of the theory is the so-called financial mathematics. This
theory provides a solid theoretical basis for trading securities - its founding
fathers were recently recognized by a Nobel Prize in Economics. Stable
processes, one of the topics of the project, are more and more often applied in
financial mathematics and other applied sciences because the traditional
continuous models are not always adequate. The study of a singular flow was
directly inspired by a collaboration of one of the PIs (Burdzy) with economists,
published in a leading journal "Econometrics." The study of reflected Brownian
motion in time dependent domains is reminiscent of the "Stefan problem"
concerned with melting ice. Similar physical models are of great interest to
scientists who model real life environmental changes.
