
* 0071635
* Percolative Models
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/2000,07/21/2000
* Yu Zhang,CO,University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2002
* USD 43,741.00

0071635 Zhang This project concentrates on percolation theory, a mathematical
theory used to describe transitions of physical systems. Percolation theory has
a variety of applications to solid physics, biology, computer science, and
geology. A percolation process typically depends on one or more parameters, and
a dramatic change in physical properties may occur as a critical parameter value
is passed. This research will focus on the behaviors of percolative models in
the following three areas: percolation model, first passage percolation model,
and the percolative process. More precisely, the research makes use of
probability theory (the moment estimations, the ergodic theory, correlation and
martingale inequalities and stochastic ordering), the CLT theorem, graph theory
(duality, the fractal dimension), combinatorics (partition lattices,
distributive lattices), and functional analysis (the real analyticity). The
project will use these mathematical tools to advance in a rigorous understanding
of the critical phenomena.

This project concentrates on percolation, a mathematical model used to describe
transitions of physical systems. Percolation theory has a variety of
applications to solid physics, biology, computer science, and geology. A
percolation process typically depends on one or more parameters, and a dramatic
change in physical properties may occur as a critical parameter value is passed.
For example, suppose we immerse a large porous solid in a bucket water. Clearly,
how water penetrates the solid depends on the size of the pores of the solid. A
simple mathematical model of such a process is defined by taking the pores to be
distributed in some regular manner, and to be open or closed with probabilities
p or 1-p. There is a critical threshold, for probability at which the behavior
changes abruptly, below which the water penetration is only superficial and
above which it is arbitrarily deep. The behavior near the critical threshold is
more complicated. One of the most challenging problems is to give a mathematical
description of deep penetration near the critical threshold. This research will
focus on three areas: percolation model, first passage percolation model, and
percolative process. In particular, the project will investigate mathematically
rigorous exact solutions for the percolation process. The research makes use of
probability theory, graph theory, combinatorics and functional analysis. The
project will use these mathematical tools to advance in a rigorous understanding
of the critical phenomena.
