
* 0072004
* Research on Stochastic Processes and Optimization
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2000,06/05/2002
* Paul Dupuis,RI,Brown University
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2003
* USD 185,100.00

For stochastic networks with a fixed service/routing policy it is often
difficult to uniquely characterize limits under standard law of large numbers
and diffusion approximation scalings. Related difficulties appear in other
methods of analysis, such as large deviation approximations. An alternative
approach is to allow the routing/service decisions to be control variables. When
properly formulated, the analogous approximations to these controlled stochastic
networks frequently possess better qualitative properties than their fixed
policy counterparts. In addition, many approximate models are simple enough that
closed form (or nearly closed form) solutions are possible. The investigator
will carry out research on several closely related areas that can take advantage
of these features: risk-sensitive control and the control of rare events in
queueing networks; robust optimal control of law of large number approximations
(also known as fluid models); higher order corrections to the control of fluid
models. At the heart of each of these topics is a variational problem for
processes with constrained dynamics (calculus of variations or optimal control
problems for large deviations and control of fluid models, differential games
for the problems of robust control of fluid models or control of rare events).
The investigator has recently shown how in certain cases one can convert a
variational problem involving constrained and controlled dynamics and a
relatively simple cost structure into an equivalent problem involving
unconstrained dynamics and a different cost. The latter problem is then solved
explicitly. The proposed research includes extending this technique to include
problems of buffer overflow in large deviations and constrained differential
games. One of the main concerns of applied probability today is the development
of tractable approximations for stochastic networks. Stochastic networks are
ubiquitous in modern computer, communication and manufacturing systems, but
owing to their complexity and detail are very difficult to analyze. As a
consequence, much effort is being put into the development of mathematical
models that are faithful enough to "real life" that conclusions drawn from them
can be used with confidence, and yet which can be solved by either analytical or
numerical means. The purpose of this project is to develop such methods of
approximation and also the techniques for their solution. A new feature is to
allow decisions on routing and service (e.g., which data class should be served
in a communication network and where the processed data should be sent) to be
control variables that can be optimized. Two particular classes of network
problems will be given special attention. The first is the control of rare
events. In many networks there are events that do not occur very often, and yet
which are nonetheless the main concern. An example is data loss in a
communication network. The second class is the robust control of networks, which
means the control of a network in which some aspects of the network are poorly
modeled or otherwise imperfectly known.
