
* 0072387
* Stochastic Analysis on Manifolds
* DMS,PROBABILITY, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 06/15/2000,06/23/2000
* Xue-Mei Li,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2003
* USD 78,000.00

The proposed research falls into the following broad areas of stochastic
analysis: stochastic dynamical systems on manifold, the geometry of stochastic
flows and Hormander type second order differential operators, analysis on path
spaces, and the interplay between the dynamical behavior of stochastic dynamical
systems and the geometry and topology of the underlying spaces. The investigator
shall concentrate on (1) L^2 theory for differential forms on path and loop
spaces; (2) linear connections associated to Hormander type second order
elliptic operators; (3) stochastic flows and in particular stochastic
differential equations associated to Hamiltonian systems. The study of lattice
models with spin variable in a manifold is also included, as is the study of
bounded and L^2 harmonic forms on finite dimensional manifolds. The investigator
will study these problems using techniques from stochastic differential
equations. This work would lead to a better understanding of random perturbation
of dynamical systems and geometric analysis of infinite dimensional spaces. The
proposed project concentrates in the areas of stochastic dynamical systems and
analysis on path spaces. Path spaces are the spaces of trajectories of particles
or other physical objects. Methods from stochastic analysis, especially the
techniques arising from the study of stochastic differential equations, shall be
employed. Stochastic differential equations are themselves very important
objects to study as they arise naturally from physics, engineering, biology, and
finance, to model the influence of white noise. The study of such equations on a
variety of geometric objects such as spheres in connection with the curvature of
such spaces arises naturally from the mathematics and also in applications, for
example in the computation of recovering data by filtering out the white noise
in the transmission.
