
* 0072198
* Stochastic Models in Population Genetics and Ecology
* DMS,POPULATION DYNAMICS, PROBABILITY, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/01/2000,07/31/2000
* Paul Joyce,ID,Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 07/31/2004
* USD 165,608.00

These research projects fall within the areas of mathematical population
genetics and interacting particle systems. The unifying thrust is the study of
mathematical models of biological systems at the population level. The interplay
between various genetic influences such as mutation, selection, and population
structure can sometimes confound one's ability to draw valid inference. The
first goal is to develop methods of estimation and inference for complex
molecular genetic data arising from populations with various kinds of structure.
The investigators explore sampling distributions and likelihood methods in the
presence of these confounding effects. The second goal involves the study of
genealogical processes (i.e., coalescent theory) for populations which are
subject to various selective forces, geographical segregation, or other
hierarchical structuring. Both sampling theory and coalescent methods provide a
framework for computational methods such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo and
Importance Sampling. The third goal is to study spatial interactions which arise
in ecology and epidemiology using interacting particle systems. The problems
addressed include several new nonlinear voter models with a cluster-breaking
feature and new work on the two-stage contact process, with applications to
metapopulation models. Previous models of the ecology and genetics of natural
populations have been based on many simplifying assumptions. It is now important
to produce more realistic models to address ecological and evolutionary problems
that impact society. In addition to the inherent randomness in real biological
systems, spatial structure is often of critical importance. Examples of these
problems include the evolution and spread of infectious diseases, invasions of
exotic species, and survival of species in fragmented habitats. Furthermore, the
technical revolution in gene sequencing is producing huge data sets that can
only be deciphered in a sophisticated mathematical framework. The new field of
bioinformatics relies heavily on an evolutionary perspective. This
interdisciplinary work is part of an ongoing effort to develop and employ new
mathematical methods for the purpose of addressing these complex biological
problems at the population level.
