
* 0103669
* Research on Stochastic Optimization and Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2001,07/17/2001
* Hui Wang,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2004
* USD 89,251.00

Research on Stochastic Optimization and Applications

Hui Wang

Project Abstract

Many stochastic optimization problems assume that the decision maker has the
total freedom to intervene the system. That is, the control policies can be
adjusted continuously and instantaneously, or the state processes can be stopped
arbitrarily within some time interval. However, this assumption is often
violated in practice. The first part of the project is concerned with some new
formulations for stochastic optimization problems in order to accommodate these
practical constraints. These models share a common feature: random intervention
times determined by exogenous signal processes. In the context of optimal
control, the decision maker is allowed to adjust the level of control only at
times when an exogenous process gives him a green light; for example, when an
Poisson process makes a jump. In the area of optimal stopping, the state process
is allowed to be stopped only at times when it receives certain signals from an
exogenous process. Both formulations admit explicit solutions and can be applied
to model practical constraints on control policies or stopping times. The second
part of the project is concerned with a class of diffusion processes with jumps.
The major effort is put on their applications to economics and finance. The
reason for the introduction of such processes is that the classical diffusion
model for stock prices cannot explain many empirical puzzles. For example, an
abnormality called volatility smile is often observed in option pricing, and the
return distributions of financial assets exhibit a leptokurtic feature. We
intend to explain these phenomena, using the jump processes to model stock
prices in a financial market or the values of economic projects in investment
problems. The discontinuous behavior in the underlying processes requires new
techniques to obtain explicit solutions to certain pricing and wealth
optimization problems. The research project includes pricing commonly traded
exotic options, analysis of utility maximization, and evaluation of investment
projects.

Stochastic optimization is one of the main topics in modern applied mathematics,
with many applications in disciplines like engineering, biology, economics and
finance, etc. The purpose of this research project is to systematically develop
mathematical theories that are more faithful to real life problems, so that the
conclusions drawn from them can be used with more confidence. For example, a
better understanding for the uncertainty of stock prices can help agents reduce
the risk in financial practice. However, in developing more realistic models,
one must be aware of the subtle balance between complexity and mathematical
tractability. A realistic yet too complicated model can be mathematically
untractable. The goal of the project, therefore, is to develop analytically or
numerically solvable models that embrace the essence of the practical problems.
To this end, some new formulations are considered for general stochastic
optimization problems in order to accommodate some practical constraints; for
example, the controller can intervene the system only at times when an exogenous
process sends out a certain signal. Also considered are some new models for
economics and finance that incorporate the drastic changes of stock prices over
short periods of time. These new models can be used to explain many empirical
puzzles that the classical models fail to do, and to help agents develop better
portfolios to reduce risk.


