
* 0103841
* Markov Random Fields, Finitary Codings, Phase Transitions and Ergodic Theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/2001,06/20/2001
* Jeffrey Steif,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/2004
* USD 98,000.00

0103841 Steif The principal investigator will carry out research in
probabability theory; more specifically in statistical physics, Markov random
fields and ergodic theory, and especially on problems which belong to the
interface of these disciplines. A common theme for these problems is the notion
of a phase transition which comes up in various guises. The first set of
problems to be investigated concerns elucidating the relationship among the
notion of finitary mappings, a concept which is relatively old, the much newer
and important notion of exact simulation and finally the existence of a phase
transition. It is already known that there are intimate connections between
these. A second set of problems concerns better understanding the relationship
between the phase diagram for various statistical mechanical systems (such as
the Ising or the classical Heisenberg models) and the underlying graph on which
they live. These questions lead to the study of phenomena which do not arise on
the classical Euclidean lattices. A third set of problems concerns determining
the sets of capacity 0 for certain concrete Markov processes arising in particle
systems (e.g., the stochastic Ising model). Finally, a fourth set of problems
concerns understanding the class of stationary processes which arise from
positive contractions in Hilbert space, a class of stationary processes which
have very different behavior than processes traditionally studied. Even for
these systems, the concept of phase transition arises. Many systems in the world
evolve stochastically and probability theory is utilized in order to better
understand and predict the behavior of such systems. For example, statistical
physics is the study of how particles behave globally and more generally how
various general cooperative systems evolve. Understanding such systems is part
of the motivation for this project. Another goal of this project is to determine
how certain abrupt changes occur within a system (a so-called phase transition
such as when water boils) and to investigate the underlying conditions which
lead to such phenomena. There are various distributions which arise here which
are important to investigate but for which one is not able to make explicit
calculations. In such cases, a key tool is computers which, via simulations,
allows us to approximate these distributions. In many cases, one can sample
exactly from these distributions and one more goal of this project is to
understand when this is possible.
