
* 0103821
* Differentiable Statistical Functionals and Bayes Asymptotics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS
* 07/15/2001,03/10/2003
* Richard Dudley,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
*  Shulamith T. Gross
* 12/31/2004
* USD 111,003.00

The investigator and co-workers are studying differentiability of functionals
of empirical measures and distribution functions. In one dimension, p-variation
norms work well for Frechet differentiability. Extensions to several dimensions
are being pursued. In Bayes asymptotics, normal approximations with small
relative errors are being found even for small probabilities of intermediate
deviations.

In Bayes asymptotics, one of the goals is to choose the best of several
statistical models, possibly for multiple data sets. For example, multiple
clinical trials may be done of a treatment for a disease. Three models are that
the treatment is helpful, is harmful, or makes no difference. Further models
incorporate the possibility that the treatment may have substantially different
effects in different study populations. The procedure is to begin with a
noninformative prior probability distribution on each model, then adjust it
based on the likelihoods from each data set. Improved approximations of the
updated probabilities are being investigated. For differentiable statistical
functionals, a data set gives an approximation to a probability distribution. If
a nonlinear transformation is applied both to the true distribution function and
to its approximation, one looks for a linear transformation that approximates
the nonlinear one as well as possible in the neighborhood of the true
distribution. One is also looking for effective ways of bounding the discrepancy
between the true and approximate distributions and their transformations.
