
* 0104343
* Markov Process
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2001,02/23/2005
* Srinivasa Varadhan,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 05/31/2007
* USD 689,885.00

0104343 Varadhan The focus of this project is interacting particle systems and
their scaling limits. When we have a large system of particles interacting
through local interactions, the evolution of such a system when it starts far
away from equilibrium poses several questions. Density being often the only
conserved quantity, there is usually some sort of a transport equation appearing
as the scaling limit. Superposed on it is the motion of individual particles,
which is usually an inhomogeneous Markov process after the interactions are
somehow averaged in the scaling limit. Laws of large numbers as well as
fluctuations and large deviations from them are some of the interesting problems
in this context. In addition the coefficients arising in the limiting
descriptions are functions of density and or other parameters and the regularity
of their dependence on the parameters is also of importance. There are a large
class of physical processes where the rules of behavior are prescribed at the
level of individual units. These rules concern the nature of the interaction
between individual units that could involve some randomness as well. But one
needs to make predictions of the collective behavior of the units at a much
larger scale. This project deals with the derivation of the rules of collective
behavior from models of interactions at the level of individual units. In the
physical sciences examples of such problems that have been successfully studied
include the rules of fluid flow that are derived from the laws of interaction
between molecules that make up the fluid. Similar problems in the social
sciences, for instance one of predicting macroeconomic behavior based on models
of economic exchange between individuals, have not been adequately addressed.
