
* 0104232
* A Study of Several Stochastic Models
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2001,06/22/2001
* Vlada Limic,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2004
* USD 64,119.00

The principal investigator plans to work on several topics in probability
theory. The aim of the first project is to study transience/recurrence behavior
of edge reinforced random walks on graphs. The purpose of the second project is
to characterize stability and optimality of batch service policies for queueing
systems. The third project is a rigorous study of the NK model of protein
evolution. The main interest here is in determining the exact or asymptotic
behavior of various quantities in the corresponding fitness landscape. The
fourth project involves a sequence of interacting Moran model particle systems
and their scaling limit, the interacting Fisher-Wright diffusions. The goal here
is to develop tools and techniques that will help one answer questions about
fine properties of the interacting diffusions.

Random processes with reinforcements appear in models of biological systems. A
particle performing an edge reinforced random walk on a graph has memory and
prefers to traverse edges that were traversed before. It is known that some
reinforced random walks exhibit behavior very different from that of the
classical random walks without memory. The aim of the first project is to show
that edge reinforced walks for which each edge is reinforced only once, by a
fixed amount, are not so different from the classical random walks. The batch
service queueing system is a model of a retail store delivery van, or a terminal
in a computer network which downloads software packages. The purpose of the
second project is to describe a large class of batch service policies that keep
the queueing system stable, and to find easy to implement policies in this
class, that are close to optimal with respect to a specific cost function. The
NK model is an idealization of protein evolution in the presence of selection.
The interacting Moran models represent a subdivided population with a resampling
mechanism within each subpopulation, and migration of individuals to neighboring
subpopulations. The properties of both models are of interest to geneticists.
