
* 0139927
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic Methods for Fractional Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2002,07/27/2006
* Mark Meerschaert,NV,Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2006
* USD 595,330.00

Brownian motion, the scaling limit of a simple random walk, is a stochastic
model for diffusion. Probability densities for this stochastic process solve the
classical diffusion equation. A continuous time random walk is a simple random
walk subordinated to a renewal process, used in physics to model anomalous
diffusion. Increments of the simple random walk represents particle jumps, and
the renewal epochs represent the particle jump times. Infinite variance particle
jumps cause superdiffusion, in which a cloud of particles spreads faster than
the classical model predicts. Infinite mean waiting times lead to subdiffusion.
Scaling limits of continuous time random walks are stochastic processes whose
densities solve fractional partial differential equations. Infinite variance
particle jumps lead to operator stable Levy motions, while infinite mean waiting
times induce subordination to an inverse stable subordinator. Fractional
derivatives are generators of stable continuous convolution semigroups. The
research funded by this grant is developing a sound mathematical basis for this
physical theory, and pursuing practical applications to problems in contaminant
transport. The goals of this research include limit theory for continuous time
random walks with possible dependence between the jump sizes and the waiting
times, extension to more realistic multidimensional jump vectors with matrix
scaling to allow different rates of particle spreading in each coordinate,
parallel development of multiscaling fractional derivative operators in space,
analysis of the fundamental physical basis of fractional diffusion to elucidate
the physical meaning of the model parameters, development of useful statistical
methods for parameter estimation, numerical methods for fractional partial
differential equations, and application of these methods to real data from
laboratory and field experiments and remediation efforts involving porous media
and fracture flow. Movement of contaminants in a mountain stream takes place
over a vast range of time scales. A majority will move away quickly, but a small
amount can be caught in eddies for minutes or days. Another fraction may move
into the relatively motionless water beneath the streambed, and it may take
months or years for the last molecules to disappear completely. The movement of
contaminants in underground water spreads over a similar range of time scales.
Our team of mathematicians and hydrogeologists uses modern interdisciplinary
research methods to develop accurate models for the movement and spread of these
contaminants. Much more than an academic exercise, this work is needed for
realistic models of contaminant and nutrient movement in drinking water
supplies. The research is necessary because existing diffusion models greatly
underestimate the time and concentration at which contaminants arrive
downstream, when compared to actual data.
