
* 0203368
* Finite and Infinite-Dimensional Stochastic Dynamical Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/2002,02/10/2006
* Salah-Eldin Mohammed,IL,Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 226,534.00

The research in this project focuses on several dynamical and numerical aspects
of stochastic differential equations. Stochastic ordinary differential equations
(sodes) on finite-dimensional manifolds generate stochastic flows on the
manifold. One objective of the research is to construct invariant manifolds for
such flows near stationary solutions, under suitable regularity and growth
conditions on the driving vector fields. In particular, the investigator will
prove the existence of stable, unstable and center manifolds near each
stationary point on the manifold. In order for sodes to constitute viable
physical models, the investigator conjectures that a Kupka-Smale type theorem
must hold. An important class of infinite-dimensional semiflows on Hilbert space
is generated by dissipative semilinear stochastic partial differential equations
(spdes) on smooth compact manifolds. For these semiflows, the investigator
intends to prove the existence of finite-dimensional invariant manifolds near
stationary points. Important examples of spdes covered by this analysis are
Burger's equation, affine linear stochastic evolution equations and stochastic
reaction-diffusion equations. The results of the research will reveal new
features of the stochastic dynamics of these well-studied models. One encounters
models of stochastic systems with memory (sfdes) in many engineering and
physical applications. Deterministic smooth constraints on the solutions of such
models lead naturally to sfdes on (compact) Riemannian manifolds. The
investigator will study the path-space-valued Markov process generated by
trajectories of sfdes on the manifold. The investigator will establish an Ito
formula for the infinite-dimensional segment process and will attempt to obtain
its infinitesimal generator in terms of geometric invariants of the ambient
Riemannian manifold. From the pathwise dynamical point of view, the investigator
will construct perfect semiflows on the path space which are induced by
solutions of sfdes on a compact Riemannian manifold. The existence of invariant
manifolds will also be examined.

The project focuses on qualitative and long-term behavior of a large class of
probabilistic models known as stochastic differential equations. These equations
are widely used by scientists and engineers. Of special interest is a class of
models that are used in physics, engineering and biology in order to analyze
dynamical systems whose evolution is influenced by random fluctuations and past
history. These models are very important in a variety of diverse areas such as
signal processing, stock market fluctuations, economic and labor models,
aircraft dynamics, materials with memory, population dynamics and fluid flow.
The investigator will use the most current probabilistic techniques in order to
develop a deeper understanding of these models. The outcome of the research in
this project will yield precise information on the long-term behavior of
solutions of the underlying stochastic equations on states that are near
statistical equilibria. Numerical algorithms will be developed whereby real
market data will be used to test option-pricing models where the stock price is
governed by its past history. In a different direction, the research will
solidify important connections with other areas of modern mathematical research,
in particular the theory of dynamical systems and geometry. The results of the
project will be compiled in a research monograph targeting graduate students
majoring in mathematics, engineering, and finance.
