
* 0204992
* Isotropic Stable Random Fields and Infinite Dimensional Stochastic Integrals
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2002,05/07/2004
* Jan Rosinski,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2006
* USD 108,229.00

0204992 Rosinski A novel approach, based on infinite dimensional group
representations, is proposed for the analysis of isotropic and isotropic
homogeneous stable random fields. There are many analogies between problems
considered in this project and representation theory in quantum physics, in
particular, Mackey's theory. This project is intended to build on these
analogies to establish spectral representation of isotropic stable random fields
in possibly the most explicit form that could be used for analysis, modeling and
computer simulation of such random fields. The second part of this proposal is
concerned with infinite dimensional stochastic integrals. Various sample path
properties of stochastic processes, such as continuity and boundedness, can
often be described in terms of the existence of such infinite dimensional
stochastic integrals. It is proposed to simplify and unify the present approach
to infinite dimensional stochastic integrals of deterministic functions and then
to extend these results to nonanticipating integrands using decoupling
techniques, among others. This is an outgrowth of the present research of the PI
with Professor Michael B. Marcus. Development of stochastic integrals with
respect to cylindrical semimartingales in Hilbert spaces is also proposed. This
development will follow a recent progress of the PI and his collaborators on the
radonification of cylindrical semimartingales. Isotropic random fields play an
important role in the statistical theory of turbulence and other areas of
natural sciences and engineering. They can be used to model 3-dimensional
turbulent velocity, velocity and pressure, etc. The classical theory of
isotropic random fields is not suitable for modeling random phenomena with long
range dependence and high variability, that are often observed. Therefore, the
PI proposes to investigate isotropic random fields with heavy tailed stable
distributions. Puzzling connections with certain methods of quantum physics are
found under this approach; they will be further investigated and exploited. The
second part of this proposal is concerned with the theory and applications of
infinite dimensional stochastic integrals. The importance and need for the study
of such integrals comes from the theory of random systems characterized by very
large or continuous set of parameters. Infinite dimensional approach makes such
systems simpler and mathematically tractable.
