
* 0204422
* Stochastic Spatial Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/2002,06/03/2002
* J. Theodore Cox,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/2005
* USD 123,032.00

This research involves several topics in the theory and application of
interacting particle systems. These processes are stochastic models for large
systems of interacting components. Among the phenomena these systems model are:
competition of species, epidemics, spread of genetic traits, catalytic chemical
reactions, and more. The investigator will pursue research on several specific
problems. The first project involves the mutually catalytic branching process,
which models the evolution of two populations whose growth rates depend on one
another. The second project concerns the relationship between low density
interacting particle systems and measure-valued diffusions, especially the
convergence of rescaled versions of the former to super-Brownian motion. The
third project treats some questions from mathematical genetics, especially
limiting results for the stepping stone model on the two dimensional integer
lattice. In the fourth project a class of generalized branching random walks is
considered. The key to resolving the main question of local extinction versus
stability for this class appears to be the analysis of a particular case with a
certain minimal branching rate which takes a form not previously considered.
This research involves several topics in the theory and application of
interacting particle systems or stochastic spatial processes. The goal of this
research is to obtain a better qualitative understanding of various complex
phenomena that interacting particle systems model well. These are large systems
made up of many interacting components, usually with a stochastic or random
element. For example, a simple model for the evolution of a genetic trait
through a spatially distributed population fits into this framework. It
incorporates the movement of individuals across spatially distributed colonies,
and mutation at a small rate. The investigator hopes to show that this type of
model can give more accurate results than the traditional, simpler non-spatial
models widely used. Part of the proposed research concerns very specific models
and questions such as this one, and part of the proposed research will aim at
developing general mathematical techniques for handling models of this type.
