
* 0204018
* Rigorous Results for Self-Organizing Complex Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2002,03/22/2004
* David Griffeath,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2005
* USD 146,500.00

0204018 Griffeath Griffeath will continue his ongoing research program, focusing
initially on theorems for the Traffic Cellular Automaton (TCA), and on rigorous
derivation of asymptotic densities for von Koch two-dimensional solidification
rules. Foundations of the traffic project are described in a recent paper, joint
with Lawrence Gray of the University of Minnesota, in the Journal of Statistical
Physics. Motivated by empirical work of Kai Nagel and others, the authors give
convincing evidence that the TCA exhibits several phase transitions as the
density of cars increases, and for a certain range of densities clusters into a
mixture of two self-organized extreme ergodic states called free flow and
synchronized jam. The research program will further analyze this model, intended
to establish the new phenomenon of conservative clustering, and also to shed
light on the underlying mechanism. In a separate project, Griffeath will study
Von Koch crystals, very simple deterministic nearest-neighbor Cellular Automaton
growth rules on the two-dimensional integer lattice, many of which are exactly
solvable but aperiodic. A novel computational machinery will be developed in
order to rigorously describe the self-organized, often fractal structure of
these crystals by means of a generalized formal language, interactive
visualization, nonlinear recursion, and computer-aided proof. The research of
David Griffeath combines mathematical analysis and computer visualization in the
study of complex spatial systems. Over his career, the investigator has
exploited this interplay for the theoretical and empirical study of a wide
variety of dynamics which serve as prototypes for phenomena across the sciences:
spiral formation in excitable media, crystal growth, and various other nonlinear
processes such as nucleation, flocking, host-parasite interactions, dendritic
growth, phase separation by surface tension, ecological competition, and growth
of biofilms. Griffeath is currently launching a major study of "Traffic Cellular
Automata" models which emulate the emergence of traffic jams. Most of the
initial effort on this project has been simulation-based. Now that effective
software tools have been developed for visualization and quantitative
measurement of these subtle, self-organizing systems, Griffeath intends to
derive a mathematically rigorous theory of the observed
