
* 0204332
* Stochastic Differential Equations and Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/2002,07/30/2002
* Jin Ma,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2006
* USD 125,201.00

0204332 Ma The principal investigator proposes to study various issues involving
stochastic differential equations (hereafter SDEs), stochastic partial
differential equations (SPDEs), and their relations with partial differential
equations (PDEs). A new "functional" form of nonlinear Feynman-Kac formula is
sought, via a study of the general theory of backward stochastic differential
equations (BSDEs) with non-Lipschitz coefficients. The path regularity of the
solutions to reflected backward SDEs (RBSDEs) will be studied, with an eye on
its application to the numerical method for such equations. The study will also
lead to the regularity of solutions to a class of obstacle problems in PDEs, via
some new probabilistic representation formulae for the derivatives of such
solutions. The PI proposes to continue his research on the new notion of
stochastic viscosity solution for nonlinear SPDEs, including the stability and
uniqueness results in the fully nonlinear case. Some stochastic
control/stochastic finance problems, inspired by a risk reserve model involving
investment, will receive strong attention. One example is the optimal
retention/investment problem for an insurance company that uses the ruin
probability as its stability criterion. The Feynman-Kac Formula is a powerful
tool that links probability theory to analysis, especially to the theory of
partial differential equations. The nonlinear form of this formula is useful for
studying many nonlinear parabolic partial differential equations such as
reaction diffusion equations, derived from expansion of advantaged genes in
biology, combustion theory, as well as chemical kinetics. The celebrated Black-
Scholes formula in modern stochastic finance theory and the Hamilton-Jacobi-
Bellman equation in stochastic control theory are also, in essence, examples of
the formula. The main part of the proposed research is to discover the
possibility of advancing such formulae to a higher level, either by considering
the "functional form", or by considering the "stochastic form" (viscosity
solution of fully nonlinear SPDEs). Some stochastic control problems arising
from finance, insurance, and many other fields are naturally considered as
applications of the theory.
