
* 0205054
* Refined Approximation of Tail Probabilities, Constrained Expectations, Data Analysis in Multidimensional and Metric Spaces, Plus Optimal Stable Growth in Finance
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/15/2002,06/29/2006
* Michael Klass,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2007
* USD 355,156.00

0205054 Klass In work with various co-authors, the PI plans to work on the
following five tasks. 1) Complete a paper on (nearly optimal) approximation of
quantile location for sums of independent and otherwise arbitrary random
variables. 2) Complete a paper in finance which introduces a new constraint to
augment the optimal growth criterion and thereby provide local wealth stability.
A natural sub-optimal strategy can be exhibited. It is further shown how one can
create a long-term portfolio strategy which asymptotically withdraws money at
the (same) asymptotic rate at which the portfolio is growing, without
diminishing that long-term rate(!). 3) Extend previous work on self-normalized
martingales. 4) Attempt to construct and/or identify extremal distributions
which arise in various situations maximizing the expected value of some random
quantity subject to infinitely many linear inequality constraints. 5) Develop an
idea, conveyed to him in 1992 by Prof. David L. Allen, to show how to construct
a natural posterior distribution on densities in R, given only the data
acquired, and extending the result to R^d by means of the Radon Transform. This
approach permits one to establish confidence intervals for parameter estimation,
to perform hypothesis testing and data classification with only finite samples.
Goodness of fit tests are also contemplated. The principle investigator plans
work in five areas: quantile approximation for sums of arbitrary independent
random variables, optimal investment strategy designed to guard against local
capital losses of more than a pre-set proportion of the previous maximal
accumulated wealth (plus a method of permitting consumption at the long run
growth rate without sacrificing that long-run rate), extend previous work on
self-normalized martingales, solve or find approximately optimal solutions to
certain infinite dimensional linear programming problems, demonstrate how to
make full use of the data acquired in statistical settings which involve
hypothesis testing or classification (categorization) of data. The investment
work should be of fundamental interest and importance to individual, corporate
and community (governmental) investment. The data analysis efforts may suggest a
best possible approach to determining whether a particular datum came from A or
B given limited prior data on A and B. Such work could be useful in character
recognition, hand-writing decipherment, etc. The other topics were motivated by
prior work of the PI.
