
* 0226245
* Limiting Behavior of Queueing Networks and Interacting Particle Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2002,03/29/2005
* Maury Bramson,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2007
* USD 243,829.00

Professor Bramson's main research on stochastic processes continues to be in the
areas of queueing networks and interacting particle systems. Two major themes in
the first topic are the stability of queueing networks and their heavy traffic
limits. A queueing network is said to be stable when the associated Markov
process is positive recurrent. The heavy traffic limit of a sequence of queueing
networks is the diffusive limit obtained by applying the usual central limit
scaling. Results over the last decade have led to a better understanding of
queueing networks, although a general theory is lacking. The researcher plans to
investigate the behavior of queueing networks under certain well-known
disciplines, such as processor sharing and earliest-due-date, first-served.
Other related topics in queueing theory include dynamic scheduling in heavy
traffic and the stability of self-managed models for the internet. Interacting
particle systems consist of systems of many particles that evolve according to
some interaction law. Such systems are frequently motivated by models from the
physical and biological sciences. The researcher plans to investigate models
that have creation and annihilation of mass, as well the stationary measures of
certain exclusion processes.

Professor Bramson's current research is in two areas of probability theory,
queueing networks and interacting particle systems. In the first area, one
studies the behavior of large systems of individuals who proceed from one server
to the next, until their needs are satisfied and they leave the system.
"Individuals" here should be interpreted in a general sense, and may be
customers waiting to be served (for instance, at a bank or at a service
counter), jobs in some manufacturing process (such as the production of
semiconductor wafers) or information packets on the internet. In practice, one
is often faced with the choice of whom to serve first. This choice can
substantially affect the efficiency of a system, and sometimes even its
stability. That is, based on how good a service rule is in a given setting, the
number of customers waiting in line may typically remain small over extended
periods of time, or may tend to grow without bound. Work over the last decade
has shown that such systems can be unstable for unexpected reasons. The
researcher plans to continue his work in this area and investigate the stability
of the network under certain well-known service rules. The area of interacting
particle systems is motivated by models from the physical and biological
sciences consisting of large numbers of "individuals" who interact according to
some rule. For instance, individuals might be molecules moving about according
to some rule or cancer cells spreading along a surface. The behavior of these
systems can depend strongly on the nature of their interactions. The researcher
plans to continue his research on certain of these models.
