
* 0300672
* Studies in Interacting Particle Systems and Statistical Mechanics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 08/01/2003,04/17/2007
* Roberto Schonmann,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2009
* USD 519,487.00

0300672 Schonmann Schonmann will work on various projects in the areas of
interacting particle systems, statistical mechanics, percolation, and other
related subjects in probability theory. The main targets in this research are
the ergodic behavior and the relaxation patterns of several interacting particle
systems, including Ising models, contact processes and other lattice spin
systems. Percolation theory is also a major component of this research, because
of its close relations to the processes indicated above and its simplicity,
which makes it a paradigm in the study of probabilistic models with many
components. Part of the research addresses the study of the above mentioned
processes on arbitrary graphs -- an important current trend in the area. Several
of the problems have their motivation in phenomena observed in nature as, for
example, phase transitions, critical behavior, metastable behavior of systems in
the vicinity of phase transition regions and domain formation and growth. On an
informal and broad level one can see the objects of interest in this research in
the following fashion. A system contains a large number of similar components
and each component interacts in a simple way with a few other ones, which are
near to it in some sense. For instance one can think of the atoms in a crystal
interacting when they are close enough, or individuals in a large population
which may suffer or not from some infection with contamination occurring between
neighbors. The local interaction may involve a substantial amount of randomness,
but since the system as a whole is large, one expects and indeed observes a much
more predictable behavior at the global level. A great deal of interest in such
systems stems from the fact that the qualitative behavior of the whole system
may depend in non-trivial ways on parameters which are built into the local
interactions, but which only affect those in a smooth way (e.g., the rate of
infection between neighboring individuals in our second example above). The
general issues of interest are then the understanding of which sort of
equilibria can be reached by such types of stochastic dynamics, how an
equilibrium state is reached, and how the parameters which affect the local
rules may affect the answers to these questions.
