
* 0303310
* Stochastic Analysis and its Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/2003,08/17/2004
* Krzysztof Burdzy,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2007
* USD 341,276.00

The PIs investigate several problems in stochastic analysis of both a pure and
applied nature. Inverse problems and the third boundary problem are mathematical
models arising naturally in applied sciences from geophysics to medicine and
physics. The PIs study the foundational questions related to these models, such
as existence and uniqueness of the solutions to the corresponding equations, and
also address specific problems in each of these fields. The PI's investigate
several aspects of reflected Brownian motion, including the coalescence of
synchronous couplings, reflection with inert drift, existence of shy couplings,
construction of reflected processes via myopic conditioning, and the pathwise
uniqueness for the Skorohod equation. Other models and processes are the subject
of separate but related studies; they include the skew Brownian motion
stochastic flow, censored stable processes, and jump-type processes. The PI's
attack some well known "open problems" on Neumann eigenfunctions and reflected
Brownian motion. The project is devoted to modeling, at the mathematical level,
of natural, technical, economic and social phenomena involving randomness. The
field of stochastic analysis arose as a need to understand phenomena as diverse
as the stock market, non-destructive analysis of materials, medical imaging, and
heat dissipation. The mathematical side of the project provides a foundation for
the applications such as computer programs that help in real life situations.
The applied sciences routinely use mathematical formulas of stochastic analysis.
The project aims at providing usable information about stochastic processes.
