
* 0303259
* Brownian motion with killing and reflection, stable processes and projections of martingales
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/2003,07/07/2004
* Rodrigo Banuelos,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2007
* USD 203,257.00

0303259 Banuelos This project is to study a number of open problems which lie at
the interface of probability theory and other fields of mathematics. These
include: (1) Problems concerning `hot-spots' properties for the survival time
probabilities of Brownian motion which is killed on part of the boundary of a
domain and reflected on the rest; (2) Problems concerning the `fine' spectral
theoretic properties of symmetric stable processes, such as variational
characterization for eigenvalues, properties of nodal lines, geometric, analytic
and probabilistic properties of finite dimensional distributions as a function
of the starting point; and (3) Optimal problems that arise from studying the
Beurling-Ahlfors singular integral operator using space-time Brownian motion.
Solutions to the 'hot-spots' problems will lead to further progress on the
celebrated 'hot-spots' conjecture of J. Rauch which asserts that the maximum and
minimum of ground state Neumann eigenfunctions are attained only at boundary
points. Many of the proposed problems for stable processes are motivated by
their well known counterparts for Brownian motion. However, some of the
questions for stable processes in turn lead to problems which will provide new
information even for Brownian motion. Since the techniques for the Brownian
motion results do not apply, new techniques must be developed for these
problems. Such techniques are likely to lead to new and unexpected applications
in other areas particularly for other stochastic processes with jumps but whose
transition probabilities still retain certain rotational invariance properties.
Martingales have played an important role in the study of singular integral
operators in general and in the study of Beurling-Ahlfors operator in
particular. A new probabilistic approach, based on heat martingales, is
proposed. This will give a better understanding of a celebrated conjecture of T.
Iwaniec on the size of the norm of this operator. A remarkable aspect of
contemporary mathematics is the unexpected yet deep connections between
previously very different fields. The problems in the proposed project are all
interdisciplinary in nature and as such have the potential to impact different
fields in mathematics, engineering, science and economics. Symmetric stable
processes have been used to model many physical and economic phenomena,
particularly for certain stocks where the Brownian motion models are not
adequate. Estimates on the Beurling-Ahlfors operator have many applications to
nonlinear problems in elasticity. The 'hot-spots' conjecture, when formulated in
terms of the theory of heat conduction, asserts that if one begins with an
initial heat distribution on a plate which is insulated around its boundary and
waits for the initial transients to settle down, then the hottest and coldest
regions will be found on the boundary of the plate. Since the mathematical
description of heat is given by a second order partial differential operator,
introduced by the Marquis Pierre-Simon De Laplace (1749-1827) more than 200
years ago, the conjecture has been of interest to researchers in mathematics,
physics and chemistry. The connection to probability arises from the description
by Norbert Wiener (1894-1964) of heat flow in terms of Brownian motion.
