
* 0306194
* Graduate and Postdoctoral Training in Probability Theory and its Applications
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2003,03/05/2007
* Richard Durrett,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,161,757.00

In recent years, there has been a tremendous expansion in the use of probability
models in finance, geosciences, neuroscience, artificial intelligence and
communication networks in addition to an increase in its use in traditional
application areas in engineering disciplines, physics, ecology, genetics, and
various fields of mathematics. This has created a strong demand for researchers
trained in probability to develop new methodologies and to work in an
interdisciplinary context. We propose a variety of activities to meet these
needs. Graduate fellowships will enhance the training of new researchers at
Cornell, where a cohort of more than 20 Ph.D. students exists and 4-6 students
receive their Ph.D.'s in this subject each year. On a national scale, two yearly
2.5 day hot topics conferences will bring to Cornell a small group of
established researchers and young investigators (in equal numbers). The
conference will feature talks describing recent developments, and the young
researchers will have a unique opportunity to discuss their research and open
problems with the leaders in the field. A two week summer school featuring 4-6
lectures by three prominent researchers, two series of 1-3 on interdisciplinary
opportunities, and a limited number of short talks by selected participants,
will benefit a large number of graduate students and researchers (young and old)
throughout the country.

This project will be under the direction of six probabilists from Math and
Operations Research at Cornell (Durrett, Lawler, Protter, Resnick, Saloff-Coste,
and Samorodnitsky). Their combined research covers a wide variety of topics in
probability and its applications. However, to ensure that this is truly a
national resource and covers all aspects of modern probability, they will
receive advice from a nationwide committee of prominent researchers that
represent a wide variety of specialties and many of the major probability groups
throughout the country: David Aldous (U.C. Berkeley), Thomas Kurtz (U. of
Wisconsin, Madison), Claudia Neuhauser (U. of Minnesota), Charles Newman
(Courant Institute), Yuval Peres (U. C. Berkeley), Simon Tavare' (U. of Southern
California).
