
* 0306167
* Topics in Statistical Mechanics and Related Graphical Models
* DMS,PROBABILITY, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 07/01/2003,07/15/2008
* Lincoln Chayes,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 458,246.00

0306167 Chayes The investigators will study a variety of systems all of which
either directly concern classical spin systems in equilibrium or have their
basis in some approximation to a statistical mechanics model. There are six
individual projects, all of which they have already analyzed to some degree. The
first project concerns an approach to a general theory of discontinuous phase
transitions. For a certain class of nearest neighbor attractive systems on the
usual d-dimensional cubic lattices they can show that whenever the associated
mean field theory predicts a discontinuous phase transition, the actual system
also undergoes a discontinuous transition whenever the dimension d is large. The
second project is a proposal to study a model which emulates, through a
deterministic evolution of a random environment, the celebrated SOC sandpile
models. Third, they study systems at points of phase coexistence in a
statistical ensemble fixing the excess of the minority phase in the system. It
appears that, in a correct scaling, there is a sharp value of minority-phase
volume where a droplet of the minority phase spontaneously emerges. Fourth, they
will investigate certain percolation systems which locally appear similar to
percolation on the complete graph but contain an underlying geometrical
structure that is absent in the usual complete graph systems. In the fifth
project, they will study a variety of interacting random walks with both
attractive and repulsive (and mixed) interactions. The final project concerns
the correct definition of thermodynamic limit of the free energy in polydisperse
systems, e.g., systems with a continuum of particle species. The Principal
Investigators will be examining a number of problems (six in the proposal with
more on the horizon) in the area of Statistical Mechanics or closely related
fields. The essence of these problems concerns systems consisting of simple
constituents which interact in a simple manner. However, since there are a
myriad of these constituents it turns out that such systems are capable of
highly complex behavior. Of particular interest is the phenomena of phase
transitions in which the entire collective character of the system undergoes a
drastic change. This notion is either at the heart of or just behind the scenes
in all of the systems that are proposed for study. One project concerns a
demonstration that "most" systems undergo a more catastrophic sort of transition
sometimes known as a phase change of the first kind. A second line of
investigation concerns the formation of droplets (e.g. raindrops) which, as it
turns out, takes place on a submacroscopic scale known as a mesoscopic scale.
Third, under investigation is the infiltration of "disturbances" in a system
which -- from one perspective -- models a social network. Fourth, there will be
investigations of systems in which the above mentioned elementary constituents
are all of different (but closely related) character. The remainder of the
investigations concern the so called percolation and random walk systems. While
these models have their origins in the study of chemical polymers, the
applications cover a large range of topics, one of which, in modern terms, is
the dissemination of information in communications networks.
