
* 0404806
* Research on Stochastic Processes and Optimization
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, OPERATIONS RESEARCH, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2004,08/12/2004
* Paul Dupuis,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2008
* USD 443,323.00

The proposed research is concerned with two topics in the area of stochastic
processes and optimization: (1) theoretical foundations for importance sampling,
(2) large deviations analysis of urn occupancy models. Importance sampling is a
widely used Monte Carlo simulation technique for the estimation of quantities
that are largely determined by rare events. With few exceptions, importance
sampling algorithms are based on a change of measure that is not allowed to
adapt in the course of generating a sample. Recent studies, however, indicate
that these schemes may fail miserably in very common circumstances. These
difficulties reflect the absence of a broad theoretical foundation for
importance sampling. One contribution of the proposed research is to build such
a foundation in a general setting. Roughly speaking, at the heart of any
importance sampling problem is a stochastic game, and an understanding of this
game is the key to designing and analyzing efficient importance sampling
algorithms. This perspective motivates the concept of dynamic importance
sampling, where the change of measure is allowed to vary depending on the
simulation history. It can be shown that dynamic schemes, properly designed, are
optimal in a suitable sense. The second topic, urn occupancy problems, is
concerned with the distribution of multiple balls in multiple urns. This
classical topic has found applications in many fields. The proposed research
concerns large deviation approximations, new techniques for explicitly solving
the associated variational problem, and the development of relations between
equilibrium distributions for stochastic networks and occupancy problems.

If one were to ask an average person whether unlikely events are important,
their first response might be that an event with very little chance of happening
could not be significant. After a moment's reflection, however, they would
realize that such events have a profound impact in many circumstances. For
example, measuring credit risk is very important to those who manage portfolios
of loans, corporate bonds, and other financial instruments that are subject to
default risk. Often the problem reduces to estimating the probability of
default, which is usually very small, especially for highly rated obligors.
However, an accurate estimation is crucial for risk management because these
rare defaults can induce significant losses. Similar considerations apply in
many other circumstances, especially when performance standards are stringent.
The dominant technique for estimating small probabilities has been a simulation
algorithm called importance sampling. However, the traditional design
methodology for importance sampling has very limited applications and has been
observed to break down in very common situations. Part of the proposed research
is concerned with the most basic question, that is, how to build a broad
theoretical foundation for importance sampling, upon which efficient algorithms
can be designed for very general problems. A new concept of design is introduced
in the proposal and the resulting importance sampling algorithms work well in
practice. The other part of the proposal is concerned with a class of urn
occupancy models. These models are very useful in the design and analysis of
large-scale networks, biological systems, and physics. However, due to the
complexity of the models, approximation becomes exceedingly important. The
proposed research will develop an asymptotic method that can yield good
approximations with only a modest computation effort.
