
* 0405367
* IX Latin American Conference on Probability and Mathematical Statistics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS, Catalyzing New Intl Collab
* 04/01/2004,03/24/2004
* Alicia Carriquiry,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 09/30/2004
* USD 16,500.00

ABSTRACT: The IX Latin American Conference on Probability and Mathematical
Statistics is held in Punta del Este, Uruguay, from March 23 to March 27, 2004.
Conference organizers structure activities to provide as much opportunity as
possible for discussions among conference participants, and to create an
environment that is welcoming of young researchers and graduate students who
wish to present their work. Several introductory short courses on topics ranging
from stochastic calculus with financial applications, to graphical models, and
model selection in a Bayesian framework, are taught. In addition, special
discussion sessions on course topics are organized, to facilitate the
interaction between young researchers and their more senior colleagues.

In the past twelve years, collaboration between Latin American and US
mathematical scientists has increased many-fold. One important consequence has
been the growth of well-trained students from Latin American institutions who
choose to enroll in graduate programs in American universities and who then
develop close and enduring ties to the US academic community. In part, this
increased interaction is due to the series of Latin American conferences in
probability and statistics, that are generally held every two years in a Latin
American country, and that typically include a significant contingent of US
participants. The conferences have grown both in size and importance over time,
and have contributed to the creation of a community of applied probabilists and
statisticians who are eager to work in interdisciplinary teams to solve complex
problems of importance to society. The National Science Foundation, through its
funding of travel awards for US scientists and for scientists from selected
Latin American countries excluding Cuba , has been an important sponsor of these
workshops. The funding requested from NSF for the IX Latin American conference
will be used to partially cover travel expenses of 10 US participants and of six
Latin American conference participants from countries other than Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Mexico, Venezuela.




