
* 0406042
* Quenched Tails and Almost Sure Limit Laws
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2004,07/19/2007
* Amir Dembo,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 438,614.00

0406042 Dembo The evaluation of probabilities of rare events leads to an
understanding of the mechanisms by which they can occur, and when many different
rare events are possible, it identifies the mechanism causing one of them to
actually occur. This approach has been very successful, often for finding the
quenched asymptotic behavior when two levels of randomness are present,
conditioned on a fixed, typical realization of one element of randomness. The
proposed activity focuses on the applications of this approach in two
directions:

1. Experiments and simulations involving dynamical systems out of equilibrium
report an aging phenomenon, that is "memory" being accumulated in the system.
The fluctuation-dissipation theorem of statistical physics relates the time
derivative of the correlation function at equilibrium to the effect of small
perturbations in the dynamical equations. It is predicted in the physics
literature that aging is related to a specific form of breakup of the
fluctuation-dissipation theorem. One goal of the proposed activity is to form
the mathematical version of the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, to understand
the causes of the aging mechanism, and to rigorously relate the two.

2. The Gaussian free field and the Brownian motion are two fundamental random
objects of great intrinsic beauty and much interest in probability theory (as
well as in mathematical physics). The PI and his collaborators have been very
successful in studying the fractal geometry of the extremal points of the
occupation measure and covering process associated with planar Brownian motion
and random walks. Recent works by the PI's students, their collaborators, and
others, suggest strong similarity between the extremes of the Gaussian free
field and those of the Brownian motion, as well as novel relations between
contour lines of random height functions, those of the Gaussian free field and
certain conformally invariant loop ensembles. Pursuing further this similarity,
one goal of the proposed activity is to gain new insights and develop novel
connections between the planar Gaussian free field and Brownian motion.

Over the past three decades, the physics community has developed sophisticated
non-rigorous techniques for making very accurate predictions about the
asymptotics of random dynamics, Gibbs measures, and planar objects with
conformal symmetries. More recently, mathematicians started making significant
progress in developing the corresponding rigorous theories and proving some of
these predictions. One of the key tools in this process has been the theory of
large deviations and the intuition behind it. The proposed activity is partially
motivated by such non-rigorous physics predictions. As such, it is expected to
result in new mathematical ideas and techniques that, beyond the immediate
resolution of challenging problems of much interest to probabilists, would have
an impact on the interface between probability theory and statistical physics.
This grant will provide graduate training of students in probability theory. The
techniques to be developed in this proposal are also expected to have future
applications to the theory and practice of universal non-linear filtering, a
problem of relevance and much interest for communication theory (see the URL
www-stat.stanford.edu/~amir/ for some related activity and preprints).
