
* 0451194
* RUI: Problems in Stochastic Geometry
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 11/01/2005,11/17/2008
* Denis Bell,FL,University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2009
* USD 53,290.00

The investigator plans to study three problems in the area of stochastic
differential geometry. The first problem concerns the Gauss-Bonnet-Chern
theorem. The investigator has proved a generalization of this theorem valid for
an oriented even-dimensional Riemannian vector bundle over a closed compact
manifold, equipped with a metric connection. The investigator would like to
simplify his proof, replacing the use of the Splitting Principle, which
constitutes a key step in his argument, with a more elementary and transparent
stochastic argument. The second problem concerns the derivation of integration
by parts formulae for the law of a diffusion process on a compact manifold. The
investigator has recently found a new method for obtaining integration by parts
formulae in the case where the diffusion is strictly elliptic. He plans to use
his method to study the analogous problem for degenerate (non-elliptic)
diffusions. He believes he will be able to prove a dichotomy theorem giving
conditions very close to necessary and sufficient for the existence of
integration by parts formulae, for a large class of vector fields in the
degenerate case. In the third problem, the investigator in collaboration with
Elton Hsu, will use ideas in two papers of Hsu to give a simplified stochastic
proof of the Gauss-Bonnet-Chern theorem for manifolds with boundary. They will
use the expertise they gain from this work to study the index theorem for the
Dirac operator on spin manifolds with boundary. The proposal combines two areas
of mathematics, stochastic analysis, the study of randomness, and differential
geometry, the study of shape. Both areas have close connections with the
physical world. For example, stochastic differential equations, a central theme
of the proposal, are widely used to model physical systems subject to the
influence of random noise. Examples include the flow of heat in a material,
weather systems, the trajectory of a spacecraft, and the pricing of stock
options. Curved spaces are often the natural setting for these phenomena, e.g.
if one wishes to study the heat at various points on a cylindrical pipe. A
deeper understanding of the mathematics underlying physical systems is often
crucial in developing good mathematical models of these systems. Thus, although
it is of a theoretical nature, the research outlined in this proposal may prove
useful in many areas of applied science and technology.
