
* 0503901
* Explorations in Stein's Method
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Jason Fulman,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Wen Chen Masters
* 09/30/2006
* USD 63,196.00

Stein's method is a remarkable and largely unexplored technique for proving
approximation and limit theorems in probability, and the investigator hopes to
develop versions of it which can be used to solve problems of interest to
researchers in algebra, probability, and statistics. More precisely, there are
five specific problems of interest the investigator would like to solve. The
first problem is to use Stein's method to prove approximations to the Tracy-
Widom distribution (whose merit lies in its applications to random matrix
theory, tiling problems, percolation, queuing theory, and much else). The second
problem is to continue the investigator's work on Stein's method and the
spectrum of random walks. The third problem is to use Stein's method to prove
approximations to the semicircle distribution (the free probability analog of
the normal distribution). The fourth problem is to use Stein's method to bound
convergence rates of Markov chains, building on ideas of Diaconis. The fifth
problem is to prove chi-squared approximation for contingency tables with fixed
row and column sums, which would be quite valuable because such approximations
are frequently used in statistical work even though their accuracy is poorly
understood.

In making decisions of public policy, it is important that one draws correct
conclusions from the data available. A drawback to many of the statistical
methods applied today is that the accuracy of the conclusions is unclear. As one
example, in determining whether there is gender bias in the promotion of
employees, it is common to use a statistical test called the chi-squared test.
As a second example, work on DNA sequences of interest to biotechnology and
health uses Poisson approximations from probability theory. As a third example,
in physics and chemistry one uses Markov chain methods to test theoretical
models. These methods are routinely applied so it is important to quantify their
validity. A remarkable technique, introduced by Charles Stein at Stanford,
offers hope of better quantifying the accuracy of such procedures. Stein's
method has proven successful in applications to DNA sequencing, but the
technique is largely unexplored. The investigator plans to extend the scope and
applicability of this method. As a final goal, the investigator plans to study
the use of Stein's method in Markov chain theory, which as mentioned above, is
crucial to drawing reliable conclusions from computer simulations.


