
* 0503650
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic Interactions between Particles and Environments
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/15/2005,09/12/2006
* Timo Seppalainen,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2008
* USD 40,000.00

This research is conducted on two fields of stochastic processes: random walk in
random environment (RWRE) and interacting particle systems. In the former, a
particle is driven by its interaction with the non-homogeneous random medium,
while in the latter, the particle interacts with other particles present. In the
general RWRE model an environment is a collection of transition probabilities
between lattice sites, and it is chosen from some mixing shift-invariant
distribution. On the other hand, a class of deposition models, introduced by the
first PI, not only provides a unified framework for many well-known particle
systems, but also gives a broader view on common phenomena arising in such
systems. An object of vital importance in particle systems, in spirit similar to
a random walker in random environment, is the so-called second class particle.
The main goal of these fields is the understanding of the consequences of the
randomness in the environment, or caused by particle-particle interactions,
respectively. Among the fundamental questions one can consider are the existence
of 0-1 laws, law of large numbers, central limit theorems, large deviations,
etc. The two fields are very close in spirit and ideas, just as an example, non-
reversibility is a major obstacle in both fields to common applications.
Sometimes even direct connections can be established between the two fields
through different representations of the same system. This research contains an
instance where a surface growth process is shown to be the dual of a RWRE model,
allowing the flow of results from the latter to the former. Dual connections
within the field of interacting systems are known to be a powerful tool.
Analogously, drawing parallels between interacting systems and RWRE's allows for
the exchange of methods, insights, and results.

Besides the fact that probabilistic intuition and techniques are often of great
relevance to other areas of mathematics, this research has a direct impact on
probability theory, combinatorics, statistical physics, and the theory of
partial differential equations. The fields of random media and interacting
systems also have various industrial, agricultural, sociological, and biological
applications. Moreover the methods and problems in these fields are often easy
to state, while the solutions involve sophisticated tools. This makes the
subject appealing to graduate students and young researchers, generating more
interest in probability theory.
