
* 0503977
* Superdiffusions and Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2005,05/18/2005
* Eugene Dynkin,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 138,076.00

The subject of the project is a class of measure-valued Markov processes called
superdiffusions and the correponding class of semilinear elliptic equations. An
intensive study of the connections between these two classes during the past 15
years resulted in developing a nonlinear analog of the classical probabilistic
potential theory related to the Brownian motion. Some fundamental problems in
this field were solved during the last three years which opens new directions of
research. These directions will be explored. In particular, new probabilistic
tools will be applied to problems on nonlinear differential equations. Harmonic
functions in spaces of measures associated with superprocesses will be
investigated which promises to open a new chapter in infinite dimensional
analysis. In this connection, exit boundaries for superdiffusions will be
explored - an attempt to extend Martin boundary theory to nonlinear PDEs.

The goal of the proposal is to contribute to probabilistic analysis, which is an
important branch of modern mathematics. Interactions between the theory of
stochastic processes and the theory of partial differential equations are
beneficial for both fields. At the beginning, mostly analytic results were used
by probabilists. More recently, analysts (and physicists) took inspiration from
the probabilistic approach. Of course, the development of analysis in general,
and of theory of differential equations in particular, was motivated to a great
extent by problems in physics. A difference between physics and probability is
that the latter provides not only an intuition but also rigorous tools for
proving theorems.
