
* 0504882
* Coalescent processes and population models
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2005,03/30/2007
* Jason Schweinsberg,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 99,587.00

The PI studies several problems related to coalescent processes and population
models. Coalescent processes are stochastic processes that model a system of
particles which start out separated and merge into clusters as time goes
forward. These processes can be used to describe the genealogy of a population
because if one takes a sample from a population and follows the ancestral lines
backwards in time, the ancestral lines will coalesce. When a beneficial mutation
occurs in a population and spreads rapidly, many ancestral lines will merge at
almost the same time, as they will all be traced back to the individual that had
the beneficial mutation. One goal is to use results from the theory of
coalescent processes with multiple mergers to get further insight into tests
that are used to detect beneficial mutations. A second project is to determine
the distribution of the time that it takes for one individual in a population to
experience k mutations. The PI will also study a model of coalescence in which
the total mass of the system increases over time. A coalescent model in which
new particles appear at rate one and clusters merge at a rate proportional to
the product of the masses has previously been studied, but a qualitatively
different phase transition is conjectured to arise in an alternative model in
which clusters merge at a rate proportional to the sum of the masses.

Stochastic models of coalescence have a wide range of applications in other
fields of science such as biology, physical chemistry, and astronomy. Biologists
interested in understanding evolution are concerned with the merging of the
ancestral lines of a sample from a population. It should be possible to use the
mathematical theory of coalescence to gain further insight into how beneficial
mutations impact this process. The project of determining the amount of time for
one individual in a population to experience several mutations is motivated by
simple models of cancer, in which it is assumed that a cell becomes cancerous
only after several harmful mutations take place. The study of coalescent
processes in which the mass of the system increases over time is motivated by
recent interest in randomly growing networks.
