
* 0504608
* Curved Wiener Space Analysis
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2005,04/06/2007
* Bruce Driver,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 170,000.00

This proposal is primarily concerned with three topics. The first is to study
the convergence properties of certain new finite dimensional geometric
approximations to Wiener measure on a Riemannian manifold. The second is to
generalize the classical "Skeleton" and "Taylor isomorphisms" theorems to path
and loop groups. The third is to find refinements to Malliavin's lifting method
for deducing information about heat kernels and related Dirichlet forms. The
first two topics are motivated, in part, by the P.I.'s attempt to understand the
important problem of quantizing Yang-Mills fields which form a key part of the
"standard model" of particle physics. (See the Clay Mathematics Institute
problem pertaining to quantized Yang-Mills fields for a description.) The third
topic is an attempt to extract useful information from the path integral
representations for solutions to elliptic and hypoelliptic type heat equations.
The P.I. hopes to find new gradient inequalities for hypoelliptic diffusions by
modifying the standard Bismut and Malliavin vector-field lifting techniques.

Since the 1940's, Feynman "path integrals" have played a central role in the
description of quantum physics. Although highly studied, the mathematical
footing of path integrals in many contexts is still tenuous at best. Much of
this proposal is devoted to the mathematics of path integrals which in turn may
impact our understanding of the description of elementary particles. The
problems to be addressed are aimed at giving mathematically precise meaning to
the heuristic expressions and computations which are used by physicists in the
description of elementary particles. Besides being of foundational importance,
this project should shed light on the "anomalies" which can appear in the
quantization process, i.e. the process of going from a classical mechanical
description to a quantum mechanical description of a physical system. It is also
proposed to develop new methods for extracting useful information about the flow
of heat in complicated geometrical bodies using the diffusion interpretation of
this phenomenon. This proposal has a significant graduate training component as
a number of the problems will be tackled by the P.I.'s students.
