
* 0504737
* Problems Related to Gaussian Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS
* 06/01/2005,03/07/2007
* Jan Hannig,CO,Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2008
* USD 96,000.00

Abstract:

The investigator studies research problems in theoretical probability. In
particular he investigates the problem called small deviations. The PI is also
working on extreme value theory for Gaussian random fields motivated by an
application to nonparametric statistics. The problem of small deviations is
related to the behavior of the probability that a stochastic process stays in a
small neighborhood of the origin. As the neighborhood shrinks, this probability
clearly tends to zero --- the question is at what rate? The PI calculates this
rate for various processes, including the storage process that is used to model
the amount of water available in a dam. Motivation of the other problem comes
from nonparametric statistics. One of the main problem in modern nonparametric
smoothing is concerned with finding the best smooth curve approximating the
data. Chaudhuri & Marron (1999) proposed a tool for data exploration called
SiZer. The visual display of SiZer, can be viewed as a summary of a large number
(hundreds) of hypothesis test results. For reasonable statistical inference,
care needs to be taken about the multiple comparison issue. The current
implementations of SiZer is not addressing the issue of multiple testing
adequately. To correct this one needs to study the distribution of the maximum
of a particular discrete nonstationary Gaussian random field.

The PI works on two major problems, small deviations for stochastic processes
and extreme value theory for a particular random field. The area of small
deviations is relatively new with major developments starting in the 1990's. The
solution of the small deviation problems helps us understand the nature of
certain rare events when the variability of a random process is much less then
expected. Applications of this theory are currently pursued by many researchers.
The investigator develops a new application of small deviation techniques in
storage theory. The proposed extreme value problem is directly motivated by a
statistical application. It aims at improving the performance of the data
analysis tool SiZer. SiZer is currently widely used by many applied scientists.
Successful applications of SiZer include internet traffic modeling, climatology
and environment, and biology and genetics. Part of this proposal aims at
significantly improving the SiZer tool to make it more reliable for
applications.


