
* 0504193
* Studies in Nonequilibrium Behaviors of Tagged Particles
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2005,05/03/2007
* Sunder Sethuraman,IA,Iowa State University
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2009
* USD 92,966.00

The proposed project is to study some asymptotic fluctuations of a
distinguished, or tagged particle interacting with others in certain models of
simple exclusion and zero-range particle systems. The physical feeling is that
the tagged particle is in some scale a type of homogenized random walk or
Brownian motion with parameters reflecting system interactions. This picture to
first order in terms of the law of averages has been established. Also, to some
extent, under equilibrium conditions, second order features such as
"fluctuations" have been understood. But less is known in "non-equilibrium"
situations. In this context, the specific proposed work is to characterize the
non-equilibrium fluctuations in certain "mean-zero" simple exclusion and zero-
range systems where some calculation is possible. Resolution of these issues
will also have some bearing on non-equilibrium fluctuations of "hydrodynamic
limits" which is as well an open problem.

Informally, the proposed project is to investigate some asymptotic behaviors of
a distinguished, or tagged component interacting with others in certain models
of traffic, queuing and fluids. More specifically, the proposed work is to study
"non-equilibrium" fluctuations of such tagged components. The broader impacts of
the proposal are in its connections with statistical physics where determining
tagged component behavior is important to understanding "transport," and "multi-
scale" phenomena.
