
* 0505751
* SLE Properties
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2005,08/22/2005
* Daniel Stroock,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2007
* USD 36,643.00

The estimate for the upper bound of the Hausdorff dimension of the SLE boundary
is already established by S. Rohde and O. Schramm. While a theorem on the
Hausdorff dimension of the SLE trace was announced by V. Beffara, the boundary
of the hull when kappa > 4 remains an open conjecture. To get an estimate on the
lower bound for the Hausdorff dimension of the SLE boundary, the asymptotic
behavior of normalized (pre-)Schwarzian derivatives for the SLE backward flows
is employed. The normalized (pre-)Schwarzian derivatives of SLE maps with higher
order terms are continuous square integrable martingales with second moment
obeying the Duplantier duality and they have correlations that decay
exponentially in the hyperbolic distance. This method allows one to make a
formal argument for a lower bound. Makarov's law of iterated logarithm makes it
possible to compare harmonic measure to a Hausdorff measure associated with a
logarithmico-exponential function. The goal of this project is to get the exact
estimate for Makarov's law of iterated logarithm for SLE and compare harmonic
measure to a Hausdorff measure with a best possible measure function.

Since Stochastic Loewner Evolution (SLE) was introduced by Schramm, a lot of
works have been done in this area by mathematicians and physicists in various
areas like mathematical physics, probability theory and complex analysis. For
example, SLE(6) was used to prove Mandelbrot's conjecture that the outer
boundary of a planar Brownian path should have fractal dimension 4/3. On the
other hand, several lattice models from statistical physics have been shown or
conjectured to correspond to some SLE's. This project provides mathematical
analysis for physicists' predictions like Duplantier's duality conjecture, which
is derived by arguments from conformal field theory. It may also build up the
methods to approach their mathematical proofs.
