
* 0553701
* Collaborative Research: FRG:Stochastic models for intracellular reaction networks
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2006,06/26/2006
* Grzegorz Rempala,KY,University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2008
* USD 301,251.00

With the completion of numerous genome projects for bacteria, yeast, and humans,
there is an increasing interest in understanding how molecules encoded within
the genomes interact to define various functional networks of the cell. Network
of integrated molecular reactions tend to involve many different molecular
species, thus posing complex analytical problems. For prediction and simulation
purposes it is essential to reduce both the model and computational complexity
of the problem, while still capturing all the essential characteristics and
potential behavior of the network. This project will systematically develop
stochastic models for chemical reaction networks, beginning with classical
Markov chain models and developing new models that take into account the
stepwise development of reactions involving RNA and DNA molecules. Specific
issues to be addressed include scaling limits based on the wide range of time
and other quantitative scales in the system, model reduction through scaling
limit approximations and other approaches, the implications of the combinatorial
restrictions the reaction structure places on the system, sensitivity analysis
for the parameters of the stochastic models, and statistical methods for model
validation based on data that is frequently obtained through indirect and/or
aggregated measurements.

At the level of the cell, the chemical dynamics may well be dominated by the
action of regulatory molecules that are present at levels of only a few copies
per cell. Therefore, the molecular fluctuations of these components may
determine the dynamics of the reaction network. These molecular fluctuations
appear to have significant consequences; the observed large variation in rates
of development, morphology and concentration of molecular species in a cell
often lead to a randomization of phenotypic outcomes and non-genetic population
heterogeneity. Since these fluctuations may have profound effects on the
physiology of the cell, stochastic models for the intra-cellular reaction
networks and careful statistical analysis appear to be essential if the system
is to be well understood. The project will also provide a fertile training
ground for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. There is a high
demand for well-trained mathematical scientists with the interest and expertise
necessary to contribute to the solution of problems arising in cell and
molecular biology.
