
* 0555343
* Probability and Mean Field Models for Spin Glasses
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2006,01/25/2010
* Michel Talagrand,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2009
* USD 162,000.00

The unexpected behavior of mean-field models for spin glasses was discovered in
the seventies by G. Parisi. These models are simple mathematical objects. It is
remarkable that they exhibit such a subtle behavior, and that their rigorous
study is so challenging. The PI believes that elucidating these models will
bring the discovery of an entire new direction in probability theory. He has
been trying for 10 years to build new methods to study them. One of the
fundamental objectives (the proof of the Parisi formula giving the free energy
of the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model) has been attained, but this success cannot
hide the fact that overall our understanding remains rather limited. In
particular, two central questions, (known as the Ultrametricity conjecture and
the Chaos problem) seem as hard as ever. They are possibly related to questions
of analysis. The PI plans to work on these very hard questions, but also will
strive to make incremental progress on less daunting issues, in particular the
study of new mathematically canonical mean field Hamiltonians that exhibit
replica symmetric equations of a new type.

Mathematics and Physics have influenced each other in fundamental ways since at
least Galileo, and this mutual influence is stronger than ever. In the
seventies, Physicists discovered that certain alloys (called spin glasses)
responded in an unconventional way to magnetic simulation. They introduced new
models to explain these behaviors. These models are simple and natural
mathematical objects. Yet for a long time there existed no mathematical method
to study them. The early work of the physicists uses heuristic methods that need
not be completely reliable. The present project it a step in the long range
program of eliminating this discrepancy, by developing new tools from
mathematics, and in particular probability theory, to completely understand
these fundamental models. The long rang outcome of this program could be a new
impetus on probability theory, one of the most important branch of mathematics
for applications.
