
* 0600537
* Conference on Asymptotic Analysis in Stochastic Processes, Nonparametric Estimation, and Related Problems
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS
* 06/15/2006,06/16/2006
* Pao Liu Chow,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 16,000.00

This is a proposal on conference for asymptotic analysis in stochastic
processes, nonparametric estimation, and related fields. The proposal presents a
concerted effort of researchers from multiple institutions to assemble an
impressive list of invited speakers, who are renowned leaders in the fields of
probability theory, stochastic processes, stochastic differential equations, as
well as in the nonparametric estimation theory, and related fields. Their works
have stimulated much of subsequent progress in these fields. In addition, a
number of invited speakers were early developers of the fields of probability
and stochastic processes, establishing the foundation of contemporary
probability theory. The conference focuses on stochastic systems. The main theme
is asymptotic stochastic analysis, which is a powerful tool for studying
stochastic processes and nonparametric estimation problems. Leading experts
around the globe will present state-of-the-art results on such topics as
stochastic ordinary and partial differential equations, large deviations,
homogenization, asymptotic methods in nonparametric inference, the interplay
between stochastic differential equations and nonlinear partial differential
equations, and stochastic control and numerical methods. Not only will the
conference further our understanding in stochastic processes and nonparametric
methods, but also it will be a trend setting event, leading to an acceleration
of research efforts, and making broader impacts on mathematics, education, and
different branches of science and engineering as a whole.

In the new era of global economy, any scientific innovation will add to the
national competitiveness. The asymptotic analysis in stochastic processes and
nonparametric estimation extends in many areas of human endeavor, and it is a
very powerful mathematical tool for solving many complex problems arising from
engineering and sciences. In recent years, research in these areas has witnessed
a tremendous progress, which has resulted in a significant impact on
mathematics, physical, social and biological sciences, as well as on engineering
and technology. The rapid progress has necessitated fast and timely
communications among researchers in the field. The proposal aims at bring
leading experts in the areas together to exchange ideas, to interact with young
researchers, and to update the most recent progress. The proposal presents a
concerted effort by researchers from multiple institutions to assemble an
impressive list of invited speakers, who are renowned leaders in the fields of
probability theory, stochastic processes, stochastic differential equations, as
well as in the nonparametric estimation theory, and related fields. Their
important scientific contributions have stimulated much of subsequent progress
in these fields. In addition, a number of invited speakers were early developers
of the fields of probability and stochastic processes, establishing the
mathematical foundation of contemporary probability theory and its applications.
Special emphasis will be given to encourage broad participation, which is
important to the diversification of the research community. The organizing
committee will make every effort to promote the participation of junior
researchers, graduate students, and researchers from under-represented groups.
Not only will the conference further our understanding in stochastic processes
and nonparametric statistical methods, but also it will be a trend-setting
event, leading to an acceleration of research efforts, and making broader
impacts on mathematics and applications, education, and different branches of
science and engineering as a whole.
