
* 0600206
* Topics in Stochastic Analysis
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2006,07/09/2008
* Krzysztof Burdzy,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2010
* USD 293,998.00

The PI's will investigate several problems in stochastic analysis of pure and
applied nature. Competing particle systems appear in various scientific models
including biology and theory of combustion. The PI's will study various aspects
of such models, including hydrodynamic limits, tagged particle behavior and
properties of the associated partial differential equations. Long term behavior
of reflected Brownian motions driven by the same noise will be examined.
Geometric properties of Neumann eigenfunctions will be investigated. Uniqueness
of solutions to some stochastic differential equations will be proved. Boundary
behavior of harmonic functions and local and global behavior of heat kernel
associated with jump processes will be examined. Brownian motion on a fractal
set will be investigated. Inverse problem is a mathematical model arising
naturally in applied sciences from geophysics to medicine and physics. The PI's
will study the foundational questions related to this model, such as existence
and uniqueness of the solutions to the corresponding equations. Other models and
processes will be the subject of separate but related studies; they include
Markov processes conditioned on a small time scale, a change of variable formula
for processes with 4-th order scaling properties and non-local operators of
variable order.

Brownian motion and Markov processes are models for a wide range of natural
phenomena, such as weather and climate, various functions of living organisms
and financial markets. One of the scientific goals is to make accurate
predictions based on available data. Mathematical methods have to be developed
to make such predictions possible and reliable. The PI's will work on both
theoretical questions leading to general results and on specific models that can
serve as testbeds for the general methods. The results of theoretical research
are often used to make quantitative predictions in well undrstood models and to
make qualitative predictions related to complex systems. The research of PI's
will be mostly focused on processes that display no or little long time memory.
Such systems are popular models for inanimate matter and man-made systems, but
also for many biological systems.
