
* 0602202
* The return time statistics for non-markovian maps
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2006,06/29/2006
* Nicolai Haydn,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2010
* USD 163,278.00

Abstract proposal DMS-0602202

The proposed work is on the connection between mixing properties, the decay of
correlations and statistical properties of dynamical systems. There are three
main areas:

(i) We want to get a better understanding what happens to the return times for
mixing maps near periodic orbits. Currently it is known that generic points have
in the limit Poisson distributed return times. However near periodic orbits such
regular behavior cannot be assumed and we intend to show that the limiting
distribution is a compounded Poisson distribution where the compounded part is
Bernoulli and determined by an `escape rate' near the periodic orbit.

(ii) The second area of research is to determine the limiting distribution for
return times for non-uniformly hyperbolic systems. This would allow us then to
classify the long term statistical behavior for a considerably larger class of
dynamical systems including some parabolic systems, `billiard type' systems and
also higher dimensional maps similar to the Henon map which has been studied
extensively and is technically very difficult to approach.

(iii) The third major area in which we propose to do research is related to a
famous theorem by Shannon, McMillan and Breiman that uses the decay rate of
dynamical neighbourhoods to describe the entropy. We want to prove a Central
Limit Theorem for a $\alpha$-mixing systems. This will considerably extend
previous results that used very strong mixing or regularity assumptions to
obtain distribution results. We want to use new techniques that should allow us
to overcome the difficulties that are entailed by weakening the mixing
properties.

Let us note that research in this area is of interest to a wide variety of
scientists including experimentalists who want to do numerical simulations.
Detailed knowledge about the distribution of return times can be used to develop
more reliable ways to numerically analyze time series of chaotic dynamical
systems. The proposed research can also serve to develop more efficient data
compression algorithms.
