
* 0603742
* Kolmogorov Operators and SPDE
* DMS,PROBABILITY, COFFES
* 08/01/2006,08/14/2007
* Michael Roeckner,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

The aim of the project is to fully develop an analytic approach to the solution
of stochastic partial differential equations (SPDE) via the associated
Kolmogorov equations (i.e. infinite dimensional generalized heat equations). The
corresponding partial differential operators, called Kolmogorov operators, act
in infinitely many variables. Their analytic treatment is still at the beginning
and several approaches will be implemented during the course of this project. In
particular, their spectral analysis and geometry will be central points of the
research. Among the important applications, which will constantly provide
orientation for the planned work, will be stochastically perturbed partial
differential equations (PDE) as e.g. the generalized Burgers, the Navier-Stokes
or porous media equations. Specific topics to be investigated also include jump
type noises as stochastic perturbations, integrations by parts formulae with
boundary terms for invariant measures, SPDE over unbounded domains, non-linear
Kolmogorov equations in infinitely many variables, convergence of their spectral
structures and non-linear PDE in infinite dimensions, non-linear infinite
dimensional state spaces and their geometry/topology.

Stochastic methods are nowadays standardly used in all Natural Sciences as well
as as Economics and Engineering. This project will concentrate on the theory and
the applications of a branch of Stochastics, namely Stochastic Partial
Differential Equations (SPDE), which has undergone an enormous development in
recent years. It has become a major research direction in Probability Theory as
far as its conceptions and general theory is concerned, and at the same time it
is being used more and more in applications in many other disciplines. These
include Biology, Chemistry, Physics, in particular Hydrodynamics and
Climatology, but also Medical Sciences, Economics, and Engineering. The aims of
this project is to contribute to both the mathematical theory of SPDE and to its
applications to fundamental problems in the sciences mentioned above.
