
* 0603886
* Markov Processes in Geometric Environments
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 05/01/2006,02/05/2008
* Laurent Saloff-Coste,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2011
* USD 261,000.00

Many basic Markov processes evolve on a state space carrying a related geometric
structure. Brownian motion on a Riemannian manifold, random walks on Cayley
graphs of finitely generated groups and finite Markov chains on complex
combinatorial structures such as trees or matchings are all primary examples.
This proposal focuses on the relationships between the behavior of such
processes and the properties of the underlying geometric structure. It involves
problems at the interface between analysis, geometry and probability with a
major role played by groups and their actions. Potential theory, i.e., the study
of harmonic functions and, more generally, of solutions of the heat equation, is
at the center of many of these considerations.

Random processes play an important role in many aspects of science and human
activity. The study of card shuffling procedures is an entertaining yet complex
and mathematically interesting example. Various random processes are used to
model complex phenomena, from polymer molecules, to DNA analysis, to image
restoration, to financial markets. They are also used as crucial tools for
efficient computations. In such cases, there are strong structural constraints
underlying the behavior of these stochastic processes. These constraints are
expressed in terms of the environment of the process which often has a complex
combinatorial or geometric nature. This proposal focuses on the study of the
fundamental properties of such stochastic processes and on how they relate to
the global structure of the environment.
