
* 0603701
* Survival Time Probabilities and Applications to Hot-Spots and Spectral Gaps
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2006,03/20/2008
* Rodrigo Banuelos,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2010
* USD 198,000.00

This proposal studies problems that lie at the interface of probability and
other fields of mathematics, or in more contemporary language, problems in
stochastic analysis. These include (1) problems related to the hot-spots
conjecture of Jeff Rauch for Neumann eigenfunctions and counterparts originally
raised by the PI for conditioned Brownian motion and (2) problems related to the
sharp spectral gap bounds conjecture for Schrodinger operators. The problems in
(1) and (2) are formulated in terms of survival time probabilities for Brownian
motion which are then reduced to the study of finite dimensional distributions
functions. The probabilistic formulations are more general than the original
conjectures but much more natural from the point of view of the stochastic
analysis ideas and techniques suggested in this proposal. The conjectures that
motivate these problems are well known and very difficult. Any progress on these
problems will likely lead to other applications and will be of considerable
interest to researchers working on several different areas of mathematics,
including harmonic analysis, partial differential equations, geometry and
probability. Versions of these problems will also be investigated for processes
other than Brownian motion such as symmetric stable processes and more general
Levy processes.

It has been known since the beginning of the last century that many physical and
biological phenomena can be modeled by random stochastic processes. Indeed, the
classical model of Brownian motion which is at the heart of the problems
discussed above was discovered by the British botanist Robert Brown (even
earlier) from physical observations of pollen particles suspended in fluids.
More recently, stochastic models have been used in many other settings in the
physical, biological and social sciences with many sophisticated applications to
economic models, and particularly to financial markets. Many of these
applications involve stochastic processes which, unlike Brownian motion, do not
have continuous trajectories. The finite dimensional distribution techniques
that arise in the problems above came about because of the connections to these
more general stochastic processes.


