
* 0604423
* Studies in Algebraic Combinatorics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 07/01/2006,02/07/2011
* Richard Stanley,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2011
* USD 534,900.00

The proposal is in the area of algebraic combinatorics, with six main research
topics. The first topic concerns a new formula for the values of irreducible
characters of the symmetric group. This formula is connected with another
formula of Kerov which is not well understood, though it has applications to
free probability theory and other areas. The second topic deals with a
generalization of the classical theory of lattice paths on the plane, where now
the paths lie on a Riemann surface. The third topic concerns the subject of
sign-balance, i.e., the difference between the number of even and number of odd
permutations in certain sets of permutations. The primary focus is on a
conjecture of Eremenko and Gabrielov that may be connected with recent work on
ribbon Schur functions. The fourth topic concerns the saturation conjecture for
Littlewood-Richardson coefficients, recently proved by Knutson-Tao and others.
There are many new avenues of investigation opened up by recent work in this
area. The fifth topic is the theory of k-triangulations, a generalization of
ordinary triangulations of a polygon. A recent breakthrough of Jakob Jonsson
suggests several new open problems and conjectures. Finally the proposer plans
to continue his research on increasing and decreasing subsequences, another
subject for which recent work has suggested a host of new directions of
research.

The proposal deals with a number of topics in algebraic combinatorics, a field
which connects arrangements and patterns (such as jigsaw puzzles, computer chip
design, and airplane boarding systems) with sophisticated abstract techniques.
This combination of both simple, concrete objects with powerful, abstract
reasoning has led to many important breakthroughs and applications. The proposer
plans to work in six specific areas in which recent work points to the
possibility of much further progress. These areas involve such ideas as using
symmetry to simplify complicated objects, extending the notion of paths on a
plane surface, decomposing a geometric figure into simpler pieces, and finding
patterns in a list of objects. Progress on these very natural questions should
have many applications, both within mathematics and to practical problems of
scheduling, ranking, optimization, etc.
