
* 0604216
* Conformal Invariance and Restriction in Multiply Connected Domains and Riemann Surfaces
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2006,07/25/2006
* Robert Bauer,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2010
* USD 118,882.00

The P.I.'s research programme is to study conformally invariant measures first
in multiply connected domains and then on Riemann surfaces. In particular:
Identify diffusions on an appropriate moduli space that give rise to conformally
invariant measures on curves satisfying the restriction property; Measuring the
restriction defect for other diffusions, and calculating or characterize
intersection probabilities as functions of the moduli; Link the measure and its
change under perturbations of the conformal structure to highest weight
representations; Study conformally invariant quantities for domino tilings and
the Gaussian free field in multiply connected domains. Self-avoiding planar
curves arise in many natural contexts. For example, if a very shallow plate is
filled with water and oil, we can consider the curve (or curves) separating the
two liquids. Another example are coastlines, the borders of countries on maps,
or rivers seen from an airplane. Typically, these curves are very irregular. But
what exactly is ``typical,'' and how can the irregularity be quantified? Since
all coastlines are different, it does not make sense to look for one self-
avoiding curve as the mathematical model of a coastline. On the other hand, it
does make sense to look for a probability distribution on the set of all self-
avoiding curves ( the ``possible'' coastlines) so that if we sample from the set
of these curves according to this distribution, then the statistics are in
agreement with statistics of real coastlines. The P.I. proposes to study these
probability distributions in the case when the geometry is complicated by holes
(think of pebbles in the shallow plate with water and oil) or the curves are
situated on a curved surface such as a sphere (the globe), a donut, or a
pretzel.
