
* 0605058
* AMC-SS: Mathematical and Computational in Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics.
* DMS,PROBABILITY, COFFES
* 07/15/2006,06/05/2008
* Luc Rey-Bellet,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2010
* USD 106,501.00

Luc Rey-Bellet works in several directions in statistical mechanics, both in
equilibrium and non-equilibrium. (a) The construction and the ergodic properties
of stationary states for stochastic partial differential equations arising from
a model of a nonlinear Klein-Gordon equation coupled to one or several heat
reservoirs. (b) The validity of the fluctuation theorem for entropy production
in some class of non-uniformly hyperbolic systems, such as billiards. This
involves the development of large deviations techniques for such systems. (c)
The validity of the fluctuation theorem for the entropy production in classical
and quantum open systems. (d) The development of higher-order coarse-graining
numerical schemes for Monte-Carlo methods. Many fundamental problems in non-
equilibrium statistical mechanics remain poorly understood, both at the
conceptual and mathematical level: for example the characterization of non-
equilibrium stationary states of driven open systems. The fluctuation theorem of
Gallavotti and Cohen is a new universal property of these states and its study
in various systems (deterministic, random and quantum) will be one of the main
theme in the work of the investigator. Multiscale numerical methods and the
general question of extracting the relevant degrees of freedom out of complex
systems is a problem of paramount importance in modern applied mathematics. The
investigator proposes to use probabilistic techniques from statistical mechanics
(cluster expansion and renormalization group) to develop efficient numerical
schemes for the coarse-graining of Monte-Carlo methods. The proposal of the
investigator, besides its theoretical aspects, has a number of applications to
various concrete physical models. These applications are integrated (via
numerical or analytical work) into graduate research projects. The project
involves several collaborations with researchers in U.S. institutions and
abroad. The project also helps to the dissemination of modern mathematical
tools, in particular probabilistic ones, into applied sciences.

The field of statistical mechanics is the physical and mathematical theory
which attempts to link the microscopic and macroscopic worlds. The microscopic
world, the world of atoms and molecules, is described by the laws of Newtonian
or Quantum mechanics which involve a huge number of equations. The macroscopic
world on the contrary is usually described by a few parameters or equations,
such as pressure, temperature, electrical and thermal conductivity, etc... This
reduction comes from the fact that a very large number of particles, seen from
through macroscopic lenses, behave in a very regular fashion. For example, in a
well isolated room, the temperature throughout the room will be nearly constant.
Another example is a piece of metal heated at one end and cooled at the other
end: there will be a flow of energy from the hot part to the cold part but
(almost) never in the opposite direction. This phenomena are similar, both in
spirit and in mathematical terms to the following: if one throws an unbiased
coin very many times then the proportion of head will be extremely close to one
half and (almost) never exhibit significant deviations. It turns out that to
study this typical behavior it is very useful to study and characterize the rare
events corresponding to untypical behavior, i.e., "large deviations". Having a
detailed understanding of the atypical behavior of a very large number of
particles is in fact the clue to a fundamental understanding of what is really
typical. Theses ideas, which go back to the founding fathers of physics and
probability theory, and their implementations in various physical situations
form the core of the proposal.
