
* 0606615
* AMC-SS: Stochastic analysis and random medium in continuous space and time
* DMS,PROBABILITY, COFFES
* 07/01/2006,04/09/2008
* Frederi Viens,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2010
* USD 375,000.00

The PIs' research program in stochastic analysis, as part of NSF's efforts in
Analysis, Modeling, and Computation of Stochastic Systems, ranges widely in
probability theory and its applications to physical systems. It focuses on
models in continuous space and time, with turbulent or otherwise chaotic
behavior, and makes heavy use of infinite-dimensional random objects, especially
stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) which feature white-noise
behavior in time and various irregular spatial behaviors, as well as non-white-
noise-based objects which fail to have the martingale or the Markov properties
(e.g. fractional Brownian noise). Specific topics to be covered, with
corresponding physical applications, are divided in three categories: (i)
problems based on SPDEs and their probabilistic representations, including
Feynman-Kac approaches, ranging from very basic questions of existence and
uniqueness for highly irregular coefficients, to quantitative questions on the
asymptotic behavior of linear multiplicative stochastic heat equations including
the Anderson model and directed polymers measures in Gaussian environments, to
questions of diffusive behavior around random Gibbsian impurities/obstacles;
(ii) specific physically motivated SPDEs: magneto-hydrodynamics (MHD) in a
turbulent environment, based on a Feynman-Kac formulation and its connection to
products of random matrices; a framework for self-organized criticality unifying
microscopic and macroscopic time scales; (iii) extensions of the Russo-Vallois
theory of stochastic integration to general Gaussian and even highly non-
Gaussian processes, with SPDE applications to a genealogical framework for
connecting fractional Brownian motion to Kolmogorov operators.

The PIs' purpose for studying these topics is to come to a better understanding
of complex random ("stochastic") phenomena that change simultaneously in space
and time. While many typically think of chaotic phenomena as being devoid of the
possibility of predictable behavior, the PIs choice of complex models is
designed to illustrate how specific inputs, no matter how random, invariably
cause outputs which, while they may look very random on a short time scale, do
show extremely predictable behavior in other scales of space and time, with
important physical consequences. For instance, the MHD model should be capable
of exhibiting the so-called "fast dynamo" effect, by which a magnetic fluid with
low viscosity (the earth's oceans, or its atmosphere, or the sun), when
subjected to a uniformly random energy input, will exhibit a magnetic intensity
which grows at a specific exponentially rate; this effect could have
applications to non-mechanical locomotion. Also of note is the model for self-
organized criticality, which can help understand two-time-phased systems, such
as avalanches: rather than being considered as events which occurs
instantaneously when a threshold is reached, the model will take advantage of a
heat-transfer setting reacting to a random environment in a short time scale.
Many of the project's other models are also based on the idea that a random
environment can have predictable effects, such as non-diffusive behavior for
polymers or particles around random impurities or force fields. As
mathematicians, the PIs are motivated by the beauty of the continuous-time
continuous-space probabilistic tools needed to study these physical models, and
remain true to their commitment to bridging the gap between theory and
applications. Graduate students working with the PIs will take part in this
project's fundamental aspects, and in investigating quantitative issues via
calculations or numerical computer work. The PIs will encourage students from
underrepresented groups to join their research program.
