
* 0642361
* CAREER: Quantification of Risk
* DMS,PROBABILITY, OPERATIONS RESEARCH
* 07/01/2007,05/12/2011
* Patrick Cheridito,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2013
* USD 400,003.00

Quantification of Risk: Abstract

The notion of risk plays an important role in various fields such as insurance
mathematics, finance, reliability theory, decision theory, economics, optimal
control or optimal route planning. In many of these fields, the application of
probabilistic and statistical methods has had a long history. A lot of effort
has been spent on the development of plausible stochastic models and techniques
to maximize expected values, minimize variances or control ruin probabilities.
Considerably less work has been devoted to a systematic investigation of the
concept of risk, its quantification and the implications for regulation and
behavior. In particular, the study of consistent aggregation of risk,
attribution of risk, or optimal management of risk in dynamic setups has only
started recently. The goal of this project is to provide a mathematical
framework for the quantification and management of risk in different contexts.
Formally, a risk measure is a functional on a space of random variables or
stochastic processes. An important aspect of the project will be the study of
the mathematical structure of such functionals with a view towards important
properties like monotonicity, convexity or time-consistency. But also the
tractability of related optimization problems, practical applications and
numerical implementations will be investigated. This will involve methods from
probability theory, statistics, convex analysis, locally convex vector spaces
and numerical mathematics.

The project explores the quantification and management of risks faced by
individuals, companies and society in different situations of uncertainty. The
main focus of the project is to provide mathematical tools for the assessment,
control, mitigation and minimization of risk. Practical problems to be addressed
are optimal portfolio allocation; the pricing, hedging and design of financial
derivatives; the valuation of complex insurance products such as equity-linked
insurance contracts; the determination of capital requirements for banks and
insurance companies; coherent attribution of risks; optimal risk transfer
between financial institutions; the securitization of risks; integrated risk
management; the valuation of energy contracts; the optimal operation of power
plants; and the assessment of risk faced by society through financial crises,
under-funded pension plans or natural disasters such as hurricanes and
earthquakes. The general treatment of risk and the investigation of different
concrete problems are expected to motivate new concepts and the transfer of
expertise between different fields.
