
* 0652617
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Fourier analytic and probabilistic methods in geometric functional analysis and convexity
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2007,06/07/2007
* Roman Vershynin,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2009
* USD 314,000.00

The aim of this project is to bring together tools from Fourier analysis, affine
convex geometry, geometric functional analysis, probability theory, and
combinatorics to attack problems arising in geometry, analysis, and in various
areas of applied mathematics and computer science. On the technical level, the
focus is on the study of properties of (generally high-dimensional) convex
bodies, random matrices, Gaussian measures and processes, and of approximation
problems. Specific sample directions of planned research are related to the
slicing problem, the Mahler conjecture, the Gaussian correlation conjecture,
combinatorial dimensions of classes of functions, singular numbers of random
matrices, signal reconstruction (notably, compressed sensing), and links to
quantum information theory. A combined, focused effort is expected to bring new
insights toward a better understanding of the participants' respective fields of
research, which - while related and occasionally overlapping - are not identical
and often employ different perspectives.

The area of mathematics encompassing the methods and the problems described
above has recently entered a period of rapid growth. In large part this is due
to numerous links to other fields such as computer science and mathematical
physics. In a nutshell, the wealth of connections between high-dimensional
convexity and applications is due to the complexity of the systems (e.g.,
physical, biological or economical) that one wants to analyze: the large number
of free parameters in such systems may be reflected in the large dimension of
the mathematical object that serves as a model. Additionally, many results in,
say, geometric functional analysis, can be presented as statements about the
complexity of high dimensional objects in presence of convexity; this explains
the links to computer science. In addition to research per se, a major component
of this project is the training of postdocs and graduate students in an
integrated research environment. This includes organization of a summer school
and of a conference. Workshops and seminars devoted to the project at each
institution are also planned. The dynamic growth of the area and wealth of
applications makes it an ideal topic of study for graduate students and young
researchers, whom we expect to attract. Special attention will be paid to
recruiting members of groups under-represented in the field of mathematics.
