
* 0701091
* Stochastic systems with complex interactions and random environments
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/15/2007,02/11/2009
* Timo Seppalainen,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2010
* USD 203,000.00

This project studies three categories of stochastic processes: interacting
particle systems, interface models, and random motion in a random medium. The
goal is to describe typical large scale behavior and to quantify deviations from
the typical behavior. Examples of particular objects of study are fluctuations
and large deviations of the current in the exclusion process and the zero range
process, behavior of the exclusion process in a random environment, height
fluctuations in the random average process, and quenched central limit theorems
for random walk in a random environment. An important phenomenon to clarify is
the transition between different universality classes as the parameters of the
zero range process are varied.

This project investigates mathematical models that describe complex interactions
and motion of particles in an irregular environment. These mathematical systems
incorporate randomness to model irregularity and unpredictability. The goal is
to unearth general mathematical laws that govern such systems irrespective of
less important details. A key point is that these systems appear quite different
at microscopic and macroscopic scales. So it is important to understand how
different rules for small-scale interactions and motions lead to different
large-scale systemwide behavior. Real-world phenomena that such mathematical
studies can illuminate include the motion of vehicles on a freeway, packets
making their way through a communication network, fluid particles in a tube,
wetting transitions where fluid spreads in a porous medium, or epidemics
advancing through an orchard of trees. Over the longer term understanding
complex interactions has wide implications for science and engineering and
thereby for society. Models of the kind described in the proposal are intensely
and concurrently studied by mathematicians, natural scientists,social
scientists, and engineers.
