
* 0705970
* Stochastic Dynamical Systems in Finite and Infinite-Dimensions
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2007,02/11/2011
* Salah-Eldin Mohammed,IL,Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2013
* USD 260,000.00

The PI will study the stochastic dynamics of three different classes of
differential systems: (1) stochastic ordinary differential equations (sode's)
under smooth constraints, (2) constrained stochastic differential systems with
long memory and (3) stochastic partial differential equations (spde's). In the
first class of problems, the PI will develop a complete characterization of the
almost sure behavior of the underlying stochastic flow in the neighborhood of a
stationary (non-ergodic) solution. The effect of small perturbations on the
almost sure qualitative structure of the stochastic flow will be studied near
hyperbolic stationary solutions. Such small perturbations are natural because of
unavoidable statistical errors in estimating the parameters of physical models
against experimental inaccuracies in the measurement of real data. Issues of
genericity and local stability will be addressed. In the second class of
problems, a regular class of constrained stochastic systems with long memory
will be identified. Such classes allow for the existence of smooth stochastic
semiflows and hence a characterization of their invariant manifolds using
suitably-modified ergodic theory techniques. The interplay between the geometry
of the constraints and the stochastic dynamics will be examined. Weak and strong
approximation schemes will be developed for stochastic systems with full memory
and then applied to option-pricing models in mathematical finance with delayed
stock-dynamics. The dynamics of the third class of problems will be studied by
analyzing classical examples such as two-dimensional stochastic Navier-Stokes
and Burgers equations. The proposed research is a long-term program that
advocates novel links between probability theory/stochastic analysis and
traditional mainstream mathematical disciplines such as dynamical systems,
differential geometry and numerical analysis. In particular, the research would
lead to new interactions between stochastic geometry and dynamical systems.

During the past decade, a considerable number of applied mathematicians,
engineers and economists have turned their attention to randomly evolving
systems with memory for modeling a variety of physical phenomena whose time
evolution depends on their past history. In physics, laser dynamics with delayed
feedback is often investigated, as well as the dynamics of noisy bi-stable
systems with delay. In biophysics, random (viz. stochastic) systems with memory
are used to model delayed visual feedback systems or human postural sway and in
the design of cardiac pacemaker cells. In mathematical finance, the volatility
of the stock may be dependent on its past history and hence the stock dynamics
may be best described by a stochastic system with memory. The research in this
project is expected to give a complete characterization of the stability
structure near equilibria for a large class of infinite-dimensional models
called stochastic partial differential equations. Such models are ubiquitous in
the study of heat flow, the movement of fluids and modelling of climate change.
The PI will complete the preparation of a research monograph on stochastic
systems with memory. The monograph is intended to be the basis for a graduate
course in mathematics at Carbondale. Stochastic systems with long-memory and
their applications to option-pricing in mathematical finance will engage the
PI's master's and doctoral graduate students, some of them are females and
minorities.
