
* 0706927
* Probabilistic methods in quantum spin systems and spin glasses
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2007,08/13/2009
* Shannon Starr,NY,University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2010
* USD 91,433.00

The PI will investigate two problems, both of which lie at the intersection of
probability theory and mathematical physics. The first is to try to classify
``quasi-stationary random overlap structures''. Random overlap structures arise
in the study of mean-field spin glasses such as the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick
model. They are analogous to random partition structures, but more general.
Quasi-stationarity is an invariance property for random overlap structures,
abstracted from the physicists' ``cavity step''. It is akin to exchangeability
for deterministic mean-field spin systems. So, the proposal is to find and prove
a spin-glass version of de Finetti's theorem. Unrelated to this, the PI will
study the ferromagnetic Heisenberg quantum spin system. The Hamiltonian of this
quantum model equals (one minus) the Markov generator of the symmetric exclusion
process (SEP). Physicists' spin wave arguments suggest important conjectures for
the spectrum of these operators. For example, one such conjecture turned out
(after the fact) to be equivalent to Aldous's conjecture, that the spectral gap
for the SEP equals the spectral gap for the random walk. The proposal is to try
to prove these conjectures.

Spin glasses are unusual magnetic materials, which settle into stable
configurations on short time scales, but hop from configuration to configuration
on long times scales. So, depending on the length of time observed, they look
either like solids or liquids. Glass does the same thing: for example, windows
in very old churches are thicker at the bottom than the top, supposedly because
the glass flowed down over time. Over 20 years ago, Giorgio Parisi, a physicist,
proposed a unique solution to the simplest spin glass model. Only recently was
his intuitive guess really proved by mathematicians. This led to interesting new
math as well as new physics. But much remains to be done. Parisi made other
guesses for problems in computer science. For many computational problems which
involve finding an optimal solution, it is known that any algorithm is ``NP
complete''. This means (it is strongly believed) that a program solving such
problems would take inordinately long to run. On the other hand, Parisi and
others proposed analytical solutions to random versions of many of these
problems. Presumably, the next best thing to a foolproof solution is one that
works with high probability. The property of quasi-stationarity seems to be
inherent to all these heuristic solutions. So understanding it is important for
an overall picture of the subject.
