
* 0706947
* AMC-SS: Stochastic Modeling and Methods in Financial Equilibrium Theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY, COFFES
* 08/01/2007,07/24/2007
* Gordan Zitkovic,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2010
* USD 179,953.00

The research to be performed will provide a new stochastic modeling framework
for a class of equilibrium problems in financial markets, and outline a novel
technique for a mathematical analysis of those models. The project's long-term
goal is to build a general methodology for the specification of models of stock
prices from market primitives such as utility functions and the random income of
financial agents, and the structure of publicly available information. While the
main tools include stochastic analysis, general theory of processes and
finitely-additive probability, the analysis of such problems requires the use of
methods from functional and convex analysis and fixed-point theory, as well.
Moreover, several other purely probabilistic and stochastic-analytic projects
which emerge from various aspects of the central problem will be considered.

Formation of prices in financial markets is one of the most interesting and
relevant problems at the intersection of mathematics and economics. Despite the
rational character of investors in financial environment, it is extremely
difficult to predict future prices of stocks, bonds, commodities or any other
class of assets. However, the qualitative properties of the price-evolution of
these instruments can be studied using mathematical tools and a great deal of
information about them can be deduced from readily observable primitives. Such
knowledge can lead to a better regulation and the increased efficiency of the
financial system, as well as to a better understanding of the overall
functioning of our economy.
