
* 0706257
* RUI: Percolative models
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2007,06/29/2007
* Yu Zhang,CO,University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2010
* USD 101,134.00

Percolative models are very active subfields of probability theory. They have
drawn much of their inspiration and motivation from physics, biology, and
computer science. They also have been used heavily in physics, biology, and
computer science. In this proposal, Zhang focuses on three basic percolative
models: an oriented percolation model, a first passage percolation model, and a
percolation model. The research uses probability theorems (e.g., the martingale
probability theorem, Markov chains, the CLT theorem, and correlation
inequalities); graph theorems (e.g., for duality, lattice surfaces, and
planarity); combinatorics (e.g., partition lattice, renormalization); and
functional analysis (e.g., complex variables).

The proposed project promotes teaching experiences for Zhang's undergraduate
students in the areas of engineering, computer science, and mathematics. Because
issues and open questions in percolation theory are easy for students to
understand, the proposed project also offers students an opportunity to conduct
research activities on percolation problems. Furthermore, percolation theory is
also directly applicable in biology, industry, and computer science. Thus,
students will find it appealing to pursue investigations in this important area.
In conclusion, the activities of students' research outlined in this project
would contribute significantly to the quality of education at this institution.
The proposed project also enhances technological and scientific understanding.
Because percolation theory involves numerical computations and simulations, the
project requires new technology in computing science.
