
* 0707163
* Time-Dependent Determinantal Point Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2007,04/20/2009
* Alexei Borodin,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2010
* USD 249,973.00

The proposal focuses on the study of time-dependent discrete and continuous
probabilistic models of random matrix type. More exactly, we work with time-
dependent determinantal point processes. We use three different approaches
corrersponding to three sources of our models: Interacting Particle Systems (the
totally asymmetric exclusion process, the polynuclear growth process, etc.),
Representation Theory of Big Groups (the infinite symmetric group, the infinite-
dimensional unitary group and the like), and Schur processes, which may be
viewed as a very general algebraic formalism suitable for various problems of
Enumerative Combinatorics. Despite different origins these themes are closely
interrelated, and they conveniently provide three different points of view on
the class of time-dependent determinantal point processes.

The proposal focuses on the study of large time fluctuations of various models
of random growth in one space dimension. Such models naturally appear in
mathematics and physics, and until recently no tools were available for
computing their fine large time asymptotics. A few years ago a combination of
methods from statistical physics, combinatorics, analysis, and representation
theory lead to a stunning success: For a handful of models not only we were able
to rigorously control the size of the fluctuations but we also found explicit
distributions that play the role of the famous bell-shaped curve. We plan to
turn this success into a method that delivers results for a much wider class of
growth models while broadening the connection of the subject to other domains of
mathematics and mathematical physics.


