
* 0707890
* Collective Behavior of Stochastic Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2007,06/08/2009
* Fraydoun Rezakhanlou,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 272,852.00

The investigator's research concerns stochastic and deterministic models
associated with the evolution of gases, coagulation and fragmentation of
clusters and the formation of crystals. As the first step, one derives a partial
differential equation for the macroscopic evolution of such stochastic models.
Roughly, after a suitable scaling, the density of particles in a gas with
grazing collisions converges to a solution of Landau Equation, the density of
coagulating and fragmenting clusters converges to a solution of Smoluchowski
Equation, and a rough interface modeled by Hamilton-Jacobi PDE with
inhomogeneity (impurity) homogenizes to a homogeneous Hamilton-Jacobi equation.
Many issues related to these models are not understood. Large-deviations type
questions for the homogenization and gases would provide us valuable
informations about the corresponding microscopic models. The phenomenon of
gelation for the Smoluchowski Equation is still a mystery and our understanding
of the corresponding microscopic phenomenon should help resolving some open
problems in this context.

Our world appears differently at different scales! For example a fluid or a gas
is a collection of an enormous number of molecules that collide incessantly and
move erratically without any particular aim. How do these molecules then manage
to organize themselves in such a way as to form a flow pattern on a large scale?
Roughly the reason is that the local conservation laws impose constraints not
immediately visible on the microscopic scale. The investigator's research
concerns the relationship between the microscopic structure and the macroscopic
behavior of fluids, gases and crystals. The analysis of the mathematical models
consisting of a large number of interacting particles is proved to be useful in
understanding the intricate behavior of our microscopic world such as the
formation of gels, the roughness of the surface boundary of solids, the
occurrence of sharp corners in crystals,....


