
* 0803517
* Stochastic Spatial Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY, COFFES
* 07/01/2008,04/05/2010
* J. Theodore Cox,NY,Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 177,266.00

(1) This proposal will address questions in the theory of interacting particle
systems and stochastic spatial processes. These stochastic processes are models
for large systems with many interacting ``components'' (cells, individuals,
particles, plants, etc.). Some examples from theoretical ecology and biology of
the phenomena these systems model are: competition of species, epidemics,
population growth, evolution of genetic traits. A principal goal of research in
this area is to understand how the macroscopic behavior of large systems depends
on the individual interactions between components. The primary model of interest
is a model for competition, a stochastic spatial Lotka-Volterra model. The
objectives are to determine the parameter regions which correspond to survival
of one species and/or coexistence of both species. The project is part of the
investigator's ongoing efforts to understand and exploit the scaling
relationship between interacting particle systems and measure-valued diffusions.
The investigator will supplement this approach using techniques from
hydrodynamics to try to show that the previously obtained survival and
coexistence conditions are sharp. A second competition model to be studied is
the multitype contact process. The main questions here are also the issues of
survival and coexistence of competing types. Another model to be studied is one
of gene flow from modified crops into a natural or wild population. The goal
here is to understand the length of the time it takes for the modified type to
invade the wild population. Mathematically, this becomes a question of the
behavior of coalescing random walks systems in two dimensions.

(2) This proposal involves research in the theory of interacting particle
systems and stochastic spatial processes. These processes are models for large
systems with many interacting components (cells, individuals, particles, plants,
etc.). The goal of this research is to obtain a better qualitative understanding
of various complex phenomena that interacting particles systems model well, such
as models of: competition of species, epidemics, population growth, evolution of
genetic traits. A principal goal of research in this area is to understand how
the large scale behavior of these systems depends on the small scale, individual
interaction rules. Several specific models will be studied, including a
stochastic spatial version of a well known model for competition between
species. In addition to work on specific models, the investigator will try to
extend the validity of some approximation techniques established for some
specific models to handle more general ones, thus justifying their use in
applications.
