
* 0803287
* Asymptotic Problems for Stochastic Processes and Differential Equations
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2008,04/19/2010
* Mark Freidlin,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2012
* USD 180,038.00

Several classes of asymptotic problems will be considered. The first class
concerns metastability and stochastic resonance for multiscale systems. The
general approach to metastability and stochastic resonance in the framework of
large deviations was developed in our previous papers. In the case of multiscale
systems these notions should be modified. In particular, new effects appear in
systems which are close to Hamiltonian and in systems with a small delay.
Another class consists of new problems for PDE's with a small parameter and
related stochastic processes. To describe the limiting behavior in these
classical problems one should consider equations on graphs or open book spaces
related to the original problam. Reaction-Diffusion-Advection equations in
incompressible fluids, in strongly unisotropic media, and in narrow tubes will
be considered. The last class of problems concerns the averaging principle for
systems with many degrees of freedom and multiwell Hamiltonians. It turns out
that even in pure deteministic systems the slow motion can be, in a sense,
stochastic.

Small perturbations of a system which often have negligible effects, when the
system considered on a short time interval, can become crucial on larger
timescale. The study of such effects is one of our main goals. We consider long
time influence of small stochastic and deterministic perturbations and, under
certain conditions, describe the long-time evolution of the system which
essentially depends on the perturbations. Such kind of problems arise in
numerous applications from physics and biology to economics and sociology. We
are developing new mathematical approches to these problems.
