
* 0806017
* Stochastic Differential Equations and Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY, COFFES
* 07/15/2008,05/10/2010
* Jin Ma,CA,University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 240,000.00

The principal investigator proposes to study five problems in the general area
of stochastic differential equations and their applications in finance. A
general framework based on a new type of pathwise stochastic Taylor expansion is
proposed to substantially advance the long standing theory of stochastic
viscosity solution for fully nonlinear stochastic partial differential
equations. The new notion of forward-backward martingale problem (FBMP) and the
weak solution to forward-backward SDEs will be further investigated, and the
discussion of well-posedness, especially the uniqueness of the solutions will be
extended to general cases where the coefficients are allowed to be measurable
and/or VMO (Variation Mean Oscillation), reaching the most advanced stage of the
theory. A new variant of reflected backward SDEs is proposed with an eye on its
applications to various problems in finance where a variant of Skorohod problem
and a stochastic representation theorem for optional p rocesses were originated.
Two proposed problems are more closely related to finance. The general convex
risk measures will be put into the framework of the newly developed theory of
filtration consistent nonlinear expectations, and will be investigated using
quadratic backward stochastic differential equations and the BMO (Bounded Mean
Oscillation) martingale theory. A credit risk model with partial information is
proposed, aiming at a general framework where continuous observation, counting
process observation, and delayed information can be present at the same time.
New types of nonlinear filtering problems are expected to emerge, and some
interesting new phenomena exhibited so far have raised new questions for the
theory of stochastic differential equations.

The proposed research is seeking significant advancement in the field of
stochastic differential equations, as well as the related areas such as finance.
The proposed projects on stochastic viscosity solution for nonlinear SPDEs and
weak solution of FBSDEs will build on the results initiated by the PI to further
explore the nature of the respective subjects, and to fill the gaps in the long
standing theory. The projects on variant reflected BSDE, on quadratic nonlinear
expectations, and on credit risk models with partial information are aiming at
developing new tools in stochastic analysis to solve complex but practical
problems in finance. Most projects in the proposed research have direct or
indirect connections to applied fields, especially stochastic control,
stochastic finance, and operations research. Two problems in finance theory will
be treated directly, using advanced techniques in stochastic analysis and
stochastic differential equations. Several parts of the pro posed research
involve Ph.D students and postdoctoral fellows, partly reflecting an educational
incentive of this proposal.
