
* 0852898
* Applications of the method of infinitesimal exchangeable pairs in analysis, geometry and statistics
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2009,06/09/2009
* Elizabeth Meckes,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2013
* USD 76,520.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In earlier work, the PI introduced a new version of Stein's method of
exchangeable pairs, called infinitesimal exchangeable pairs, adapted to
situations in which the underlying random object is distributionally invariant
under the action of a continuous symmetry group. The proposed project involves
further applications of this new technique, focusing on two main directions:

1) Developing a new approach to proving a certain type of quantitative central
limit theorem ``with high probability''. For example, a random projection of a
large collection of high-dimensional data points is ``usually'' approximately
Gaussian; the empirical spectral measure of a large Wigner-type random matrix is
``usually'' close to the semi-circle law. The proposed project involves using
the method of infinitesimal exchangeable pairs in combination with other tools
of theoretical probability, e.g. measure concentration and entropy bounds, to
prove quantitative versions of statements of this type. Quantifying such
statements leads not only to finer information about convergence and dimensional
dependence, but also allows applications of the relevant results in fixed (high)
dimensions, which is frequently important in applications to geometry,
statistics, and computer science.

2) Continue the PI's study of value distributions of eigenfunctions of the
Laplace-Beltrami operator. In earlier work, the method of infitesimal
exchangeable pairs was used to identify a previously unobserved connection
between value distributions of eigenfunctions and the behavior of their
gradients. Partial results have been obtained in certain examples, namely on
large-dimensional spheres and tori; the PI aims to develop a more complete
understanding of these examples as well as exploring new applications of
previous results in the high-eigenvalue limit on fixed manifolds.

Over the past four decades, Stein's method has proved to be a powerful tool for
showing that certain randomly constructed objects can be well understood by
approximating by classical probability distributions, and giving quantitative
information about how good these approximations are. The PI has introduced a new
version of the method which can be used to take advantage of the presence of
"continuous symmetries" (e.g., the symmetries of the sphere as opposed to those
of the cube) in a problem. This new approach has already been successfully
applied in studying Riemannian manifolds, convex bodies in Euclidean space, and
the compact classical matrix groups, in some cases to prove results rather
different from those previously known, and in some cases shedding new light on
old results. The proposed project includes applications in convex geometry,
spectral geometry, random matrix theory, and statistics. Accordingly, progress
made in the proposed research will cut across disciplines as well as adding to
the existing infrastructure of available techniques in probability. It is
expected that the new techniques developed in the course of the project will be
widely applicable to other problems in mathematics. In particular, these
techniques will likely be useful in analyzing systems in which there are two
levels of randomness, and there is a "typical" behavior for the system, which
occurs conditioned on most realizations of one of the types of randomness; such
situations occur frequently in mathematics and statistical physics.
