
* 0852227
* SGER: The Algebraic Topology of Random Fields and its Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY, TOPOLOGY
* 10/01/2008,09/18/2008
* Shmuel Weinberger,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2011
* USD 199,276.00

The core of this project is the setting up of a research network, initially
between four researchers, in three institutions, supporting interchange between
them (Robert Adler, Technion, Jonathan Taylor, Stanford, Shmuel Weinberger and
Keith Worsley, Chicago) and, more importantly, their students. They will study
problems related to the geometric characterization of random structures, such as
topological invariants of excursion (nodal) sets of random fields and learning
the homotopy and homeomorphism types of manifolds in the presence of noise and
developing techniques for quantifying the statistical accuracy of the resulting
estimates. Whereas previous work on random field geometry has concentrated on
characteristics coming from differential topology, such as Lipshitz-Killing
curvatures (which include the Euler characteristic) this project will
concentrate on characteristics coming from algebraic topology, involving
homology-invariant concepts such as the number of connected components, Betti
numbers, and other related invariants. Furthermore, while previous work in these
areas was in the setting of Riemannian manifolds, it is planned to extend this
to allowing non-Riemannian metrics even on smooth manifolds. In manifold
learning this is important due to the fact that in some applications natural
measures of closeness underlying the context of a data set can well be non-
Riemannian. In the context of random fields, it may open new doors in the study
of purely non-Gaussian fields, such as stable fields, where the natural geometry
on the parameter manifold induced by the field is non-Riemannian.

The motivation for this project, which links algebraic topology, probability,
and pure and applied statistics comes from both its intrinsic mathematical
interest and from a wealth of applications, from areas as broadly spaced as the
statistical analysis of fMRI brain images, high dimensional data analysis in
computer science, and cosmological projects such as the COBE and WMAP
experiments and the Sloan digital sky survey. The four PIs come from a variety
of intellectual backgrounds and are specialists with different, but
complementary technical skills. Not only will this project join these skills,
but over the next two years a number of other researchers will be added to the
project, strengthening, among other aspects, its international component and
extending to the training of young scientists in the US.
