
* 0901505
* Stochastic differential equations: potential theory and uniqueness
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2009,07/23/2009
* Richard Bass,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2013
* USD 359,997.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The behavior of harmonic functions and potential functions for processes that
have jumps will be studied. In particular, how does smoothness in the
coefficients of the operators translate to the smoothness of harmonic and
potential functions? Secondly, uniqueness for several probability models that
have origins in mathematical physics and mathematical biology will be
investigated. One model is that of stochastic partial differential equations in
one dimension with a space-time white noise as a driving term. A second model is
that of superprocesses with branching interactions.

In recent years researchers in mathematical physics, economics, and mathematical
finance have realized that to adequately model real-world phenomena, the
possibility of jumps must be allowed. For example, an unexpected discovery or
unexpected regional conflict might cause a sudden jump up or down in stock
prices. However, some of the very basic questions about models that incorporate
jumps are as yet unanswered. One of the areas to be investigated is the
regularity of such models. A typical question is: if the initial data is
perturbed slightly, is it true that the behavior of the model at future times
will also be only slightly perturbed?
