
* 0905937
* Automatic asymptotics and probability models
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2009,05/19/2009
* Robin Pemantle,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2013
* USD 326,072.00

The proposed research falls into two categories. The first concerns development
of a computational apparatus to derive asymptotics from mutlivariate generating
functions. This is done using complex analytic methods. In one variable, the
subject of analytic combinatorics is well developed, but in more than one
variable, methods are only now beginning to be understood. Geometric properties
of the singular variety of the generating function become important, requiring
further work both in the construction of appropriate deformations and in the
effective computation of the resulting integrals. The second area of proposed
research concerns analysis of several probability models. One of these is to
find perfect squares in products of random integers. This model, due to
Pomerance, arises in sieving methods of factorization. In past work, we analyzed
a square-finding algorithm believed to have asymptotically the shortest possible
run time. In fact we know it to be within about 30% of the best run time, but
would like to prove that it is in fact asymptotically optimal. A positive result
would tell us the algorithm in fact searches for an asymptotically optimal
witness. Other probability models in the proposal include searches and sampling
in trees of exponential growth, and computations saddle point integrals for
likelihood functions. Here follows a "big-picture" description of how this
research is situated with respect to problems of general scientific interest.

Generating functions are perhaps the single most widely applicable technique for
counting or estimating the size of combinatorial classes. Generating functions
encode recursive information: tractable generating functions exist when the
sizes of the classes satisfy a recursion. An explicit (non-recursive)
descriptions of these numbers is usually more desirable. For example, the
recursive definition of the Fibonacci numbers, a(n) = a(n-1) + a(n-2), while
remakably simple, is less useful for size estimation than the explicit formula
a(n) = (1+o(1)) b^n where b is the Golden ratio. It has been known for several
decades how to convert one-variable generating functions into explicit
asymptotic formulae. Recent research of the PI and others extends this knowledge
to generating functions for multivariate arrays. An important component of the
proposed research is the automation of these new mutlivariate techniques, which
requires development of effective tools for computing algebraic and topological
invariants of polynomials.

One aspect of the utility of the proposed research on square subproducts is
obvious: it gives us the run time of the main component of a basic and widely
used factoring algorithm. The method of analysis is to show that the
factorizations of random integers converge, in an appropriate sense, to a
certain Poisson process. Probability limit theorems are common in analytic
number theory, but the limit structure required for this analysis requires
keeping track of the magnitude of the product of all the factors. A second
aspect of the significance of the proposed research, therefore, is that it will
develop a number-theoretic probability model containing more information than
previous models, and to which actual factorizations of random integers may be
shown rigorously to converge. The part of the proposal concerning searches and
sampling on graphs of exponential growth is motivated by in part by the
connection between uniform sampling and size estimation.
