
* 0906535
* AMC-SS: Stochastic Networks -- Analysis, Control and Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2009,07/04/2009
* Ruth Williams,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 331,800.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Stochastic models of complex networks with dynamic interactions arise in a wide
variety of applications in science and engineering. Specific instances include
high-tech manufacturing, customer service systems, telecommunications, computer
systems, and gene regulatory networks. This project involves the study of a
number of mathematical problems stemming from the challenges of analysing and
controlling such stochastic networks. Some of the problems involve the
development of general theory for broad classes of stochastic networks, while
others focus on mathematical problems directly motivated by specific
applications. Since the complexity of stochastic networks usually precludes
exact analysis of detailed "microscopic" models, the focus here is on
approximate models. Two levels of approximation are considered: first order
approximations called fluid models, and second order approximations which
frequently are diffusion models. Mathematical questions being addressed include
rigorous justification of these approximations, analysing and controlling the
behavior of the approximate models and interpreting the results for the original
microscopic models. An important subtheme is understanding the interplay between
the levels of approximation. Four topics are being studied: (i) dynamic
scheduling for stochastic processing networks, (ii) analysis of processor
sharing networks, (iii) connection level models for data networks, (iv)
stochastic systems with delayed dynamics and state constraints. Some stochastic
process aspects of these topics include study of singular diffusion control
problems, analysis of measure-valued processes used to keep track of residual
job sizes, foundational questions for reflected processes, and the asymptotic
properties of functional stochastic differential equations with natural state
constraints. Specific applications being investigated include Internet
congestion control and biochemical reaction networks.

Stochastic networks are mathematical models for complex systems involving
dynamic interactions subject to uncertainty. Such networks arise in a wide
variety of applications in science and engineering, especially in operations
research, computer science, electrical engineering and
bioscience/bioengineering. This grant funds research on mathematical problems
arising from the need to analyse and control such stochastic networks. Two
fundamental problems for such networks are (a) to identify and understand
mechanisms that stabilize the systems, and (b) to quantify the performance of
the systems under such stabilizing mechanisms. The networks under study are
substantially more general than those that have been rigorously studied to date.
Through their complexity and heterogeneity, these networks present challenging
mathematical problems. This project involves the development of new mathematical
theory and techniques as well as the application of this theory in studying
specific problems such as Internet congestion control and understanding gene
regulation. Collaborations with researchers familiar with areas of application,
the training of graduate student researchers, and the dissemination of research
results through publication in peer reviewed journals and presentations at
cross-disciplinary research conferences are integral parts of the project.
