
* 0906907
* Some related problems for stochastic partial differential equations and backward stochastic differential equations
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2009,07/26/2009
* Jie Xiong,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2013
* USD 117,294.00

The PI will study three types of problems about stochastic partial differential
equations (SPDEs) and backward stochastic differential equations (BSDEs).
Firstly, he will build a connection between SPDEs and BSDEs; and will use it to
prove the strong uniqueness and regularity properties for the solutions to such
SPDEs. He will also study the rare events phenomena for financial market using
large deviation principle. Secondly, the PI will derive a stochastic maximum
principle (SMP) for stochastic optimal control problems arising from real world
applications where the coefficients of the systems are not smooth. This will
lead to two new classes of BSDEs. He will study their solutions and will explore
the numerical approximation for these. Finally, the PI will consider the
parameter estimation problem based on partial information. The key to the proof
of the consistency of such estimates is heavily dependent on the establishment
of a filtering stability result.

This research is motivated from the study of certain population models, the
wireless communication and the mathematical finance. The PI will develop
mathematic tools to study SPDEs and BSDEs arising from these problems. The
results obtained will be applied to various real world applications for the
benefit to the society. For example, the SMP can be applied to the power control
problem to serve the society in improving the efficiency of the communication
network. The study of the financial market will help the government to regulate
the market; especially, the large deviation problem will help to characterize
rare events in the financial market. The parameter estimation problem can be
used to locate various targets including the hidden source of pollution. Long-
term effects on graduate and post-graduate training of students in stochastic
analysis and optimal control are also expected.
