
* 0907198
* Measures on function spaces, statistical mechanics and the rigorous renormalization group
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2009,06/17/2009
* Abdelmalek Abdesselam,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 139,876.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Functional integrals were introduced by R. P. Feynman as a conceptual tool for
the understanding of the quantum field theory of elementary particle physics.
They provide a bridge from classical mechanics and field theory to their quantum
counterparts. These integrals have become ubiquitous in physics and provide a
foundation for our current understanding of a wide array of subjects: quantum
electro and chromodynamics, the standard model of elementary particle physics,
the theory of superconductivity, the statistical mechanics of phase transitions,
turbulence, financial derivatives, and much more. From a mathematical standpoint
the main question they pose is that of the construction and study of infinite
dimensional probability measures in spaces of functions or distributions. The
last decades have seen impressive results and successes in this area, and key to
these successes is the renormalization group. The later can be described in
nontechnical terms as follows. Consider a very large population of voters which
have to opt between say two political parties. One can group them according to a
hierarchy of larger and larger geographical regions, for instance county, state,
nation, etc. One can also assign a `super elector' for each such region whose
vote is determined by the majority at the next more detailed level of
representation. In a nutshell the renormalization group is the transformation
from the configurations of voting odds at one representation level to the next
coarser one. The iteration of this transformation allows one to make predictions
about the macroscopic behavior of this complex interacting system (the odds on
say the majority vote at the national level) starting from the microscopic
behavior (a mathematical model for the odds at the level of individuals). The
above analogy with voting is given simply for the sake of exposition. In
physics, one would, instead of voters, consider for instance spins or magnetic
moments at the atomic level, and try to use the renormalization group machinery
in order to infer the overall magnetization of a piece of material such as iron.

The importance of the renormalization group in physics lies not in the mere
qualitative description given above, but rather in the quantitative
approximation scheme which has been developed on the basis of this intuition.
The main goal of the proposed activity is to develop mathematical tools which
allow a rigorous control of the error terms in this approximation scheme. The PI
will in particular focus on the study of complete renormalization group
trajectories between two fixed points, i.e., situations where one needs to
control a system over the full range of scales from the infinitely small to the
infinitely large. The PI will study such trajectories on a variety of models
such as phi-four with a modified propagator in three dimensions, and the Gross-
Neveu model in two dimensions. An important component of the proposed activity
is graduate education. The PI will foster the involvement of graduate students
in the proposed research work and will provide them with training in the
mathematical tools from constructive quantum field theory and renormalization
group theory needed in order to tackle research problems in the area.
