
* 0907293
* Stochastic Processes in non-Euclidean spaces
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2009,06/01/2009
* Tai Melcher,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2013
* USD 118,264.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Brownian motion on finite dimensional Riemannian manifolds is well studied, and
the deep relationship between the Laplace-Beltrami operator and the geometry of
a space and the properties of Brownian motion and its heat kernel measure on
that space are well understood. This proposal is devoted to the study of certain
generalizations of this paradigm, including the study of diffusions on sub-
Riemannian manifolds and certain infinite dimensional Lie groups, Levy processes
on Lie groups, and Brownian motion on ``tree space,'' a continuous space with
geometric and combinatorial structures which has biological applications. These
studies lie in the intersection of analysis, geometry, and probability, and the
study of solutions to stochastic differential equations and their generators is
a uniting framework of many of the problems considered.

Probability provides a powerful tool in analysis and geometry, and stochastic
processes give tractable models for many physical and biological phenomena. For
example, Brownian motion gives a way of understanding heat flow on a space. The
PI will investigate properties of several stochastic processes on spaces which
occur naturally in some physical or biological applications. Sub-Riemannian
manifolds arise in classical and quantum mechanics, and certain geometric
quantities are best understood in this setting. Infinite dimensional spaces
appear in physics in quantum field theory and string theory. Levy processes have
recently been a subject of intense research, due in part to new applications in
finance. ``Tree space'' models the space of all phylogenetic trees. The research
during this grant period should have implications in various mathematical
disciplines, such as harmonic analysis, functional analysis, and mathematical
physics, and should find applications in other scientific fields, such as
physics and biology.
