
* 1003244
* Stochastic Evolution Equations Driven by Nonmartingale Random Fields and Related Topics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2009,06/15/2010
* Anna Amirdjanova,DC,American University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 81,330.00

Analysis of spatio-temporal phenomena is becoming important with the increasing
use of large repositories of remote-sensing images and video-streams. In fact,
modern society's need for analysis of temporal evolution of complex spatial
systems far outpaces the technological, engineering and mathematical advances
made so far. Spatial structures encountered in actual practice are often
nontrivial due to long memory, or due to presence of "rough" geometrical
constraints, and the existing analytical tools fail to describe spatio-temporal
evolution of such systems, making solution of necessary parameter estimation and
prediction problems very challenging. This project addresses some of these
challenges and focuses on the analysis of continuous stochastic evolution
equations driven by Volterra random fields, which lack martingale and Markov
structures. More specifically, the research will deal with the following major
areas: 1. Analysis of multiparameter Volterra random fields (this includes
construction of strong/weak martingale transforms generating the same natural
filtration as the Volterra field, study of integrated Volterra kernels with
respect to non-Gaussian martingales, analysis of Volterra random fields with
infinite-dimensional parameter spaces, development of efficient simulation
techniques for Volterra multiparameter fields); 2. Development of stochastic
calculus with respect to Volterra random fields and the study of local time for
Volterra processes; 3. Analysis of stochastic evolution equations driven by
Volterra random fields (including the study of parabolic SPDEs perturbed by
Volterra-type noise, analysis of stochastic evolution equations arising in
nonlinear filtering of random fields when the observation noise has Volterra
structure, representations and construction of suboptimal filters in that
setting, development of numerical techniques for ``denoising" of images with
long-memory spatial structure. Stochastic evolution equations arising from
systems of interacting randomly moving particles, which are subject to Volterra-
type noises, will also be studied. 4. Inference for evolution equations driven
by Volterra fields (estimation of coefficients when the Volterra kernel is
known, plus estimation of parameters of the Volterra kernel itself). The results
are expected to be useful in a wide variety of complex spatial systems, as they
evolve in time. The project has a substantial nonlinear filtering component,
which naturally enjoys applications in a great number of settings where
image/video ``denoising" is important. These range from tracking hurricanes via
satellites to medical procedures involving analysis of spatial data streams that
are recorded and transmitted by various devices.

Everyday we are surrounded by complex systems and are awash in spatial data. The
importance of analysis and modelling of spatial phenomena is growing with the
increasing use of remote-sensing images and video-streams arising in such
diverse areas as geological and astrophysical sciences, climatology, biomedical
applications and studies of population dynamics. Specific applications include
Mobile-commerce industry (location based services), NASA's study of
climatological effects of El Nino, land-use classification and global warming
using satellite imagery, analysis of evolution of stars and galaxies via remote
and Earth-based telescopes, studies by National Institute of Health on
predicting spread of disease and epidemic control, not to mention ``routine"
analysis of traffic and infrastructure trends on the basis of specialized maps,
which represent noisy ``snapshots" of the state of complex spatial dynamical
system taken at particular points in time. The use of random fields, which allow
to take into account spatial interactions among variables in complex systems, is
an increasingly important tool used in numerous problems of statistical
mechanics, spatial statistics, neural network modelling, and others. At the same
time many of the above real-life applications lack mathematically convenient
Markov and martingale (spatial) structures, making the majority of available
analytical tools inadequate. This project aims to address these challenges and
to develop a theory of stochastic evolution equations driven by a large class of
random fields, called Volterra random fields, which lack martingale and Markov
structures and allow for a wide range of (both, long and short) memory and
pathwise properties. The project also has a significant nonlinear filtering
component, which naturally enjoys applications in a great number of scientific
and commercial settings where spatial filtering and image and video denoising
are important. The research results emanating from this grant aim to advance the
current state-of-the-art in stochastic analysis and will promote use of
probabilistic methods among scientists in other areas. This encourages
interaction between researchers with varying backgrounds and ultimately leads to
new ideas, techniques and conclusions in each of those fields. For example,
complex media, with its important applications and underlying microscopic
processes, is typically linked to long-term memory, long-range interactions and
non-Markovian kinetics. Some of the examples of the latter include processes in
systems of many coupled elements, colloidal aggregates and chemical reaction
medium, porous media, quantum mechanics and quantum field theory, plasma
physics, magnetosphere and many other fields. The project also has a substantial
educational component.
