
* 1004418
* Scaling Limits for some Stochastic Control Problems with Applications to Stochastic Networks
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 08/15/2010,08/03/2010
* Amarjit Budhiraja,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2014
* USD 311,261.00

This research project considers scaling limits of certain controlled stochastic
processing networks in heavy traffic. Brownian control problems(BCP) have been
proposed as formal diffusion approximations for a broad range of controlled
networks.Currently there is a critical lack of general theory that establishes
rigorous connections between a network control problem and its associated BCP.
The first goal of this research is to establish that for a wide range of control
forms, network structures and optimization criteria, the value functions of
suitably scaled controlled network models converge to that of the corresponding
diffusion control problem. The second goal is the study of qualitative
properties of diffusion control problems arising from the above asymptotic
analysis. These problems correspond to a family of singular control problems
with state constraints in non-smooth domains. The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB)
equations for such control problems are a challenging class of degenerate
elliptic nonlinear partial differential equations with gradient constraints and
somewhat non-standard boundary conditions. Existence, uniqueness and regularity
theory for HJB equations for a range of such control problems and cost criteria
will be developed. Wellposedness of such equations is a central ingredient in
development of numerical schemes for obtaining near optimal controls.
Additionally, regularity is key in reading off useful qualitative information on
the form of an optimal control. An example of such information is the
characterization of an optimally controlled process as a reflected diffusion
over a domain determined in terms of a suitable free boundary problem. Such
characterization results for singular control problems are some of the most
elegant and useful results in the field and their study for problems with state
constraints will be a focus of this research.

Dynamic control problems that motivate this work arise from a wide range of
application areas, such as, telecommunications, manufacturing, service
engineering, computing, etc. Control in such networks can take a variety of
forms, examples include, scheduling, sequencing, routing and admissions of jobs,
and input and processing rate controls. Networks of interest are in general
quite complex and thus one seeks tractable approximate models. The overall theme
of this research is the development of techniques for obtaining good scheduling
policies for general families of such stochastic processing systems using the
mathematical theory of diffusion approximations. The work will lead to improved
design, stability and regulation of complex manufacturing, communication and
computer systems. Research project will support the training of two graduate
students and develop international collaborations and with faculty from non-
Ph.D. granting institutions.
