
* 1004771
* Heat kernel estimates and applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2010,03/06/2012
* Laurent Saloff-Coste,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2014
* USD 329,451.00

Many fundamental Markov processes --- including random walk on group and
diffusion on Riemannian manifold or Lie group --- can be viewed as defined by an
underlying geometric structure. This project studies the intricate relationships
between the properties of the process and the properties of the underlying
geometry. Technically, this is done by obtaining precise estimates on the
transition kernel of the process (the heat kernel). The aim is to gain a better
understanding of the large scale properties of the process, based on the
underlying geometry but also, in some cases, to explore the geometry with the
help of the associated Markov process.



Markov processes play a fundamental role in modern scientific activities, from
physics to biology to finance, where they model complex phenomena. They also
play a basic role in computer simulation. This proposal studies basic properties
of Markov processes by relating the properties of the process to the geometry of
the space in which it evolves. How does heat diffuses in a large piece of alloy?
and how does this depends on the shape of the piece and the perhaps varying
nature of the alloy? What can one discover about the nature of the alloy by
observing temperatures? These are, in spirit, some of the questions that are
considered.
