
* 1005282
* Stochastic processes on hypergraphs and dynamic graphs
* DMS,PROBABILITY, COFFES
* 08/15/2010,08/03/2010
* Nicolas Lanchier,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2014
* USD 178,576.00

The theoretical framework of interacting particle systems has been successful in
modeling physical, biological and sociological systems that are spatial by
nature. In such systems, members under consideration are traditionally located
on the vertices of a static graph, with the state of each member being updated
according to transition rates that depend upon the configuration in its local
neighborhood. Motivated by a variety of problems that arise from ecology,
sociology and neuroscience, the primary objective of this research project is to
introduce and analyze simple stochastic models that extend the framework of
interacting particle systems as the components under consideration evolve either
on hypergraphs or on dynamic graphs rather than traditional static graphs.
Hypergraph structures will be employed to model systems including an
intermediate mesoscopic scale: contact process with destruction of cubes and
hyperplanes as a model of populations subject to catastrophic events, and voter
type model on hypergraphs as a model of the majority rule in explicit space.
This results in systems in which all the vertices connected by the same
hyperedge are simultaneously updated, either spontaneously or at a rate that
depends upon the global configuration of the hyperedge. Dynamic graph structures
will be employed to model systems of components that have the ability to shape
their spatial environment: coupling of contact processes with varying parameters
as a model of host-symbiont interactions, and random walks on weighted graphs as
a model of electrochemical signals in the brain. This results in systems
involving dynamics on the graph similar to that of traditional interacting
particle systems, but also dynamics of the graph, with a feedback between
dynamics on and of the graph. Beyond the mathematical analysis of some specific
models, the aim of this research program is also to initiate the development of
a theoretical framework, inspired from interacting particle systems, in order to
model more realistically systems that are ubiquitous in nature.

In the early seventies, Frank Spitzer in the United States and Roland Dobrushin
in Soviet Union independently introduced a new theoretical framework, known as
interacting particle systems, in order to understand the dynamics of systems
that are spatial by nature. This framework not only had a major impact in a wide
variety of fields such as physics, biology and sociology, but it also gave rise
to a number of challenging and exciting mathematical problems. The main
objective of research in this area is to understand the macroscopic behavior and
the spatial patterns that emerge from the microscopic interactions that dictate
the local dynamics of large systems of components such as atoms, cells, plants
of different species or individuals with different opinions. Motivated by a
variety of problems that arise from ecology, sociology and neuroscience, the
primary objective of this research program is to extend, starting from simple
examples, the traditional framework of interacting particle systems following
two directions. The first extension consists of systems that include an
intermediate mesoscopic scale: populations that undergo catastrophic events
modeled by the removal of all the individuals in large blocks, and opinion
dynamics including the emergence of large discussion groups. The second
extension, also known as adaptive networks in the physics literature, consists
of systems of components that have the ability to shape their spatial
environment: host-pathogen and host-mutualist systems in which symbionts affect
the mortality of their host, and electrochemical signals that can strengthen or
weaken the connections between neurons. This research project is also the first
step towards the development of more realistic models of biological and
sociological systems that cannot be captured by traditional interacting particle
systems.
