
* 1005749
* Critical planar systems and conformal invariance
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2010,10/27/2015
* Julien Dubedat,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2016
* USD 165,063.00

The last decade has seen a series of major achievements in the study of
conformally invariant systems, in particular following the introduction of
Schramm-Loewner Evolutions. This new approach has proved extremely effective in
describing the scaling limit of interfaces of critical models of two-dimensional
Statistical Physics, such as percolation and the Ising model, in accordance with
the earlier predictions of Conformal Field Theory (CFT). The research program
proposed here focuses on systems on paths and loops, in particular in relation
with the CFT formalism; on free field invariance principles and the analysis of
Cauchy-Riemann operators; and on the connections between geometric and
functional representations of continuous scaling limits.

The goal of this proposal is to analyze mathematical models of the physical
phenomenon of phase transition. A phase transition describes a sharp qualitative
change in a physical system under variation of an external parameter, such as
freezing of water (transition from liquid to solid phase as temperature
decreases). At the phase transition, a random macroscopic geometry may emerge,
akin to the wiggly interfaces separating non mixing fluids like oil and water,
or positively and negatively charged regions in a magnetic material. The study
of those fluctuating interfaces is grounded in both Probability Theory and
Theoretical Physics. Special emphasis will be put on the interplay between these
two approaches, and their relation to other areas of mathematics.
