
* 1007460
* Support for the US participants of the 6th Levy Conference; Technical University of Dresden, Germany; July 2010
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 05/15/2010,05/11/2010
* Jan Rosinski,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2011
* USD 15,000.00

The intend of this proposal is to provide partial support for the U.S.
participants of the 6th International Conference on Levy Processes. The support
is primarily aimed at graduate students, postdocs, junior faculty, women and
minorities. The conference is scheduled to be held on July 26-30, 2010 at the
Technical University of Dresden, Germany. It follows a companion summer school
in Braunschweig, July 22-24, 2010.

Levy processes are at the crossroad of many different mathematical disciplines
such as Fourier analysis, potential theory, partial differential equations,
fractal analysis, and various branches of stochastics. At the same time, Levy
processes are now being used in a great variety of scientific and engineering
problems, and as a result, a host of new mathematical problems have arisen.
Essential use of the theory of Levy processes occur in disparate fields such as
mathematical finance, insurance, telecommunications, extreme values theory,
quantum theory, meteorology, geophysics, astrophysics, and many other areas.

Conferences on Levy Processes foster cross-fertilization of ideas and help
researchers to enter into these ares of vital and often interdisciplinary
research. A central theme of this proposal is to help make the conference, as
well as its satellite summer school, accessible to junior researchers and
graduate students in the United States.
