
* 1007563
* Eigenvectors of random graphs & diffusions on simplices
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2010,05/21/2010
* Soumik Pal,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2014
* USD 147,424.00

The PI proposes two long term directions in his research in Probability theory.
The first one involves study of spectral and eigenvectors properties of sparse
random graphs. This is a joint work with Ioana Dumitriu. Eigenvectors of graph
adjacency or laplacian matrices have natural significance as solutions of
combinatorial optimization problems. However, very little theoretical results
are known about eigenvectors of random graphs. Our ongoing investigation
combines methods and intuition from the Random Matrix Theory with graph
combinatorics. We have so far succeeded in obtaining interesting results for
random regular graphs where we show that, when the degree grows poly-
logarithmically with the order, the adjacency matrix displays some of the
properties of the Gaussian Orthogonal Ensembles. Eventually we plan to study
``real world'' graphs, particularly the ones with a given degree distribution.
The second direction is the construction and study of a diffusion on the space
of continuum trees whose reversible measure is the Brownian CRT, as conjectured
by David Aldous. This appears as a limit of natural discrete Markov chains on
finite phylogenetic trees. Continuum trees are of great significance as they
appear as the limiting state space of several families of random trees and
random planar maps (via Schaeffer bijection). It appears from our ongoing study
that this limiting diffusion is a new kind of measure-valued process on the
space of such trees, reminiscent of the classical Fleming-Viot model. The
proposed method is a continuation of ideas developed by the PI in related recent
work.

Random graphs and networks are popular in diverse areas such as social
networks, models for the internet, computer vision, and number theory. Several
natural optimization problems on graphs (e.g., figuring out clusters, or ranking
algorithms such as Google PageRank) involve what are called eigenvectors of the
graph. If the network grows randomly, its eigenvectors are random, and it is of
interest to study its properties. A study of such properties is listed as one of
our main research areas. The other main area involves the structure of
phylogenetic (or evolutionary) trees. A lot of recent interest in Biology and
related mathematics is in the structure of the collection of all possible
evolutionary trees. This is an enormous space very different from the usual
Euclidean (say, three dimension) space. One way to explore this set is to let a
Markov chain jump around from tree to tree randomly in a ``nice'' way. A few
such models have been proposed in the literature. We take up the study of one of
them which is related to other areas of Probability. The analysis and results
are expected to be quite novel in the subject area.
