
* 1007144
* Probabilistic Techniques in Mathematical Phylogenetics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, COFFES
* 08/15/2010,08/03/2010
* Sebastien Roch,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2012
* USD 171,000.00

It is proposed to investigate the phylogenetic reconstruction problem from a
probabilistic perspective. Inferring the speciation history of a group of
organisms is a fundamental problem in evolutionary biology. This history is
represented by a phylogeny, i.e., a rooted tree where the leaves correspond to
current species and branchings indicate speciation events. The stochastic
evolution of molecular sequences on such a phylogeny is an instance of a Markov
model on a tree. In this project, the PI will further develop connections
between the theory of Gibbs measures on trees and the phylogenetic
reconstruction problem. A particular emphasis will be given to models of
insertions and deletions with the objective of providing a probabilistic
analysis of the multiple sequence alignment problem. Connections to information
theory problems will also be considered.

Assembling the Tree of Life is a fundamental problem in biology which provides
insights in the study of evolution, adaptation, and speciation. Much information
about past evolutionary events can be inferred from the analysis of DNA sequence
data collected from existing species. A notable feature of the evolution of
molecular sequences is the significant role played by randomness. In recent
years, probability theory, the mathematical study of randomness, has provided
key new insights in assessing the power of statistical methods to reconstruct
evolutionary processes in large-scale phylogenetics. The main theme of this
project is to further investigate these connections. In particular, more
realistic models of evolution will be considered. New phylogenetic analysis
techniques will be developed and implemented.
