
* 1007823
* Stochastic processes with spatial constraints
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2010,09/01/2010
* Nevena Maric,MO,University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

The proposal focuses on infinite stochastic systems whose evolution is spatially
constrained. It involves research on space-time inhomogeneous contact processes
and branching random walks. It also involves a study of quasi-stationary
distribution which is an essential concept related to equilibrium properties of
a process conditioned to stay inside a sub-state-space. In an earlier work, we
established a relation between quasi-stationary distributions and a Fleming-Viot
particle system, which promises a novel, constructive and useful approach to
quasi-stationarity. The proposed research on the subject will build on and
significantly extend this work. Many natural and social phenomena arise as a
result of interaction of large number of components (particles, humans, viruses,
plants,...). Due to immense complexity of these systems, in order to make them
more accessible, one assigns random components to these interactions and studies
corresponding stochastic models. As suitable models for various physical
systems, interacting stochastic systems have been studied extensively over the
last decades. They were found also to be very useful models in epidemiology. The
proposed project is related to infinite stochastic systems whose evolution is
spatially constrained. Some mathematical questions to be addressed can be
translated as: What happens with an infection if it spreads using only a certain
number of individuals and contacts among them? How does reduction of a habitat
affect distributions of a plant species? Beside its mathematical significance,
the proposed research has very important applications in biogeography and
evolution theory and hopefully it will generate fruitful collaborative
interdisciplinary research.
