
* 1007176
* Flows, Polymers and Random Media
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/2010,03/05/2012
* Michael Cranston,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2014
* USD 359,272.00

The PI proposes to carry on research on problems in stochastic flows, the
parabolic Anderson model, polymer phase transitions and random Schrodinger
operators. In the area of stochastic flows, the PI will continue efforts on the
distribution of passive tracers under the motion of stochastic flows. Here, the
goal will be to investigate the joint asymptotic distribution of two disjoint
bodies of passive tracers moving under the flow. This will also be investigated
for the case of turbulence where the tracers are carried by Kolmogorov velocity
fields. Other research will be carried out involving the behavior of the
singular flows called Kraichnan flows. In the area roughly labeled the parabolic
Anderson model, the PI will investigate the so-called dynamo problem. This
involves a model for the generation of magnetic fields in turbulent media such
as on the surface of a star. The dynamo conjecture is that the magnetic field of
a star will exhibit exponential growth. The PI will attempt to establish this
exponential growth and examine the asymptotics of the exponential constant as
the inverse Reynolds number goes to zero.

The general spirit of this proposal is to pursue a mathematical investigation of
physical phenomena in the presence of random and chaotic media. Examples of this
in the investigations in stochastic flows are provided by the distribution of
plankton particles when carried by ocean currents or the spread of oil as in the
recent disaster in the Gulf of Mexico. The goal of this study is to give
information on the distribution and shape of a body of particles being carried
by a random current. Another example of phenomena in chaotic media is the
creation of magnetic fields in young stars. The field strength is conjectured to
exhibit rapid growth and the mathematical model should also have the high
focusing of the magnetic field strength in small regions which are sun spots.
This will lead to more understanding of the development of these spots which
have an effect on events on earth. Another project relates to behavior of
polymer chains. One aspect of this work will be to make a detailed study of the
phase transitions of polymers and the effect the relation of length to
temperature has on the nature of the transition. Another aspect of the polymer
study is to gauge the effect that a random environment has on the shape of a
polymer. So far, very noisy environments have been shown to force the polymer
into a particular shape, that is intense randomness reduces the degrees of
freedom of the polymer in the model. We aim to gain more insight into the nature
of this particular shape.
