
* 1007244
* Interactions Among Probability, Group Theory, Graph Theory, and Ergodic Theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2010,05/05/2016
* Russell Lyons,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 362,468.00

It is proposed to deepen various connections among the mathematical areas of
probability, group theory, graph theory, and ergodic theory. Mainly this will be
achieved by probabilistic thinking about questions that arise in other areas. In
group theory, the PI will work on the question of whether every group is sofic.
The PI discovered with Aldous that a probabilistic setting leads to a wider
framework for this question and suggests a new approach to it. In graph theory,
probabilistic thinking leads to new questions and results involving inequalities
for finite graphs. Namely, one often finds when counting combinatorial objects
that a subgraph contains fewer of them than the whole graph. But if the subgraph
is based on fewer vertices, then one ought to normalize the counts to reflect
this. The PI has some partial results in this direction and proposes to find
more. In ergodic theory, questions involve graphings, colorings, and factors. In
fact, it may be that these investigations will lead to progress in the theory of
percolation on groups. Combining several of these areas are very natural
processes that are related (by previous work of the PI) to algebraic invariants
known as ell-2-Betti numbers. Therefore, they suggest ways of resolving an
important open question about these Betti numbers.

In the 19th century, Cayley introduced graphs (networks) to represent the
algebraic objects known as groups. It is always desirable to have finite
approximations to infinite objects, and the same holds for infinite groups.
Gromov and Weiss suggested a way to use finite networks for this purpose. If one
can actually succeed in making such approximations for all groups, then this
would resolve a host of important conjectures in a variety of fields of
mathematics. The PI proposes to continue work on this question. Inequalities are
important in most areas of mathematics. The field of graph theory and
combinatorics contains many inequalities, often of the form that certain graphs
contain the most (or the fewest) possible objects of a certain type among all
graphs in a given class. The PI will develop novel inequalities of this type,
which are inspired by a probabilistic viewpoint. Topology is the study of the
shape of things. One tool is to count the number of holes of various dimensions.
But if the whole space of interest is infinite, then the number of holes is
often either zero or infinity. It turns out that there is a more informative way
to count holes, and previous work of the PI has shown how it is related to
random combinatorial objects. Therefore, the PI will attempt to use his new
random objects to resolve an important open question about this hole counting.
