
* 1008873
* Collaborative Research: Applications of Stochastic Analysis to Models of Multi-Agent Interactions
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,02/01/2012
* Jianfeng Zhang,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 167,000.00

Recent advances in continuous-time contract theory, some of which have come out
from the prior work of the investigators, as well as advances in equilibrium
theory and in modeling liquidity, are applied in order to develop more realistic
models of interactions of multiple economic agents. In particular, optimal
design of joint ventures between two firms is addressed, that is, the optimal
time to enter/exit a project, the optimal effort each should invest in it, and
how they should share the profits/losses, thus extending the classical real
options theory to the case of two agents. New models for finding optimal
compensation to managers are developed, in which the manager may have better
information than the investors, and in which the investors may acquire better
information at a cost. Global properties of prices formed in equilibrium of
financial markets with many agents are analyzed, in order to study what factors
influence the volatility and the risk premium of the stock market. In addition,
the investigators model how prices locally evolve due to changes in liquidity,
for example in the presence of fast high-frequency traders. Finally, in a model
of a market with many interacting agents, the project explores how the average
number of defaults and average loss evolve in the limit when the number of
agents grows.

This project is particularly timely given that one of the reasons for the recent
crisis in financial markets is the way traders and managers have been
compensated. It will help provide insight into what types of compensation
schemes are optimal for the parties involved and for the society in general.
Another issue that needs better understanding if a similar crisis is to be
prevented in the future, is how the markets evolve due to the interaction of
many agents, and how lack of liquidity influences the behavior of the market
participants and the prices. In particular, this research sheds light on the
formation of asset prices, on portfolio strategies, and on the frequency of
defaults that can be expected in markets with many agents, as well as how prices
are formed in markets with varying degrees of liquidity. Thus, the results of
the project will shed light on which issues to focus on when regulating
compensation in financial markets and regulating the financial industry in
general.
