
* 1022639
* Evolutionary responses to limiting factors in heterogeneous environments
* DMS,PROBABILITY, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, EVOLUTIONARY ECOLOGY, COFFES
* 09/15/2010,09/18/2010
* Sebastian Schreiber,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 404,027.00

All organisms have the potential to produce descendants whose numbers grow
exponentially, but are eventually prevented from doing so by the action of
various factors that limit reproductive success. The field of ecology is largely
devoted to the study of these limiting factors. Debates concerning the relative
importance of different potentially limiting factors for particular microbe,
plant, and animal taxa pervade the evolutionary ecology literature; prominent
examples include extrinsic versus intrinsic sources of mortality, different
macro- and micronutrients required for organismal growth, physical wear or
breakage of different key structural features of an organism, resources versus
predators in population regulation, pollen versus resource limitation in plants,
and egg versus host limitation in insects. While important progress has been
made developing theory to resolve these debates in particular contexts, these
theoretical treatments have been developed in isolation from one another. Many
of these debates, however, share a common logical structure: the focal organism
lives in a heterogeneous environment, has a finite pool of metabolic resources
to ameliorate multiple limiting factors, and can not instantaneously adjust
metabolic allocations to perfectly match the environment. This project will
develop a general mathematical framework for analyzing evolutionary problems
with this logical structure, apply this framework to several major limiting
factor debates in evolutionary ecology, and confront the modeling predictions
with empirical data. The mathematical framework will provide broadly applicable
methods at the interface of stochastic processes and dynamical systems. These
methods will be used to understand (i) whether insects are limited by a finite
supply of eggs or a short lifespan to locate hosts and (ii) whether plants are
limited by their ability to attract pollinators or by other aspects of
reproduction. To establish a dialogue between the theory and the natural world,
data on egg limitation and pollen limitation will be collected and analyzed to
evaluate the theory.

Conservation and restoration ecologists are interested in anticipating the
responses of animals and plants to changing environments and in being able to
manipulate those responses to beneficial ends. This project will contribute to
these goals by providing a deeper understanding of how organisms evolve in
response to different factors that may limit reproductive success. A population
of organisms whose fitness is consistently limited by one particular factor will
respond predictably to perturbations of that factor. On the other hand, a
population of organisms whose fitness is limited by different factors at
different times or places will respond to perturbations less predictably. A key
topic of this project, pollen limitation, has direct bearing on documented
global declines in the populations of pollinating insects such as bees. These
population declines threaten plant communities and crop productivity world wide.
Results from this project will be incorporated into a new course on pollination
ecology, into two textbooks dealing with calculus and modeling as applied to the
life sciences, and into entry-level courses for biology students. Moreover,
undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral associates will be trained
in a vertically integrated manner.
