
* 1053280
* CAREER: Random eigenvalue problems and fluctuations of large stochastic systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2011,07/15/2015
* Benedek Valko,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,999.00

The PI will work on problems related to random matrix theory and the fluctuation
theory of large stochastic systems. One of the basic problems of random matrix
theory is to analyze the eigenvalues of large random matrices. The PI will focus
on problems related to the asymptotic spectral properties of the beta ensembles,
a family of models generalizing some of the most studied classical random matrix
models (e.g. GOE, GUE, GSE, Wishart). The project builds on the recent results
of the PI and collaborators in which the point process scaling limits of general
beta ensembles are derived in the bulk of the spectrum. The proposed problems
include the extension of methods to other random matrix ensembles, analyzing the
limiting point processes and finding connections to the existing descriptions of
classical cases. The approach relies on the study of random tridiagonal matrices
which also provides a natural framework to investigate the asymptotic spectral
properties of certain random Schrodinger operators. Non-rigorous physical
scaling arguments suggest that a large class of one-dimensional random systems
have unusual superdiffusive fluctuations with a scaling exponent of 2/3.
Examples include interacting particle systems, growth models and directed
polymers. These systems arise as models for various phenomena in the natural and
social sciences. The recent decade brought a breakthrough from the mathematical
side: for certain models the fluctuation exponent has been determined rigorously
and in some cases even scaling limits have been proved. The PI will work towards
extending the rigorous results to a wider family of models. In particular the
fluctuation theory of certain lattice gases, directed polymer models and self
avoiding processes will be studied.

The problems considered in the proposal deal with the analysis of systems with a
large number of random components with complex interactions. We might understand
the joint distribution of the entries of a large random matrix, but the
distribution of the eigenvalues is usually a lot more complicated. The evolution
of an interacting particle system might be simple on a local level, and we might
understand the behavior of the fluctuations for a fixed time, but the scaling
limit of the fluctuation field may be a highly non-trivial object. The goal of
the proposal is to develop new tools and to provide a better understanding for
such problems. The educational part of the proposal focuses on enhancing
undergraduate and graduate probability education at the PI's host institution
and actively involving graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in the PI's
area of research.
