
* 1105581
* Structural properties of random tree models and their applications in network flows, brain circulation networks and statistical physics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, COFFES
* 08/15/2011,08/05/2011
* Sreekalyani Bhamidi,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2015
* USD 210,000.00

The main aim of this proposal is a systematic mathematical study of a number of
random network models arising from applications in computer science, biology and
statistical physics, understanding dynamics on these network models, and
developing mathematical methodology to glean information from real world
networks. Using branching process embeddings and local weak convergence
techniques, we propose to develop a set of robust tools that can be used to
analyze one of the most important family of network models (the attachment
family) which arises in a diverse range of applications. These mathematical
techniques will give information on the asymptotics of not only local
functionals such as degree distributions but global functionals such as the
maximal degree and the spectral distribution of (random) adjacency matrices.
Using continuous time branching process techniques we also propose to analyze
models of network flow and first passage percolation, in order to understand the
effect of disorder on the geometry of random network models and the propagation
of congestion across edges in flow carrying networks. Preliminary computations
suggest that for a wide array of models, macroscopic order emerges from
microscopic rules of transport as the size of the network increases, and the
project will attempt to understand this phenomenon and explore connections
between these models and stable age distribution theory and the Malthusian rate
of growth of branching process models in biology. New models of random trees
motivated by statistical physics and biology will also be studied wherein using
random walk constructions and conditioned branching processes, we aim to
understand the scaling limits of such models. Finally we propose to develop
mathematical methodology to analyze, understand and quantify sources of
variation in the structure of real world complex networks such as trees arising
as blood circulatory networks in the brain.

Over the last few years the availability of empirical data on many real world
networks including social networks, data transmission networks such as the
Internet and various biological networks, has stimulated an explosion in the
array of mathematical models proposed to understand these networks. Researchers
in a wide array of fields are interested in understanding properties of such
networks, the evolution and change of such networks over time, as well as the
dynamics of various processes on these networks such as transporting flow or
traffic through these networks and epidemic models on these networks. An
understanding of the behavior of these mathematical models would allow
practitioners to glean important information and insight about such processes in
the real world, ranging from the design of more efficient networks,
understanding the factors that influence the rate of spread of congestion of
flow processes or other dynamics through the network, to the significant factors
that contribute to the actual emergence of the structure of the network itself.
A mathematical analysis of such problems leads to interesting connections
between these models and wide areas of mathematical probability including
branching process models in biology and random fractals. The aim of this project
is to develop mathematical methodology to understand properties of such network
models and in particular understand what happens when the system size grows
large. At the same time the project will also develop techniques to accurately
understand data arising from various biological networks such as vascular
networks in the brain and the factors that significantly affect functional
properties of such networks. The techniques developed will be of use to a wide
community of researchers, and we anticipate that the project will foster
interdisciplinary collaborative projects with both national and international
research groups and facilitate the training of students and expose them to this
rapidly emerging field of research.
