
* 1105469
* 2011 International Conference on Probability, Statistics and Data Analysis (2011-ICPSDA)
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS
* 04/15/2011,04/08/2011
* Subhashis Ghoshal,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Haiyan Cai
* 03/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

The Department of Statistics at North Carolina State University (NCSU) is
hosting the "2011 International Conference on Probability, Statistics and Data
Analysis" in the NCSU campus in Raleigh, North Carolina, from April 21-24, 2011.
All presentations will take place in the newly built state-of-the-art building
named "SAS Hall." The conference serves as the official meeting of the
International Indian Statistical Association (IISA), and provides its members a
unique opportunity to meet fellow statisticians and exchange ideas. The
conference is co-sponsored by the American Statistical Association (ASA), NC
Chapter of ASA, National Institute of Statistical Sciences (NISS), SAS
Corporation, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), The College of Physical and Mathematical
Sciences (PAMS) and the College of Agricultural and Life Sciences (CALS) of
NCSU. The Department of Statistics at NCSU is providing equipment, staff and
logistic support. The conference includes 4 plenary talks given by Prof. S. R.
S. Varadhan, Prof. Peter Hall, Prof. Michael Jordan and Prof. Sally Morton. The
conference also features 6 special invited talks, over 150 invited talks, a
poster session and panel discussions on funding opportunities and statistical
education. Eminent speakers, women, minorities, under-represented groups,
graduate students and young professionals will be supported by the funding
received from federal granting agencies such as the National Science Foundation
(NSF).

The main objective of the conference is to bring together both well established
and emerging young researchers from around the world who are actively pursuing
theoretical and methodological research in statistics and their applications in
various allied fields. The conference aims to provide a forum for leading
experts and young researchers to discuss recent progress in statistical theory
and applications, thereby provide new directions for statistical inference in
various fields. The conference thus provides tremendous opportunities and
benefits to graduate students, young researchers and professionals from industry
and government agencies by giving them an exposure to the cutting edge
statistical methods and their applications and providing them a platform to
showcase their own work to experts on the field through poster and oral
presentations. Moreover, interactive panel discussions on funding opportunities
and statistical education will help them better prepare for their career ahead.
Women, minorities and under-represented groups have been encouraged to
participate in the conference by proving them partial funding support, thus
promoting diversity in our profession. The conference website
http://www.iisaconference.info will disseminate conference products by providing
links to all conference related material including abstracts and slides of the
talks and hence this website will serve as a great resource for not only the
conference participants but also to any professionals interested in statistical
theory and applications.
