
* 1106270
* FBM, Hypoelliptic Processes, and Path Integrals
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2011,06/10/2013
* Bruce Driver,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

This proposal is primarily concerned with three topics. The first is to study
the smoothness properties of densities for laws of solutions to hypoelliptic
stochastic differential equations driven by fractional Brownian motion. The
second is to continue to analyze certain finite dimensional geometric
approximations to Wiener measure on a Riemannian manifold. The eventual goal is
to include the super-symmetric setting which will likely entail analysis in non-
commutative probability spaces. The P.I. expects this aspect of the project will
make contact with the theory of random matrices. The third problem is devoted to
proving parabolic regularity results for heat equations on certain infinite
dimensional Lie groups including loop groups. In one way or another each of
these problems may be recast (at least heuristically) as problem involving path
integrals. Many of the projects proposed here are loosely motivated by the
fundamental problem of constructing quantize Yang-Mills fields. See the Clay
Mathematics Institute problem pertaining to quantized Yang - Mills fields for a
description of this problem and its importance to the so called standard model
in physics. Fractional Brownian motion (fBm) was implicitly introduced by A. N.
Kolmogorov in 1940. (Kolmogorov seemed to have in mind possible applications to
the theory of turbulence.) A later paper by Mandelbrot and Van Ness (1968)
describes a number of possible applications for fBm including using it for
economic and hydrology models. The recent literature includes applications of
fBm in the modeling of neural networks, the pricing of financial instruments,
and to understanding the clustering of galaxies. One of the main projects of
this proposal is to study the statistical behavior of these types of dynamical
systems which are driven by fractional Brownian motion. The P.I. will also focus
on two other projects during the period of this research grant. One of these
projects is a continuation of the P.I.'s program to better understand the
Feynman "path integral" techniques which are used in the quantum mechanical
description of atomic and sub-atomic particles. Although highly studied, the
mathematical footing of Feynman's path integrals is still tenuous at best. The
third project is to generalize the results of the first two projects to
"infinite dimensions." It turns out that the seemingly very abstract
generalization to infinite dimensions is precisely what is needed in order to
understand the quantum mechanical description of the fundamental forces in
nature. (This topic goes under the heading of quantum field theory in the
particle physics literature.) It is a long standing major challenge to make
mathematically rigorous sense of interacting quantum field theories. This
proposal has a significant graduate training component as a number of the
problems will be tackled by the P.I.'s students.
