
* 1106853
* Stochastic Differential Equations and Related Topics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, COFFES
* 09/15/2011,08/16/2016
* Jin Ma,CA,University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 359,999.00

The principal investigator proposes to study six problems in the general area of
stochastic differential equations and their applications in finance and
insurance. Several long standing problems in the theory of Forward-backward
Stochastic Differential Equations (FBSDEs) are investigated, mainly under the
non-Markovian framework, allowing less regular coefficients and arbitrary time
duration. A ``User's Guide" type result is expected. A class of quasilinear
Backward Stochastic PDEs (BSPDE) is studied in the spirit of nonlinear Feynman-
Kac formula, and a new type of FBSDEs with coefficients having discontinuity,
arising directly from a real application, will be explored for the first time. A
class of combined optimal reinsurance and investment problems with random
terminal times and possible partial observations is proposed as a direct
application of the newly developed results on FBSDEs. Two problems regarding
credit risk models with partial information are proposed. One assumes the so-
called ``Hypothesis (H)" (or ``immersion property") and focuses on a special
BSDE with super-linear growth and exogenous jumps, with an eye on the utility
optimization problems involving defaultable assets; and the other tries to
understand the relationship between the conditional density and intensity of the
defaults in filtering models where the Hypothesis (H) fail. The PI also proposes
to investigate optimal execution problems in an ``order-driven" market by first
establishing a new model for the dynamics of the Limit Order Book (LOB) using an
equilibrium density argument that results in a general type of nonlinear/random
shape of the LOB.

The proposed research aims at resolving some of the ``last obstacles" in the
theory of FBSDEs and backward SPDEs, and some related topics in finance and
insurance. The proposed projects on FBSDEs build on the results initiated by the
PI and will lead to a new solution scheme to treat cases that have been open for
many years, which will in turn help the proposed research on optimal
reinsurance/investment and utility optimization problems involving defautable
assets. The study on credit risk models with partial information and optimal
liquidation problems are aiming at exploring new modeling aspects in stochastic
finance. Most projects in the proposed research have direct or indirect
connections to applied fields, especially stochastic control and stochastic
finance/insurance. Three problems are directly related to issues in finance and
insurance, using the tools developed in the proposed theoretical studies, while
one theoretical problem arises from a real project with a local bank in LA.
Several parts of the proposed research involve Ph.D students and postdoctoral
fellows. The PI will continue strengthening the connections with local financial
communities through a regular Math Finance Colloquium series sponsored by the
Math Finance Program at USC, for which PI is the director. Ph.D students
involved in the proposed research are more likely to obtain internships from the
local banks, and some might lead to permanent employment.
