
* 1106627
* Mean Field Asymptotic for Stochastic Processes on Graphs
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2011,11/13/2015
* Amir Dembo,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 700,000.00

The common thread in this proposal is the focus on mean field disordered models
originally developed within statistical physics. These are usually characterized
by two levels of randomness, one of whom frozen (quenched), in the form of
dependence graph or weights for the resulting stochastic process, whose
distribution is exchangeable (hence being a mean field model). In connection
with such models we focus on the following directions. The rigorous study of
probabilistic models for large systems of discrete variables that are strongly
interacting according to a random graph structure. The aim is to develop a
better mathematical understanding of their phase transitions and the existence
of multiple Gibbs measures. A related effort has to do with the development of
novel connections between the asymptotic behavior of the spectrum of structured
models of random matrices and properties of the corresponding random graphs and
graph embeddings. Understanding the scope and reasons behind some unexpected
asymptotic behavior of stochastic dynamics for spin systems out of equilibrium.
A prominent example is the aging phenomenon where memory accumulates in the
system with time and its relation to a yet to be understood specific form of
breakup of the fluctuation-dissipation theorem (which relates the time
derivative of the correlation function at equilibrium to the effect of small
perturbations in Markovian dynamics).



Over the past three decades, physicists have developed sophisticated non-
rigorous techniques for accurately predicting the asymptotic behavior of large
complex random systems. Their studies were motivated by the desire to understand
the collective behavior of various states of the matter, and the phase
transitions connecting them. For instance, the objective of understanding water
at the critical temperature at which it turns into vapor, or magnets at the
critical temperature at which they lose spontaneous magnetization, has motivated
the development of a sophisticated unified theory of critical phenomena. Over
time, it has become apparent that the models and intuitions developed by
physicists rest on deep mathematical principles, whose reach is much broader
than simply physical systems. More recently, mathematicians are making
significant progress in developing the corresponding rigorous theories and
proving some of these predictions. Probability theory is at the forefront of
this convergence, starting with the theory of large deviations and continuing
with the emerging vibrant activity in the study of stochastic dynamics of
interacting particles, large random matrices, Gibbs measures and planar objects
with conformal symmetries.

This project focuses on developing this line of research, in particular to
develop the mathematics of large random systems without (finite-dimensional)
geometric structures. These are called by physicists `mean field systems' and
enjoy a remarkable degree of universality.
