
* 1106530
* Geometric and information-theoretic aspects of high-dimensional phenomena
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2011,04/18/2013
* Sergey Bobkov,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

This proposal focuses on the study of geometric, analytic and information-
theoretic aspects of high dimensional phenomena on the border of probability,
convex geometry and analysis. One part of the project concerns the problem of
rates of convergence in the entropic central limit theorem, and is devoted to
obtaining new asymptotic expansions for the relative entropy with respect to the
growing dimension. In other part, it is proposed to perform a systematic study
of the dimensional behavior of the entropy and information for different classes
of probability distributions, satisfying convexity conditions. In particular,
new concentration properties of the information content will be considered for
dependent high-dimensional data. It is planned to introduce and explore special
positions of probability measures, responsible for correct behaviour of sums of
independent summands (when the entropy power inequality can be reversed).
Another part addresses the stability problem, raised by Kac and McKean, in the
entropic variant of Cramer's characterization of the normal law.

The main theme of the proposal is the development of the information-theoretic
approach to high dimensional phenomena, with focus on obtaining new asymptotic
bounds on the entropy and information. The study of entropy is dictated by
various applications within and beyond pure mathematics. Entropy plays a key
role in statistical physics (in order to capture the amount of disorder in a
system), in statistics (to measure the performance of statistical estimators),
in engineering and mathematical theory of communication. The proposed research
also aims to provide new connections between probability, geometric functional
analysis and information theory, and to demonstrate an increasing role of
entropy bounds in purely mathematical fields.

An integral component of the project is the involvement and training of the
graduate and undergraduate students.
