
* 1203201
* Study of random motion in random environment, and random matrix theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2012,05/19/2015
* Ofer Zeitouni,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2018
* USD 297,009.00

The proposed research project is focused on the study of random matrices and
random walks evolving in random media. Much of the existing theory of random
matrices deals with normal matrices, which are stable under perturbations; many
of the existing tools implicitly use either this stability, or some strong
independence assumptions, even in deriving rough results. A major goal of the
present proposal is to build on previous work of the PI and collaborators and
develop techniques that work even in a context where both structural assumptions
(normality or independence) fail. While the proposal discusses and addresses
some very specific questions, it is part of a larger attempt to develop new
techniques that would be applicable to a wide range of RMT questions. The second
topic to be studied concerns random walks and branching processes in random
environments. Though the theory of random walks is well developed, many gaps in
understanding remain when one changes the medium in which the walk evolves to a
random medium. In spite of rapid progress that was achieved in the last few
years by several researchers, many fundamental questions remain unanswered. The
proposed project will built on previous work, by the PI and other researchers,
with the goal of resolving some of these outstanding questions.

Matrices are the cornerstone of linear algebra, and are fundamental building
blocks in operator theory. Random matrix theory (RMT) is concerned with the
study of properties of random matrices, typically in the limit where the
dimension of the matrix is large. Motivations and applications for this study
come from several areas of mathematics (probability theory, number theory,
representation theory), the physical sciences (especially, mathematical
physics), statistics, and engineering (specifically, communication and
information theories). In recent years, RMT has emerged as a major research area
within mathematics, combining techniques from probability theory, operator
algebras, complex analysis, and combinatorics. Several major (and fundamental)
open questions have recently been resolved, especially concerning the
universality of limit laws regarding the spectrum of large random matrices. The
proposed research will seek to significantly expand the theory toward a class of
matrices whose spectrum is not stable under (small) perturbations. While the
focus of the research is theoretical, an impact on applications is expected,
e.g. in evaluating the stability of complex systems, in computations related to
quantum information theory, and in statistics. The second main focus of the
study, random walks, are arguably the stochastic processes most studied by
mathematicians, having the widest range of applications in fields as diverse as
the physical sciences, engineering, and the social sciences. Though the theory
of random walks is by now well developed, this is not at all the case when one
changes the medium in which the walk evolves to a random medium, thus obtaining
a random walk in random environment (RWRE). Such RWRE's can be used to model
many problems of motion in random media in the physical and engineering
sciences, and are mathematically appealing because on the one hand the model is
very simply stated, while on the other hand established tools for studying
processes in random media are not applicable in the study of RWRE. The goal of
the current proposal is to develop new basic probabilistic techniques that will
allow to make provable predictions concerning the behavior of RWRE. It is
expected that such techniques will be useful in the study of other processes,
and link naturally to the study of trapping models and reinforced random walks.
While not explicitly targeted in this proposal, trapping models have recently
been used to study the environmental impact of nuclear waste, and RWRE's can
naturally be used in this context to model the spread of contamination in a real
environment, once the required mathematical background and tools are in place.
