
* 1206772
* Dynamic Stochastic Networks: Analysis, Control and Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY, COFFES
* 07/01/2012,03/29/2016
* Ruth Williams,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 567,641.00

Stochastic dynamic models of complex networks arise in a wide variety of
applications in science and engineering. Specific instances include high-tech
manufacturing, telecommunications, computer systems, service systems and
biochemical reaction networks. This project involves the study of a number of
mathematical problems stemming from the challenges of analyzing and controlling
such dynamic stochastic networks. A balance of topics is proposed. Some topics
involve the development of general theory for broad classes of networks, while
others focus on mathematical problems directly motivated by specific
applications. Since the complexity of these networks usually precludes exact
analysis of detailed microscopic models, the focus here is on approximate
models. Mathematical questions to be addressed include rigorous justification of
these approximations, analyzing and controlling the behavior of the approximate
models and interpreting the results for the original microscopic models. Four
topics are proposed for study: (i) Dynamic control of stochastic processing
networks, (ii) Analysis of processor sharing networks, (iii) Congestion control
and resource entrainment in data networks, (iv) Stochastic systems with delayed
dynamics and state constraints. Some stochastic process aspects of these topics
include study of singular diffusion control problems, analysis of measure-valued
processes, foundational questions for reflected processes, and the asymptotic
properties of functional stochastic differential equations with natural state
constraints.

Dynamic stochastic networks are used as mathematical models in a wide variety of
applications in science and engineering, particularly in operations management,
computer science, electrical engineering and bioengineering. This grant funds
research to develop new results and techniques for addressing mathematical
problems stemming from the need to analyze and control such dynamic stochastic
networks. The networks under study are substantially more general than those
that have been rigorously studied to date. The results will be of fundamental
mathematical interest as well as of interest for applied researchers in relevant
areas of science and engineering. The training of mathematics PhD students,
dissemination of results through publication in peer-reviewed journals and
presentations of the research at cross-disciplinary conferences, are all
integral parts of the project.
