
* 1208191
* Integrability and limit shapes in the two-dimensional Ising model and related models
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2012,04/29/2014
* Richard Kenyon,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 389,892.00

Our goal in this project is to study the integrability properties of the Ising
model. The Ising model is a fundamental model of statistical mechanics,
originally intended to model magnetization, but is also used as a simplified
model for the behavior of any two co-existing substances interacting only
locally. It is one of the simplest mathematical models which displays a phase
transition as the temperature is varied. The Ising model has a long mathematical
history and has inspired much of modern mathematical physics such as quantum
field theory and string theory. Its integrability properties act in some sense
orthogonally to its large-scale order properties. The integrability is
nonetheless related to our ability to "solve" the model mathematically, so the
connection between solvability and integrability is important to understand in
this and other related models, which seem at present much harder to solve.
Statistical mechanics is concerned with studying, through probabilistic methods,
systems of many interacting particles. There is a tension between making
realistic models, which are close to real-world phenomena, and making
mathematically solvable models, which are typically more abstract. A new tool
which we hope to use to increase the range of our solvable models is the notion
of integrability. This is the notion, coming from dynamical systems, that in
certain cases a complicated system can be shown to exhibit in fact quite simple
behavior under an appropriate change of coordinates. We hope that understanding
in a precise sense the integrability properties of the Ising model will lead us
to see similar possibilities in other classical statistical mechanical models.
