
* 1208237
* Asymptotic theory for stochastic processes via martingale methods
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2012,07/16/2012
* Magda Peligrad,OH,University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2015
* USD 150,292.00

An important technique for establishing limit theorems for dependent sequences
is to approximate them with well understood structures, such as martingales.
Stationary martingale approximation is a subfield of stochastic processes that
received a lot of attention in the last decade. Motivated by the study of
asymptotic properties of nonstationary processes and also of stationary
processes that cannot be approximated by stationary martingales, we shall
develop the theory of nonstationary martingale approximations, which unites all
the parts of the project. The new method will exploit blocking techniques to
break the dependence and a new type of martingale construction based on blocks
of variables. We shall also provide maximal inequalities, including Rosenthal-
type inequalities, which are important for obtaining rates of convergence in the
asymptotic results and facilitate the study of a stochastic process by
approximating it, in the almost sure sense, with sums of independent normal
random variables. These tools are fundamental for obtaining new projective
criteria for stochastic processes that insure asymptotic results, including the
conditional functional central limit theorem, limit theorems started at a point,
moderate and large deviation results as well as exact representations for the
tail probabilities of sums of random variables. These types of asymptotic
behaviors are at the heart of probability theory with important applications to
statistics and other applied fields. The proposed project is expected to provide
new mathematical ideas and techniques that will shed new light on several
difficult open problems for stochastic processes and will impact other fields of
research as follows: The limit theorems started at a point are useful to analyze
random walks in a random environment. They are also of interest to researchers
working in statistical mechanics, physics, and will lead to new discoveries for
some interesting intermittent maps that recently came to the attention of
specialists in dynamical systems. The results will be applicable to families of
Metropolis-Hastings algorithms that are essential, for instance, for Bayesian
statistics. The exact asymptotic representation for the tail probabilities will
facilitate the estimations of deviation probabilities that occur in a natural
way in many applied areas, so for instance, in problems of insurance in the
context of large claim insurance, in risk theory and finance. The results will
be disseminated broadly through publications in top rated journals and
presentations in national and international conferences. They will also be
integrated with training of graduate students, presented in weekly seminars, and
will enter the curriculum of a course on limit theory for stochastic processes.
Related questions are actively being studied by several groups of researchers,
in the US and in Europe, and the proposed project will contribute to strengthen
international scientific exchange and collaborations.
