
* 1261010
* Probability Applied to Problems in Algorithmic Statistics, Statistical Physics and the Combinatorics of Permutations
* DMS,PROBABILITY, Combinatorics
* 08/01/2012,01/09/2017
* Nayantara Bhatnagar,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2017
* USD 140,000.00

The theme of this project is the application of probabilistic, algorithmic and
combinatorial ideas to the following three areas: (1) Rigorous analysis of
heuristics for statistical problems such as fast random generation and
simulation of posterior distributions, and classification of the difficulty of
these problems. Of particular interest are heuristics based on Markov Chain
Monte Carlo. The emphasis will be on understanding the models for which such
heuristics are provably efficient as well as cases where they are not. The
investigator expects this to lead to a better understanding of how to design
algorithms for these problems. (2) The proposal aims to explore the connection
between phase transitions in Gibbs measures for spin systems on sparse random
graphs and algorithmic phase transitions in constraint satisfaction problems.
For example, one long-term goal is to rigorously show a connection between decay
of correlations in the Gibbs measure and phase transitions in the connectivity
of the solution space. (3) The investigator proposes to study properties of
permutations under non-uniform measures, especially the asymptotics, large
deviations and fluctuations of statistics such as the longest increasing
subsequence. These questions give rise to interesting refinements of the theory
of limiting shapes of random Young diagrams, point processes and interacting
particle processes. One question we aim to shed more light on is the
relationship between the number of inversions in a permutation and the longest
increasing subsequence.

This project envisages using probabilistic techniques to solve problems from
areas such as statistics, statistical physics, computer science and
combinatorics. Problems involving large amounts of data and algorithms for fast
simulation of large systems are of interest to researchers in industry and
experimentalists in the physical sciences. The proposal aims to rigorously
address the question of efficient simulation. The study of Gibbs measures is a
classical topic in probability and statistical mechanics. The questions proposed
here are of value in establishing connections between the theory of Gibbs
measures and theoretical computer science which attempts to understand
efficiency of algorithms, including those which make use of randomness.
Permutations are well studied objects in combinatorics and probability. The
investigator hopes that their study under distributions that are not uniformly
random will contribute new methods of analysis and results to this classical
subject. The areas described are a good source of problems of practical and
theoretical importance which students at both graduate and undergraduate levels
could find a stimulating point at which to start their scientific inquiries.
