
* 1308476
* Geometry of random Loewner chains
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/15/2013,02/22/2016
* Carl Fredrik Viklund,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 134,798.00

This project focuses on the application of techniques from probability and
complex analysis to mathematical problems concerning scaling limits of random
planar growth and lattice model that originate in physics. The main focus is on
models related to Loewner's differential equation, and in particular on the
Schramm-Loewner evolution (SLE). Three principal directions of investigation are
proposed. First, the PI intends to study almost sure fine properties of the SLE
curves, primarily from the point of view of multifractal analysis. One of the
main questions concerns the properties of the almost sure multifractal spectrum
of harmonic measure on the boundary of the SLE hulls, but the PI will also
investigate, e.g., the winding of the curve at the tip and the geometry of the
SLE curve's collisions with the boundary of the domain where it is defined. All
of these questions can be formulated in terms of the boundary behavior of the
random conformal maps that generate the SLE curves. Secondly, the PI intends to
study rigorous connections between the SLE processes and related discrete models
and Conformal Field Theory (CFT). One goal is to develop the rigorous
understanding of the objects and algebraic structures of CFT from probabilistic
and analytic points of view. Finally, the PI will study the Hastings-Levitov
family of models which uses iterated random conformal maps to model planar
aggregation processes. A specific regularization will be studied with an
understanding of scaling limits and the predicted phase transition as ultimate
goals.

Discrete probabilistic lattice models are used in physics to model a range of
phenomena, and they provide a source of many interesting mathematical problems.
Techniques related to the random fractal Schramm-Loewner evolution (SLE) curves,
which approximate interfaces between phases in the models, have led to much
progress in the mathematical understanding of such models in recent years.
Within the project the PI will develop the understanding of the SLE curves' rich
random geometric and multifractal structures. Beside the intrinsic and
fundamental interest of these structures, and their strong connections with
physical models, the universal nature of the SLE process suggests that methods
and insights developed in the study of its geometric properties will be useful
in the study of other random fractals. An important physics approach to lattice
models uses Conformal Field Theories, CFTs, which (roughly) are ``smeared out''
continuum versions of the discrete models. The rigorous SLE machinery is still
limited compared to the scope of the non-rigorous CFT predictions, and many
connections between CFT and discrete models remain mysterious from a
mathematical perspective. The PI intends to develop the rigorous understanding
of the objects and structures of CFT from probabilistic and analytic points of
view, in particular direct connections with SLE and the discrete models
themselves. A related circle of questions concerns models of aggregation where
planar clusters are grown to model important natural processes such as diffusion
limited aggregation and flow of viscous fluid. Recent advances in the
understanding of random growth models related to conformal maps has provided new
tools which the PI will use to study versions of the so-called Hastings-Levitov
family of aggregation models.
