
* 1351653
* CAREER: Research and training in stochastic dynamics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2014,07/12/2018
* James Nolen,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2020
* USD 451,890.00

The project involves analysis of two types of stochastic dynamics. First, the PI
will study solutions to stochastic differential equations which undergo rare,
random transitions between two or more regions of the state space. The goal of
this work is to understand the statistics of these transitions, especially in
the small-noise regime: what are the typical pathways by which the transitions
occur? what is the typical time required for a transition? These issues are very
relevant to problems in chemistry and molecular dynamics, as well as many other
physical systems exhibiting metastable behavior. The second type of stochastic
dynamics which the PI will study has to do with stochastic interacting particle
systems. Specific systems to be studied involve random motion, growth, and
selection, as in models of evolution, population genetics, adaptive dynamics.
The PI will study continuum limits and large-time limits for such systems. In
particular, this will illuminate new relations between interacting particle
systems and continuum free boundary problems.

When viewed at a certain scale, many physical and biological systems seem to
behave randomly or are influenced by small random fluctuations. Mathematical
models of such systems involve probability theory. Nevertheless, it is very
difficult to use these mathematical models to efficiently predict the system
behavior over a long period of time or over a large spatial region. Therefore, a
fundamental scientific and mathematical problem is to understand how random
dynamics or interactions at one spatial or temporal scale influence a system at
another spatial or temporal scale. This research project develops mathematical
tools for predicting and describing the macroscopic behavior of certain systems
which behave randomly at a microscopic level. The specific systems to be studied
are motivated by problems in chemistry and by models of biological evolution.
One common feature in these systems is the appearance of random, perhaps rare,
transitions: a chemical reaction occurs or a cell produces a mutation. The
educational component of the project includes the training of graduate and
undergraduate students at the intersection of probability, analysis, and
applications, preparing them for careers in STEM-related disciplines.
