
* 1403417
* Spectral asymptotics for stable processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/2014,06/10/2014
* Rodrigo Banuelos,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2018
* USD 276,000.00

The proposed projects will investigate several mathematical problems which lie
at the interface of probability, partial differential equations and spectral
theory. On the probability side, the problems are formulated in terms of the
behavior of stochastic processes which extend in a natural way Brownian motion.
These processes, called Levy processes after the French mathematician Paul Levy,
play an important role in many areas of mathematics. They have applications in
fields as diverse as life and physical sciences and economics. They have been
particularly useful in the modeling of financial markets. On the partial
differential equations and spectral theory side, they involved extensions of
classical theories to operators which are used to model phenomena involving
fractional diffusions.

Mathematically the problems are as follows. (1) Trace asymptotics for
Schrodinger operators on Euclidean spaces for the generator of rotationally
symmetric stable processes (fractional Laplacian) with smooth potentials. In the
case of the Laplacian this produces the famous heat invariants for potentials
which are used in inverse scattering and other problems in spectral theory
arising in areas of mathematical physics. Questions of scattering and resonances
for stable processes and connections to heat invariants for the fractional
Laplacian will be explored. (2) A two-term Weyl's asymptotic law for domains on
Euclidean spaces. The probabilistic techniques introduced by Mark Kac in the
early 50's to prove the celebrated "Weyl's First Law" on the growth of the
eigenvalues of the Laplacian (Brownian motion) in terms of the volume of the
domain can be used to extend this result to the eigenvalues of many other Levy
processes. These probabilistic/heat equation methods fail to give "Weyl's Second
Law? which is a much deeper result and which was proved in 1980 for the
Laplacian by Ivrii and shortly thereafter by Melrose. On the other hand, the
analysis techniques of Ivrii and Melrose also fail primarily due to the boundary
conditions needed to deal with processes with jumps. The failure of both the
current probabilistic and analytic methods makes these problems extremely
challenging. In order to make progress on these questions, brand new techniques
will have to be developed. Such techniques will likely impact several fields in
mathematics, including probability and spectral theory. These projects will
involve the training of graduate students. The results will be disseminated
through publications in professional journals, lectures and on the web. As in
previous NSF grants awarded to the PI, serious efforts will be made to involve
students and young Ph.D.'s from underrepresented groups on this research.
