
* 1406410
* Probabilistic Analysis of Large Geometric Structures
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/2014,07/15/2014
* Joseph Yukich,PA,Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 210,000.00

This proposal studies statistics of large data sets. Such data sets typically
arise in applied and foundational probability theory and are the starting point
for questions in (topological) data analysis, network theory, as well as surface
estimation. How does one use a data set to infer properties about a
deterministic surface? How does one use a data set to draw conclusions about the
objects generating the data? What is the size, dimension, and entropy of the
object producing the data? Does the data have `extreme' points and outliers, and
if so, how many? What are the geometric properties of random networks which
model real world phenomena? Are the networks connected and are they `efficient'?
Up to now, the study of large data sets has largely assumed spatial independence
of the underlying point sets, where already the questions in this setting are as
challenging as they are important. We propose to study such models, but also the
more realistic models where points are not assumed independent. This would
encompass structures frequently encountered in physics, computer science, and
operations research.

Questions arising in stochastic geometry and applied geometric probability are
often understood in terms of the behavior of statistics of large random
geometric structures, where `large' means that the randomness involves a growing
number of random variables. Problems involving these structures involve
understanding the behavior of spatially dependent terms having short range
interactions, but complicated long range dependence. Random geometric structures
arise in diverse settings and include these fundamental examples: (i) Point
processes of dependent points, including those with determinantal, Gibbsian, or
Markov random field structure, zeros of Gaussian analytic functions and zeros of
solutions of the stochastic Burgers' equation, (ii) Simplicial complexes in
topological data analysis, (iii) Geometric networks and geometric graphs on
random vertex sets, including those arising in data fusion networks and nearest
neighbor graphs used in discerning intrinsic dimension and entropy of data
clouds, (iv) Random surfaces which consistently estimate a target surface, (v)
Random polytopes generated by random data. Properties of polytopes generated by
a large collection of random variables are of interest in convex geometry,
average complexity of algorithms, optimization, and extreme statistics, and (vi)
Spatial birth growth models, random sequential adsorption models. This proposal
studies statistics of the above-mentioned large structures. With large input,
one may reasonably draw conclusions about the typical or average behavior of a
large number of interesting statistics. This includes finding mean and variance
asymptotics as well as central limit theorems.
