
* 1406247
* Spectra of Sparse Random Graphs and Some Related Problems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2014,05/23/2014
* Arnab Sen,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 152,998.00

The networks with a very large number of nodes but each node having a relatively
few neighbors are abundant in the real world. The examples include, among
others, the World Wide Web and the networks of brain neurons. These real-world
networks can be effectively modeled by sparse random graphs where the links
between the pair of vertices are added under certain stochastic rules. These
random graphs have very complex geometry. One way to understand their geometry
is to study what are called the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors of the graphs.
For example, by looking at the eigenvalues and eigenvectors one can infer how
congested the network is, or identify the different clusters present in the
network. A significant part of this proposal is devoted to the study of the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of these sparse random graphs of which very little
is known so far. These random graphs with the associated eigenvalues and
eigenvectors are also used as a mathematical model to study the propagation of
electrons in a disordered medium, that is, a medium with impurities. Some of the
questions outlined in this proposal are motivated by the goal of understanding
the transport of electromagnetic waves in disordered media. The proposed
research will involve active collaborations between the PI and a number of
researchers from various US and international universities.

This proposal consists of three directions of research in probability theory,
all related to the spectra of sparse random graphs. The first part of this
proposal deals with the study of eigenvalue distributions of the adjacency
matrices of different models of random graphs with bounded average vertex
degrees. In the limit, as the size of the graphs grows to infinity, these
eigenvalue distributions exhibit a remarkably complex range of behaviors. The PI
will study properties of the eigenvalue distribution for various sparse random
graph models, including random graphs with a given degree distribution and
percolations on Euclidean lattices, primarily focusing on three key features in
the limiting eigenvalue distributions- existence of continuous part, finitely
many atoms and gaps in the support. The adjacency matrix of a large sparse
random graph can be used as a Hamiltonian for electron hopping on a disordered
medium and the study of its eigenvalue distribution is a preliminary step
towards understanding whether the medium behaves like a metal or an insulator at
different energies. The second part of this proposal deals with a model which
was introduced by Hatano and Nelson to study the motion of magnetic flux lines
in semiconductors. This can be thought as a non-Hermitian analogue of the famous
Anderson model in one dimension. Hatano and Nelson observed contrasting
localization behaviors of the eigenvectors associated with the real and the
complex eigenvalues. The PI proposes to investigate this phenomenon rigorously
and try to understand so-called 'delocalization transition' of the eigenvectors.
The final part of this proposal involves a couple of combinatorial optimization
problems on sparse random graphs. Each of these problems deals with a
combinatorial structure that is connected to the spectra of the underlying
graph, but they are interesting on their own. One of them is to understand the
behavior of the minimum weight perfect matching on the Euclidean lattices. The
variants of this optimization problem has received a lot of attention in the
literature. Overall, this proposal consists of a wide range of problems whose
solutions will include a combination of a diverse set of tools and ideas from
random matrix theory, random Schrodinger operators, graph theory, statistical
physics, additive combinatorics and probability.
