
* 1407762
* Topics in stochastic analysis and Malliavin calculus
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2014,01/04/2017
* Frederi Viens,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2017
* USD 150,000.00

The central limit theorem (CLT) is a universality result for independent and
identically distributed trials on which is based much statistical analysis in
the sociological and natural sciences. The CLT's main conclusion is that
aggregated data follows the so-called Gaussian law, also known as the normal or
"bell" curve. But scientists in many fields from seismology to computer science
to quantitative finance are finding that their data series have long-range
correlations, which means that the CLT may or may not be a valid way of looking
at how such data aggregates. The PI's work on correlated data sequences, and
related questions, would show that the Gaussian-law behavior afforded by the CLT
persists up to very long correlation lengths, with some quantitative differences
with the standard CLT, such as an increase in how spread out averages tend to
get. For instance, one of the PI's theoretical conjectures is that if
correlation is long enough, it would take too much data in practice to be able
to observe a CLT-type aggregation. The PI will study the effect of even longer-
range correlations, showing that instead of bell-curve behavior, data could
involve much higher levels of uncertainty (a.k.a. heavy tails), with an
extremely slow rate of aggregation. This could be of some significance when
applied to financial risk in the housing market: tools could be developed for
sellers of institutional mortgage insurance products for highly correlated
mortgages; they would help avoid errors in risk calculations, such as those made
by the American International Group (AIG) in the years preceding the world
financial crisis of 2008, which resulted in a taxpayer-funded bailout upwards of
$ 180 billion. The PI also plans to study the implications of long-range
correlations in so-called spin models which are useful in the physics of random
media, where, unlike the example of mortgage-based financial derivatives, long-
range correlations and heavy tails could have little or no influence on the
average large-scale behavior. The PI's Ph.D. students will take part in both
theoretical and applied aspects of the research, working with the PI to prove
theorems and test their results in practice using numerics. Involving students
in fundamental research with real-world applications will broadly disseminate
scientific understanding. The PI systematically encourages students from
underrepresented groups to join the research program.

The PI proposes a three-year research program in stochastic analysis, with two
groups of topics. First, the complexity of asymptotic laws for variations of
Gaussian processes with long-range correlations will be evidenced by searching
for conditions implying normal, non-normal, and conditionally normal limits in
general situations, including sharp convergence rates. Second, the PI will
analyze densities, tails, and convex functionals, spin systems, and hitting
probabilities, for general Malliavin-differentiable non-Gaussian processes and
fields. A main set of tools is the new use of the Malliavin calculus for
quantitative estimates of various distances between laws of random variables on
Wiener space. This includes the PI's formula for the density of general random
variables on Wiener space, proved with I. Nourdin in 2009. Another tool is the
PI's comparison of convex functionals for random vectors and fields on Wiener
space, proved in 2013 with I. Nourdin and G. Peccati. Yet another is the first
sharp estimates of distances to the normal law on Wiener space, proved in 2012
and 2013 by Bierme, Bonami, Nourdin, and Peccati. The PI will forego power-scale
model assumptions such as self-similarity and/or stationarity whenever possible,
using instead assumptions which are intrinsic to general covariance structures.
One of the consequence of the work will be to show that well-known behaviors in
so-called critical cases for power variations can be artefacts of the chosen
model classes. Another will be to find out the extend of the so-called
Sherrington-Kirkpatrick universality class for spin systems in random media, and
to determine behaviors when heavy tails and long-range correlations cause spin
systems to exit this class. A third consequence should be to understand the
critical cases for hitting probabilities of fractional Brownian motion.
