
* 1407504
* Problems at the Interface of Stochastics and Analysis
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2014,08/30/2016
* Kavita Ramanan,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 306,699.00

Many phenomena that arise in statistical physics, engineering and biology are
modeled by stochastic processes that are constrained to live within a domain.
This proposal aims to further develop the theory of such processes, with three
concrete application areas in mind. The first area concerns random networks that
arise in biology, manufacturing, and other service systems when they operate
near capacity. The performance of these networks can often be described by
diffusions that are constrained to have nonnegative components. A second area is
in mathematical finance, where the advent of electronic exchanges driven purely
by the flow of orders has revolutionized the method by which prices are formed.
The price process in a model of strategic agents who place buy and sell limit
orders can be better understood by studying a class of constrained processes.
The third area involves the study of scaling limits of random matrices, which
arise in many areas, including physics and engineering. The gaps between the
eigenvalues of some classes of high-dimensional random matrices, when properly
scaled, can be shown to be approximated by constrained multi-dimensional
diffusions with singular drift. The proposal seeks to develop a unified theory
for the construction and study of these processes, and to examine their
implications for the described applications. Another theme of the proposal
involves the study of planar obliquely reflected diffusions. Planar stochastic
processes have been the focus of active research over the last two decades.
Finally, the proposal also has a substantial educational component that includes
training of post-doctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduate students,
as well as new course development. It also entails a broader effort that
coordinates several graduate students in outreach activities aimed at
communicating mathematics to a broader audience.

This is an interdisciplinary proposal that focuses on several problems in
probability that require substantial use of analytical techniques. The first
theme concerns various aspects of obliquely reflected diffusions, including the
construction and properties of obliquely reflected Brownian motions in bounded
planar domains, and also excursion reflected Brownian motion which arises in the
boundary theory of Markov processes. It also involves the development of a
common framework for the analysis of diffusions with both reflection and
singular drift, large deviations of semimartingale reflected Brownian motions
and a free boundary problem related to a two-dimensional reflected Brownian
motion. These are motivated by applications in queuing networks, biology, and
mathematical finance. The tools that will be used intersect with several areas
of mathematics including analysis (in particular, complex analysis, conformal
mappings, harmonic analysis, functional analysis, partial differential equations
and free-boundary problems). There are also implications of this work for
mathematical physics, specifically the study of repulsive particle models
associated with random matrices.
