
* 1407136
* Conference Proposal: Frontier Probability Days 2014
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 03/01/2014,02/26/2014
* Sunder Sethuraman,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2015
* USD 20,000.00

Frontier Probability Days 2014 is a three day conference to be held at The
University of Arizona, in Tucson, May 18 - 20, 2014. The purpose of the meeting
is to bring together leading regional and national researchers in probability
theory and its applications, graduate students and others, to foster
interactions and stimulate research activity in this area. The format consists
of 7 plenary talks and several shorter presentations. The plenary speakers
represent a spectrum of leading work in probability and its applications. Topics
of interest for the conference include disordered and interacting systems,
random matrices, stochastic analysis and probabilistic applications to biology
and dynamical systems.

This conference meets approximately once every two years in the Intermountain
West of the United States. This is the fourth meeting of the conference. The
previous three meetings ran successfully in 2007 (Boulder), 2009 (Salt Lake
City) and 2011 (Salt Lake City). Roughly, 40 outside participants are expected
to come to Tucson for the conference. Much of the NSF support will be allocated
to students and junior researchers. A special feature of the conference is its
attention to "applications of probability." Part of the intent of the meeting is
to help broaden participation with other fields, a source of inspiration for
both more applied and theoretical aspects of probability research.

Conference website: math.arizona.edu/~fpd/
