
* 1419498
* Stochastic processes and high dimensional probability distributions, Russia, Summer 2014
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/01/2014,02/27/2014
* Sergey Bobkov,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2015
* USD 31,000.00

This award provides support of the US participation in the conference
"Stochastic processes and high dimensional probability distributions" which will
be held at the Euler Mathematical Institute, Saint Petersburg, on June 16-20,
2014. The main theme of the conference is the insights into stochastic processes
which arise in the light of high dimensional phenomena. It will focus on several
closely related directions including: Geometric problems about Gaussian and
linear stochastic processes; Typical distributions, concentration and other high
dimensional phenomena; Optimal transportation, associated Sobolev-type and
information-theoretic inequalities.

The mission of this forum is to consolidate and further encourage investigations
in the above mentioned directions. There will be talks by internationally known
speakers on a wide variety of topics. The organizers expect about 12-15
participants from USA, out of the total number of 40-50 scientists representing
different schools. It provides an opportunity to review the latest results in
the field and to meet several generations of researchers including postdoc and
graduate students. Broadening participation of women and junior scientists from
under-represented groups is anticipated. The results of the meeting will be
disseminated and contribute to the enhancement and improvement of scientific and
educational activities.

Website of the conference: http://www.pdmi.ras.ru/EIMI/2014/Sppd/index.html
