
* 1438867
* Exact solvability of the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang stochastic partial differential equation
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 02/20/2014,03/18/2014
* Ivan Corwin,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2016
* USD 105,661.00

The Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) equation is a non-linear stochastic partial
differential equation whose statistical properties are believed to describe a
large class of mathematical models including interacting particle systems,
random growth models, directed polymers, and branching diffusion processes. The
purpose of this project is to make significant progress towards developing a
theory of the exact solvability of the KPZ equation. In particular, this theory
should lead to exact formulas for the probability distributions of the solution
to the KPZ equation when started with various important types of initial data.
This project will involve a number of fields of mathematics and this direction
has already produced results of independent interest to these fields, which
include: Macdonald symmetric function theory, tropical combinatorics and
Whittaker functions, and certain quantum integrable systems. Since its discovery
two hundred years ago the Gaussian distribution (bell curve) has come to
represent one of mathematics greatest societal and scientific contributions ? a
robust theory explaining and analyzing much of the randomness inherent in the
world. Physical and mathematical systems accurately described in terms of
Gaussian statistics are said to be in the Gaussian universality class. This
class, however, is not all encompassing. For example, classical extreme value
statistics or Poisson statistics better capture the randomness and severity of
events ranging from natural disasters to emergency room visits. More recently,
significant research efforts have been focused on understanding systems which
are not well-described in terms of any of the classically developed statistics.
The failure of these systems to conform to classical descriptions is generally
due to a non-linear relationship between natural observables and underlying
sources of random inputs and noise. A variety of models for complex systems such
as growth processes, polymer chains, mass transport, traffic flow, queueing
theory, driven gases, and turbulence have been actively studied for over forty
years in mathematics, physics, material science, chemistry and biology. All of
these systems fail to conform with classical Gaussian statistics, as has been
observed through experimental evidence involving turbulent liquid crystals,
crystal growth on a thin film, facet boundaries, bacteria colony growth, paper
wetting, crack formation, and burning fronts. Surprisingly, despite their
differences, all of the systems fall into a new statistical universality class
whose properties are described in terms of a single model called the Kardar-
Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) equation. The purpose of this project is to develop a
statistical understand of the KPZ equation and its universality class.
