
* 1441513
* Concentration of measure, large deviations, normal approximation and applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2013,06/08/2015
* Sourav Chatterjee,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 309,774.00

It is proposed to study several problems in probability. One class of problems
concerns the phenomenon of localization under the occurrence of a rare event,
with applications to problems ranging from nonlinear dispersive equations to
random graphs. A second class of problems involves cutting-edge issues in
concentration of measure, particularly related to a topic called
"superconcentration". The PI is proposing to writing a book-length monograph on
these topics, compiling a bunch of results that he proved in previous work
together with some new results and ideas. Finally, a third class of problems
centers around a continuation of the proposer's earlier work of normal
approximation in modern problems.

Concentration of measure and large deviations are basic mathematical tools that
are frequently used in statistics, computer science, engineering, physics, and
many other fields. In this proposal, the PI has outlined a plan that may shed
light on some fundamental issues in large deviations and concentration of
measure, with applications to open questions in partial differential equations,
random graphs and networks, and several other topics. The purpose of the
proposed book-length monograph is to elucidate the ideas to a broad audience.
