
* 1449574
* US Travel Support for IHP Trimester in Probability
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 11/15/2014,11/03/2014
* Shannon Starr,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2015
* USD 48,000.00

This travel grant provides support for US researchers participating in the
Institute Henri Poincaré Trimester in Probability titled "Disordered Systems,
Random Spatial Processes, and Some Applications." The trimester comprises four
conferences that will take place between January and April 2015. Hard sciences
such as mathematics and physics thrive on unsolved old and new problems. They
have recently been called to focus on matters traditionally away from their
realm, for instance on questions arising from socio-economic investigations.
This situation presents a new opportunity for growth of the fields. This set of
meetings provides a venue for a range of scientific communities to discuss these
sometimes-controversial topics, toward development of a common and well-grounded
scientific understanding. The two research areas of disordered systems and
random spatial processes have developed in recent years the methodological and
conceptual skills to approach these new applications.

The trimester concerns studies of random spatial processes, disordered systems,
and applications to socio-economic sciences. Spatial probability is concerned
with the investigation of large-scale random structures extended in space-time.
Disordered systems are a natural setting to describe phenomena with multiple
equilibrium states, a situation that now appears to be the norm rather than an
exception. Regarding applications to socio-economic systems, the main theme will
be strongly interacting agent based models, which are extensions of the McFadden
Discrete Choice theory (Nobel Prize in Economy, 2000). Specific models to be
discussed include: Polymer models and self-interacting walks; random walks in a
(dynamically evolving) random environment; two-dimensional models scaling to
stochastic Loewner evolution; random graphs, from the simple Poissonian degree
distribution to the scale-free; the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model; the Edwards-
Anderson model; branching/coagulation processes; directed polymers in random
environment in 1+1 dimensions; and the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) universality
class.

The program website is http://www.ihp.fr/en/CEB/T1-2015
