
* 1449300
* Midwest Probability Colloquium (2014-2016)
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/15/2014,09/01/2016
* Elton Hsu,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 69,000.00

The 36th Midwest Probability Colloquium will be held at Northwestern University
on October 9-11, 2014. The Midwest Probability Colloquium (MPC) is an annual
conference series on probability theory and related topics held every year
during the second weekend (Thursday to Saturday) of October at Northwestern
University. It has been financially supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation for the past 35 years. Northwestern University is the other
major sponsor by providing the meeting venue and staff support. Each year
October is the time just before the hiring season for mathematics Ph.D's and
postdoctors gets earnestly under way. For this reason the conference has always
been eagerly anticipated by graduate students and young researchers all over the
country. It provides them with a great opportunity to interact with senior
mathematicians and to broaden their employment prospects. Among the conferences
of similar nature, the MPC stands out for its unique format in dividing its
program into tutorial and research programs. The speakers of these programs are
selected by a scientific committee elected at the previous year's conference.
They are chosen not only for their outstanding research records but also for
their excellent lecturing style.

Probability theory is a major branch of modern mathematics. It aims at a
rigorous mathematical investigation of collective behavior of random phenomena
and is one of the most applicable branches of mathematics. Mathematical models
established with the aid of probability theory have been successfully applied in
diverse areas such as applied physics, biological science, and finance.
Probabilistic models can be roughly classified into two major classes:
continuous and discrete. The most important representative of the first class is
Brownian motion and general diffusion processes. The second class includes
random walks and percolation models. Besides its wide applications in applied
sciences and social sciences, the last few decades have also seen probabilistic
methods making its sometime unexpected way into other branches of pure
mathematics such as differential geometry, number theory, partial differential
equations, mathematical physics. The common underlying theme for such
applications is that probability theory puts a measure on a space (often a
function space or a configuration space) much larger than original problems
dictate, thus providing much richer structures and selections of tools to solve
original problems. Mathematicians working in probability and related fields are
scattered around the country in universities. It is very important for them to
have a regular forum at which they can exchange ideas and results and keep
informed with the latest development in their respective special areas and to
broaden their research prospects. The annual Midwest Probability Colloquium
provides such a forum and is one of the most successful and longest running
annual meetings of probabilists around the country.

The conference website is at http://www.math.northwestern.edu/mwp/
