
* 1506783
* Long range dependence: The effect of infinite ergodic theoretical structures on limit theorems in probability
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2015,09/14/2020
* Gennady Samorodnitsky,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,001.00

This is a project on stochastic models with heavy tails and long range
dependence. Heavy tails appear when researchers need to model phenomena where
extreme values appear relatively frequently, such as weather, seismology,
finance, social networks, and others. Long range dependence appears when the
memory persists in the system for a long time. This happens in economics,
hydrology, supply chain management, and other areas. Both heavy tails and long
range dependence affect in a major way how the forces in a system interact and
combine. Failure to account appropriately for the heavy tails and long range
dependence can lead to very misleading conclusions about stability and
reliability of the system - underestimating the risks in a financial network, or
underestimating the bottlenecks in a communication network are only two
examples. The interaction of forces in a system with heavy tails and long range
dependence is the subject of the proposal.

This project deals with several interlinked important parts of probability
theory. The first one is that of long range dependence. This has been and
remains an active area of research, into which this proposal introduces a number
of new ideas. Further, limits theorems of the central limit type, as well as
related types, are bread and butter of probability theory, and the present
proposal is likely to introduce an entire new class of such theorems and relate
them to the notion of long range dependence. Next, interplay between the
probability theory and ergodic theory is also classic, but the present proposal
introduces new directions of such interplay, particularly with infinite ergodic
theory. The expected results are, of course, results in probability, but some of
the results can be of interest in ergodic theory itself. Finally, understanding
the structure of non-Gaussian self-similar processes, particularly those with
stationary increments, remains an important and difficult question, and the
present project is likely to introduce new and unexpected families of such
processes and, hence, allow a new point of view on self-similarity.
