
* 1510198
* RUI: Analysis and Control of Infinite Dimensional Queueing Models
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/2015,07/15/2015
* Amber Puha,CA,California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 180,000.00

This project entails investigating some mathematical questions that emerge in
the behavioral analysis of certain queueing models. Queueing models are
probabilistic models that capture the inherent randomness in a variety of modern
networks, such as those that arise in customer service systems, computing and
telecommunications, as well as transportation and hi-tech manufacturing. The
network structure is typically deterministic and the scheduling policy is
usually specified. Randomness results from exogenous arrival times, service
times, and internal routing. Feedback and non-head-of-the-line (HL) scheduling
policies are common in such networks. These local dynamics interact to produce
aggregate behavior that is complex and often evades closed form analysis. Hence,
tractable approximations are needed. The project involves specifying and
validating various model approximations, analyzing their performance and/or
optimal control and interpreting those results for the original system.

More specifically, this project concerns the study of three queueing models with
distinct features presenting unique mathematical challenges as follows:

(1) to develop a diffusion approximation for networks of processor sharing
queues, under general distributional assumptions in the presence of feedback;

(2) to employ nonstandard, distribution dependent scaling to obtain a diffusion
approximation for shortest remaining processing time queues;

(3) to obtain asymptotically optimal scheduling policies for multiclass queues
with abandonment under general distributional assumptions through the study of
fluid control problems.

Each model has been analyzed in various forms that include some Markovian
distributional assumptions (i.e., exponentially distributed interarrival,
service, and/or abandonment times). Such assumptions aren't particularly
realistic for modeling the behavior of modern applications. Furthermore, the
performance can be dramatically different for such systems in the presence of
non-Markovian distributional assumptions. Therefore, system performance needs to
be understood more fully. From a mathematical point of view, general
distributional assumptions result in the need to track significantly more
information in order to track the system state. For example, residual service
times or residual abandonment times for each job in the system must be tracked
in some form. This naturally leads to an infinite dimensional system where
measure-valued state descriptors provide an effective tool for tracking the
system state. In spite of employing this common modeling tool, the nature of the
mathematical challenges are distinct for each model due to the distinct system
dynamics. For processor sharing networks, a new strategy for analyzing the long
time behavior of fluid model solutions will be developed. We anticipate that
this methodology will translate to other systems where time-sharing is present.
For shortest remaining processing time queues, nonstandard distribution
dependent scaling is required to account for the order of magnitude difference
between the queue length and workload processes in heavy traffic. Such behavior
has not been observed for other scheduling policies. For the control of
multiclass queues, new frameworks need to be developed to provide an analysis of
the fluid control problem for generally distributed abandonment times. Such
advances should further help in the analysis of a diffusion control problem.
