
* 1602846
* Stochastic Systems with Complex Interactions and Random Environments
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/2016,05/21/2018
* Timo Seppalainen,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project is fundamental research on mathematical models that describe
complex interactions, growth, and motion in an irregular environment. These
systems show very different features at small scales and at large scales, and it
is important to understand how different rules for small-scale evolution lead to
different large-scale system-wide behavior. Mathematical studies can illuminate
a wide range of processes, including the motion of vehicles, packets in a
communication network, fluid particles in a tube, wetting transitions where
fluid spreads in a porous medium, epidemics advancing in a population, or the
fluctuations of a polymer chain in a fluid. The goal of this project is to
discover general mathematical laws that govern such systems, which are intensely
and concurrently studied by mathematicians, natural scientists, social
scientists, and engineers. Over the long term, understanding these and other
complex interactions has profound implications for science and engineering and
thereby for society. The project involves the training of Ph.D. students through
involvement in the research.

This project studies random paths in random environments and random growth
models. The goal is to describe typical large scale behavior and to quantify
deviations from the typical behavior. The emphasis is on finding universal
principles that apply to classes of models that share fundamental
characteristics. The main direction of the current proposal is to find and
exploit new mathematical structures in these models. These structures are
gradient-like functions called cocycles and Markov processes. These objects are
selected as extrema of variational formulas that describe the limiting free
energies and limit shapes of these models. This project attempts to characterize
features of the limiting objects through the variational formulas. The cocycles
that solve the variational formulas define invariant versions of the models and
can be used to study fluctuations. The overarching goal is to establish
universal properties for models beyond the narrow set of explicitly solvable
cases.
