
* 1606305
* Random Matrix Theory and Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2016,07/12/2018
* Horng-Tzer Yau,MA,Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Classical probability theory was built largely upon modeling systems with no or
weak correlations; random matrix statistics, on the other hand, provide
essentially the only known general laws for highly correlated systems. The
central question for random matrix theory is to determine to what extent random
matrix statistics prevail in random systems. Mathematically, this question is
generally referred to as the universality conjecture, which asserts that random
matrix statistics are independent of the distributions of the matrix elements.
The investigator and collaborators previously studied special cases of this
conjecture. This project will develop this direction further and will study
applications of the universality conjecture to statistics, combinatorics,
mathematical physics, and computer science, bringing together researchers from
probability theory and these other fields. The project is likely to result in
fruitful collaborations with statisticians and computer scientists on the
analysis of large random matrices. The project will also support the training
through research involvement of mathematics graduate students working on
cutting-edge topics in probability theory.

Wigner's vision that the local spectral statistics of large correlated quantum
systems are modeled by random matrix statistics is a groundbreaking idea in
probability theory and statistical physics. The investigator and collaborators
previously proved the universality of the local spectral statistics for both
Wigner and beta ensembles. These results are important first steps in
understanding Wigner's vision. The project's goal is to extend this
understanding to random matrices that have significant physical properties. The
following four projects will be addressed: 1. Optimal relaxation time for Dyson
Brownian motion. 2. Universality of spectral statistics of d-regular graphs for
small d, which is a highly important topic in statistics, computer science, and
large data analysis. 3. Quantum unique ergodicity and universality of band
matrices. This project seeks to show that quantum unique ergodicity and
universality appear essentially concurrently. 4. Local density fluctuation and
linear statistics of Coulomb gases.
