
* 1612758
* Questions in Probability Relating to Mathematical Finance
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2016,09/05/2016
* Philip Protter,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 60,000.00

The award will support the PI's research on mathematical models of financial
bubbles and of insider trading in the stock market. Using mathematical models
one can obtain insights not normally available to mere intuitive knowledge of
the markets, in rough analogy to how one can see more details and learn new
things by looking at the heavens through a telescope rather than with the naked
eye. The PI will treat models of credit risk, and methods currently in use by
practitioners (for example banks and investment houses) to calculate the risk
involved. The research plan makes the informed conjecture that when bubbles are
present, the standard approximations used by financial modelers in the US and
around the world are in fact significantly worse than is currently believed. The
research will draw on delicate techniques in probability theory which have to do
with the availability and flow of information under uncertainty; as a
consequence, new mathematical results will be established which deepen our
understanding of probability. The broader impact which will apply to finance
will potentially result in tools available to bankers, investors, and regulators
to understand and therefore increase national and global financial stability.
The classical way of looking at mathematical models of financial risk uses
reduced-form models and attempts to approximate the hazard rate, which gives the
likelihood of imminent default at a given time. The PI intends to investigate
how fast numerical approximation methods converge for these reduced-form models
in the presence of financial bubbles. This involves the numerical analysis of
solutions of stochastic differential equations when the coefficients are neither
Lipschitz-continuous, nor have linear growth in the space variable, creating
technical challenges which should have significant numerical implications.
