
* 1612589
* Away from Independence: geometrically, algebraically, and physically motivated random matrix ensembles
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2016
* Elizabeth Meckes,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2020
* USD 159,249.00

On the face of it, a matrix is just a box of numbers. But the encoding of
information in the form of matrices is one of the most powerful ideas of modern
mathematics; the language of matrices underpins nearly every area of pure and
applied mathematics, and anchors the frameworks of physics, engineering, and
other sciences. The study of randomly generated matrices is one of the most
exciting areas of mathematics today, with theoretical advances giving us an
ever-growing picture of what "typical" matrices are like, and providing us with
important applications in areas like image compression and the analysis of the
Big Data that surrounds us. In this project, the PI will continue her research
program investigating the behavior of very large random matrices, and how that
behavior depends on the way they are generated; this will advance the theory,
which will help better understand the applications to some of the areas
mentioned above. She will also complete her monograph "The Random Matrix Theory
of the Compact Classical Groups", which gives an overview of what has been
learned about randomly generated matrices with a particular relationship to
high-dimensional geometry; this activity will disseminate difficult technical
knowledge about random matrices to a broad audience. The PI is active in
teaching at all levels, and particularly in mentoring and encouraging girls and
young women interested in mathematical careers; those training and outreach
activities will have great impact on the diversity of those entering STEM
fields.

The monograph mentioned above will describe the remarkable advances in the
theory of Haar-distributed random matrices in recent years. Topics will include
central limit theorems for the entries of principal sub-matrices and for general
lower-dimensional projections, quantitative limit results for the empirical
spectral measures, self-similarity patterns within the eigenvalue distributions,
concentration of measure with geometric applications, including new proofs of
the Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma and Dvoretzky's theorem, and results on the
distribution of the characteristic polynomial, with connections to the Riemann
zeta function. New research projects include the study of random matrices whose
distributions are invariant under rotations in matrix space, continued work on
quantitative approximations of empirical spectral measures for various classes
of random matrices, and in various metrics, and problems in random topology
connected with topological data analysis.
