
* 1612921
* Correlations and Scaling in Disordered and Critical Stochastic Models
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2016,07/20/2016
* Jack Hanson,NY,CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

In many physical systems, large and orderly structures are formed without
distant parts of the system communicating directly. Understanding these
structures is a long-standing challenge in probability theory; this project
focuses on the mathematical study of these structures. One class of these,
percolation, has arisen to study various random networks: for instance,
underground rock formations carrying oil, traffic networks in cities, and
polymer chains. Another class of these, Abelian networks, arose to describe
situations where energy builds up microscopically until it reaches a certain
threshold and then causes a large "avalanche," and has been used to model
earthquakes. A major issue the work under this project will touch on is how
widely-separated (in space or time) parts of the random structure depend on each
other: for instance, how do early topplings in an avalanche influence those
occurring much later? These questions have connections to other important
physical systems as well as to optimization problems from computer science.

The research under this award will study correlations and fluctuations in
disordered systems (first-passage percolation and related disordered magnets)
and critical systems (percolation, and Bak-Tang-Wiesenfeld models also known as
sandpiles). A primary focus in first-passage percolation will be the order of
fluctuations of the random metric and its relationship to properties of
geodesics. In critical percolation, the work will focus on the scaling of the
chemical or graph distance in large finite clusters -- in particular, bounding
the chemical distance exponent in two dimensions. A final focus will be
structural properties of avalanches in the Abelian sandpile model, including the
question of stabilizability of sandpiles in two dimensions.
