
* 1613163
* On Rough Differential Systems and Stochastic Analysis
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2016,05/27/2016
* Samy Tindel,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2020
* USD 207,232.00

Stochastic calculus is a branch of probability theory that aims to study and
interpret differential systems with a noisy input (also called stochastic
differential equations). The most common example of such noisy input is Brownian
motion, which occurs in models throughout science, engineering, and economics.
Within this context, the so-called rough paths theory is a powerful method that
allows one to define noisy systems in a wide variety of situations (well beyond
the Brownian motion case). The rough paths theory also gives an almost-
deterministic point of view on stochastic calculus, as opposed to the
traditional approach, which is highly probabilistic in essence. The term
stochastic analysis usually encompasses both stochastic integration of Itô type
and Malliavin calculus techniques. The latter can be viewed as a way to define
an analysis at the path level; it leads to deep and useful results concerning
stochastic differential equations. This research project aims to combine rough-
paths and Malliavin calculus techniques in order to give a meaning to and then
study noisy partial differential equations that model heat transfer in random
environments. The project will also study the large time behavior of
differential equations driven by a general class of noises, and see how to
statistically identify this kind of system by observing a typical path.

This research project focuses on interactions between rough paths theory,
stochastic partial differential equations (PDE), and Malliavin calculus. A more
specific list of the six subprojects can be structured as follows: (1)
stochastic PDEs, with (a) parabolic Anderson model in rough environment, (b)
parabolic Anderson model in dimension 2, and (c) density for solutions to rough
PDEs; and (2) rough finite-dimensional systems, with (a) ergodic properties for
rough differential equations, (b) estimation procedures for rough stochastic
differential equations, and (c) renormalization of numerical schemes for rough
stochastic differential equations. In all those projects, the principal
investigator will use stochastic analysis methods combined with analysis and
rough paths tools in order to study some new yet very natural classes of
processes. Because even the definition of those objects was far from clear
before the rough path theory was introduced, their study is both motivating and
challenging.
