
* 1613337
* Collaborative Research: Propagation of Dissipation: Stochastic Stabilization in Finite and Infinite Dimensions
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/2016,05/26/2020
* Jonathan Mattingly,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2021
* USD 228,630.00

Randomness is everywhere in modern science and technology. It underlies models
of air turbulence, chemical dynamics, and algorithms for big data. Such models
are often high dimensional or even infinite dimensional, as in the case of
turbulence. Central to understanding these systems is understanding the way both
energy and randomness are spread by nonlinear interactions in the dynamics. This
research project explores a number of directions that exploit both the geometric
and algebraic structures of such systems to better understand these basic
transport phenomena. The investigators will work to understand how such
interactions can lead to stabilization in systems that are unstable in the
absence of randomness. The project includes research participation by graduate,
undergraduate, and high-school students. At the high school level, the
investigators will also work to keep the students' teachers connected with
cutting-edge mathematics, helping them to be more effective and better informed
as teachers. In addition, videos chronicling the student research efforts will
be made in collaboration with a center for documentary films to further
disseminate the experience and broaden the project's impact.

This collaborative research project in stochastic analysis and dynamics will
explore the propagation of noise and dissipation in stochastic systems and their
effects on the existence and structure of stationary states. There is particular
emphasis on effects that occur in stochastic partial differential equations, the
ability of noise to stabilize unstable systems, and non-equilibrium steady-
states in forced systems. Many of the equations to be investigated are physical
models (e.g. from fluid mechanics or non-equilibrium statistical physics) while
other equations to be studied serve as examples that aid in understanding the
underlying mechanisms producing stability or instability in such systems. This
work will build on the investigators' previous work in designing Lyapunov
functions in the finite-dimensional setting of stochastic ordinary differential
equations (SODEs) and establishing practical methods for proving unique
ergodicity and convergence to equilibrium in both the finite-dimensional setting
of SODEs as well as the infinite-dimensional setting of SPDEs. While the
research is anticipated to have immediate implications in fluid mechanics and
statistical physics, the techniques that will result from studying such systems
will be applicable to a wide family of problems in other areas, such as biology,
engineering, physics, and finance, which regularly employ stochastic ordinary
and partial differential equations as modeling tools.
