
* 1613296
* Critical Phenomena and Disorder Effects
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2016,08/17/2018
* Michael Aizenman,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2020
* USD 240,000.00

This award will fund research on the use of mathematical tools from probability
theory to address long-standing questions in the physics of phase transitions,
in an area known as statistical physics. Mathematical versions of the concepts
of phase transitions, threshold behavior, critical phenomena, and scaling limits
have value which is now well recognized in areas which at first sight might have
seemed far from the statistical physics where these concepts originated.
Mathematical studies of such topics have led to fundamental developments in
modern probability theory. In turn, rigorous analysis has provided useful
feedback on our understanding of the relevant physics. Examples of the latter
are found in the disorder effects on phase transitions in two and three
dimensional classical and quantum systems systems (such as the so-called Imry-Ma
phenomenon), and in the spectral and dynamical effects of disorder in the
context of random quantum operators. The PI was instrumental in past works of
this type, including recently, in which he contributed key results which helped
uncover new classical and quantum physical phenomena thanks to studies in
probability theory. The projected research will both continue and redirect the
PI's efforts, and will necessarily continue be interdisciplinary in nature.
Beyond its use of probability theory and mathematical analysis on physics
questions, the results of the research could potentially bring broader impacts
to other areas where modern probability theory is helping elucidate new
phenomena, such as computer science and engineering, and data science. Of
particular note with this project's other broader impacts is the potential for
outcomes of the highest caliber in training the next generation of US
scientists. Based on the PI's past and recent supervision of extraordinarily
talented graduate students and postdocs under NSF support, the project will
certainly allow the PI to offer research experience of the highest level for
such future trainees at Princeton University. Some of the research will be
carried out in collaboration with top researchers from other institutions,
providing valuable networking opportunities for the trainees.

The PI's attention will be redirected towards critical phenomena in a number of
instructive models below their upper critical dimension, a concept whose
understanding was firmly advanced by PI's previous work on percolation, Ising
spin systems and phi^4 field theory. It was recently noted that the techniques
by which the PI has previously established the Gaussian (bosonic) nature of the
Ising model's scaling limits in dimensions greater than four yield also simple
proofs of the fermionic nature of certain correlation functions in the planar
case. Some of these relations have been known through exact solution of the two
dimensional model, but the new argument suggests a path towards explanation of
"universal" emergent planarity in a class of critical non-planar and non-
solvable two dimensional models. Related questions concerning critical phenomena
will be explored for the three-dimensional case, which is neither trivial nor
solvable yet of obvious interest. Work will also continue on classical and
quantum effects of disorder on the spectral and dynamical properties of random
operators, and on the structure of Gibbs equilibrium states of systems with
quenched disorder.
