
* 1613025
* Random, Stochastic, and Self-Similar Equations
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2016,07/18/2016
* Alexander Teplyaev,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

The project contributes to the study of processes in disordered media
(fractals), which have many applications in physics, chemistry, the biological
sciences, and engineering. Diffusion processes in percolation clusters,
vibrations of fractal objects, signal propagation in channels with random
obstacles, electro-magnetic waves in fractal antennae, Rossby waves in
oceanography, models of financial markets are just a few of many examples of
such processes, for which the project will be creating new insights. The project
integrates education and research with undergraduate students, in particular,
REU summer undergraduate research projects, and incorporation of basic
mathematical research in regular university courses. The broader impacts of the
project include the following. The project will contribute to the development of
human resources in science and engineering by teaching undergraduate and
graduate students about frontiers of mathematical research, developing their
understanding of new connections between real world and complicated mathematical
abstractions based on concrete questions that are specifically tailored for this
purpose, and also are natural parts of a broader research program. The project
will include concrete steps to expand participation of underrepresented groups
in mathematical research. All this will enhance overall infrastructure for
research and education.

The existence and uniqueness of self-similar random walks, diffusions, and
Dirichlet forms will be established for a wide class of spaces arising in
various areas of mathematics, such as the limit sets of self-similar groups and
Julia sets. Gaussian and non-Gaussian heat kernel estimates and Green's-function
estimates will be obtained for such spaces. Furthermore, tools will be developed
for the study of measurable Riemannian geometry of rough spaces without
curvature bounds, but instead using symmetric diffusions, Dirichlet forms, and
non-commutative probability. These ideas will be applied to the current problems
of mathematical physics, such as magnetism and quantum waves on fractals, with
the long term goal to understand the physically meaningful path integrals in
fractal and more general non-smooth settings.
