
* 1656377
* Conference Proposal: Semester on KPZ Universality and Directed Polymers
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 01/01/2017,12/09/2016
* Thomas Alberts,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,450.00

The Semester on KPZ Universality and Directed Polymers will be hosted at the
Centre International de Rencontres Mathematiques, in Luminy, France, from
February 1 to July 31, 2017. The purpose of the programme is to bring together
leading researchers from around the world to strengthen our understanding of KPZ
universality. This is one of the most active areas of statistical mechanics and
mathematical physics in the last ten years that is focused on studying the
extremes of highly correlated random systems. Remarkably, the statistics
governing the extremes appear to be universal regardless of the particular
system under consideration, although thus far this has only been understood for
very specific systems. The main focus of the program is to understand the
unifying mechanism behind the universality, motivated by examples from directed
polymer models. This will be done in an interdisciplinary manner using ideas
from statistical mechanics, probability theory, dynamical systems, and partial
differential equations. The intellectual merit of the semester lies in its
potential to establish a cross-fertilization of ideas within different areas of
mathematics and connect these ideas with theoretical physics and other fields of
science. Broader impact will be realized via this exchange of ideas across
disciplines and through the training of a new generation of students to carry on
the work in this important field.

In addition to enabling long-term collaborations between leading researchers,
the semester will allow for the dissemination of new results with a conference
on Qualitative Methods in KPZ Universality (April 24-27, 2017) and a small
groups meeting on Random Walks in Random Environments (March 13-17, 2017).There
will also be a research school on Random Structures in Statistical Mechanics and
Mathematical Physics (March 6-10, 2017) aimed at introducing graduate students
and other junior researchers to this exciting new field. Funds from this
proposal will enable the participation of United States based students and
junior researchers in these programs.

Conference website: khanin-shlosman.weebly.com
