
* 1700494
* The 2017 John Barrett Memorial Lectures -- Mathematical Foundations of Data Science
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 04/01/2017,03/23/2017
* Vasileios Maroulas,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* robert lund
* 03/31/2018
* USD 16,000.00

The 2017 Barrett Lectures, entitled "Mathematical Foundations of Data Sciences,"
will be held May 1-3, 2017 at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville,
Tennessee. Data science has experienced rapid recent development, largely in
response to the challenges associated with massive data sets. The enhanced
ability to collect and store data requires a fundamental change in approaches to
data analysis. Today's big data challenge presents a unique opportunity to
discover new scalable approaches and to expand current theoretical and
computational algorithms. The conference features keynote lectures by Andrea
Bertozzi and Aad van der Vaart. Additionally, a dynamic group of U.S. and
international researchers at different career stages will give invited plenary
talks and poster presentations. This project utilizes NSF funding to support
travel and other participation costs for approximately forty researchers, giving
priority to graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and early career faculty
members.

The 2017 Barrett Lectures will be the 47th installment of a lecture series that
began as a tribute to the distinguished scientist John H. Barrett, head of the
Mathematics Department at the time of his death in 1969. The Lectures are one of
the longest-running mathematical lecture series in the country and are delivered
by distinguished speakers. The focus of the 47th Lectures is the application of
several mathematical methods in topics of data analysis and the growing
penetration of complex physical phenomena and formidable engineering problems
related to big data. A dynamic group of prominent researchers will expose
several research avenues for integrating aspects of our respective (but
seemingly disparate) big data perspectives. These connections will ultimately
deepen our understanding of the emerging methodologies, which are vital for
solving the scientific and engineering problems of the 21st century. Young
researchers, especially, will benefit from exposure to the wide array of
approaches presented at the meeting. More information about the conference is
available at http://www.math.utk.edu/barrett/
