
* 1708908
* Analytical Tools in Probability for Social Choice Theory and Computer Science
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2017,05/02/2017
* Steven Heilman,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2018
* USD 96,465.00

This project seeks to answer the following questions. (1) "How can we design an
election so that the outcome does not change due to miscounted or corrupted
votes?" (2) "What is the best way to cluster data on a computer?" (3) "How can
we understand the geometry of networks?" Questions (1) and (2) can be
reformulated as isoperimetric problems. One example of an isoperimetric problem
asks for the shape of a fence of fixed length that encloses the most area (the
answer being a circular fence, which was known since ancient times). The
specific isoperimetric problems the principal investigator studies can be
phrased as probabilistic problems, and this project develops some new tools from
calculus to deal with these problems. Different versions of Question (1) have
been studied extensively by game theorists in the 1950s and 1960s, but
investigations in theoretical computer science in the last two decades have
given renewed interest for Questions (1), (2), and (3). Generally speaking,
theoretical computer science finds ways for computers to solve problems as
quickly and as efficiently as possible.

This project develops two analytic tools in probability: the calculus of
variations and curvature. Several recent isoperimetric problems in probability
and theoretical computer science such as (1) and (2) ask for the Euclidean sets
of smallest Gaussian perimeter and fixed Gaussian volume. A breakthrough result
of Choksi and Sternberg from 2007 allows the calculus of variations to be
applied to these optimization problems, though others have not yet used
variational tools for these problems. The principal investigator will also
develop theories of curvature for hypercontractive and logarithmic Sobolev
inequalities. For a Riemannian manifold, Ricci curvature bounds imply
logarithmic Sobolev inequalities, a result of Bakry and Emery from 1985. In this
project, different notions of Ricci curvature on random graphs will be
investigated. Theories of Ricci curvature for noncommutative logarithmic Sobolev
inequalities will also be investigated.
