
* 1712701
* Planar First Passage Percolation
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2017,07/20/2020
* Christopher Hoffman,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 270,000.00

Probability theory has proven to be a useful framework for describing many
systems that arise in statistical physics. These systems are often too
complicated to model completely with any computer. Although exact computations
are not possible, mathematics gives us a way to learn about some important
properties of these systems. This research builds on recent advances in a model
from physics known as first passage percolation. In addition to conducting
mathematical research this award will help to develop the nation's scientific
and technological infrastructure by supporting graduate and undergraduate
education. Additionally it will sponsor several talks to help explain
applications of mathematical research to a broader community.

This research considers a large number of questions in first-passage percolation
on the plane. Recently there have been great advances in the study of geodesics
in first-passage percolation using Busemann functions. This research will build
on these results to try to answer central questions in the field that have been
open for decades. These questions include showing that the limiting shape in
independent first-passage percolation is strictly convex and that there are no
bi-infinite geodesics in any fixed direction. This project will help develop the
nation's scientific and technological infrastructure by supporting graduate and
undergraduate education.
