
* 1712862
* Universal Randomness in Dimension 2
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/2017,07/28/2021
* Scott Sheffield,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 620,000.00

This research is in probability theory. It will attempt to make connections
between a number of different probabilistic models that arise in statistical
physics and particle physics. Understanding these connections will result in
improved understanding of the physical models. The PI will train students from
the undergraduate level through the graduate level. He will also assist in the
training of postdoctoral researchers.

This research concerns a variety of random fractals that are in some sense
planar (i.e., naturally embedded in or parameterized by subsets of the plane).
These fractals include random paths, random surfaces, random collections of
loops, random trees, random functions, and random growth processes. The objects
under study are "universal" in the sense that they arise as limits of many
discrete models and "canonical" in the sense that they are uniquely
characterized by special symmetries. Several of these objects are motivated by
statistical mechanics, string theory, and gauge theory, as well as the study of
natural growth processes (lichen, mineral depositions, snowflakes, lightning
bolts, etc.) The specific technical goals of the research include the following:
understanding the limiting conformal structure of discrete planar maps,
generalizing quantum Loewner evolution growth models beyond the regime in which
they have been defined, endowing general Liouville quantum gravity surfaces with
metric structure, extending known results about random surface scaling limits to
random surfaces embedded in higher dimensional spaces, and understanding more
about the relationship between lattice Yang-Mills gauge theory (and its
variants) and the random surface models that arise in the formulas for Wilson
loop expectations. The broader aim is to provide a firmer mathematical
understanding of some of our most fundamental models for physical phenomena,
ranging from microscopic to macroscopic scales.
