
* 1712632
* Large Scale Phenomena in Models of Statistical Mechanics
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2017,06/28/2017
* Marek Biskup,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2021
* USD 270,000.00

The quantitative description of many natural phenomena, as well as modeling and
forecasting, is invariably rooted in rigorous mathematics. Probability turns out
to be a particularly useful tool as it has, by its very nature, the means to
deal with systems consisting of a large number of individual constituents. The
present project addresses questions that arise at the interface of probability
and statistical mechanics whose common feature is a simple definition,
interesting physical phenomena and a substantive challenge for mathematics. The
specific problems start with the consideration of complex microscopic systems
such as interacting random fields, random walks, local times and percolation.
Their analysis aims to demonstrate that, under the conditions when the system
size tends to infinity, a new structure, or a new degree of regularity,
naturally emerges. The resulting object, often referred to as the scaling limit,
is then studied using the methods of analysis. A crucial point is that many
microscopic systems lead to the same scaling limit. This fact, sometimes
referred to as universality, is one of the cornerstones of our understanding of
large systems. The project also includes education and training of students.

The project is naturally divided into three specific subject areas. The first of
these concerns the extrema of logarithmically-correlated spatial processes. The
goal here is to establish a level of universality of the recent findings for the
Gaussian Free Field by extending them to other processes such as the local time
of random walks and gradient fields. Gradient fields are then to be studied also
in their own right in a number of specific contexts. The unifying theme here is
to find ways to get around the restriction of the existing theory to strictly
convex interactions. The third area focuses on more traditional subjects of
bootstrap percolation, where the goal is to use scaling-limit ideas to establish
a sharp threshold in a disordered model, and positional long-range order, where
the aim is to prove crystallization in a specific model of an interacting gas.
The stated problems draw on recent advances in the field, some of which are due
to PI, and they bear strong connections to the theory of disordered systems,
extreme-order statistics, random geometry, homogenization, etc. Each of the
subareas has clearly delineated objectives of varied level of difficulty. Many
of these have been designed with the aim to include graduate students and
postdocs in research.
