
* 1712974
* Stochastic Network Dynamics: Approximation, Analysis and Control
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2017,01/16/2020
* Ruth Williams,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Stochastic models of complex networks with dynamic interactions arise in a wide
variety of applications in science and engineering. Specific instances include
biochemical reaction networks, high-tech manufacturing, computer systems,
telecommunications, transportation and business service systems. The analysis
and control of such complex stochastic networks require solving challenging
mathematical problems. This award supports research on solving such mathematical
problems. Some of the work involves the development of general theory for broad
classes of stochastic networks, while others focus on mathematical problems
directly motivated by specific applications. Since the complexity of stochastic
networks usually precludes exact analysis of detailed "microscopic" models, the
focus is on formulating and analyzing more tractable approximations. New
techniques and results will be developed in such a way that they can be used by
applied researchers in areas of application. The results of this research will
be disseminated through publication in peer reviewed journals, by posting on the
University of California's open access website and by presentations at
mathematics, science and engineering conferences. The PI will help train new
mathematics researchers through collaboration with early career researchers.

The research addresses mathematical problems associated with the analysis and
control of stochastic network dynamics. Topics to be addressed include rigorous
justification of approximations, analyzing and controlling the behavior of the
approximate models, and interpreting the results for the original microscopic
models. Two levels of approximation are considered: first order approximations
called fluid models, and second order approximations which frequently are
diffusion models. An important subtheme is understanding the interplay between
levels of approximation. Five topics are proposed for study: diffusion
approximations for (bio)chemical reaction networks, analysis of processor
sharing networks, congestion control and resource entrainment in data networks,
networks with random order of service and reneging, and dynamic control of
stochastic processing networks. Some stochastic process aspects of these topics
include rates of convergence in the approximation of density dependent Markov
chains by reflected diffusion processes, analysis of measure-valued processes
used to track residual job sizes or ages of jobs in stochastic network models
with resource sharing, singular diffusion control problems, foundational
questions for reflected processes, and numerical approximation of reflected
diffusion processes in non-smooth domains. This award will support the training
of early career researchers and underrepresented minorities through direct
support of a female graduate student, and through collaboration of the PI with
one early career researcher and one female researcher who is at a non-PhD
granting institution.
