
* 1712729
* Operator Limits of Random Matrices
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2017,04/25/2022
* Brian Rider,PA,Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 190,001.00

Random matrix theory grew out of fundamental considerations in mathematical
statistics and theoretical physics, and now has applications in such disparate
areas as number theory, statistical mechanics, wireless communications and
bioinformatics. A perfect example of the field's reach is offered by the so-
called Tracy-Widom laws. First discovered in the description of the largest
eigenvalues for certain large random matrices, these laws are now understood to
serve the role of the "bell curve" (or provide the appropriate central limit
theorem) for a wide area of modern nonlinear phenomena. The main objective of
this research is to advance our understanding of these and other probability
laws introduced through the study of random matrices. The focus is on their
basic mathematical properties, as well as extending the class of models in which
they apply.

The research builds in part on the PI's recent work on the general beta
extensions of the Tracy-Widom and related distributions. These extensions have
the advantage of embedding the more familiar triple(s) of limit laws (tied to
the orthogonal, unitary and symplectic symmetry classes) into a one-parameter
family of distributions defined via random differential operators. The main goal
here is to push this approach toward descriptions of more exotic limit theorems,
such as the higher order Tracy-Widom laws and various double scaling regimes
(again in the general beta context). Additional projects center around a
recently established matrix version of the classical Dufresne identity for
integrated geometric Brownian motion as well as solvable matrix models which
interpolate between the Gaussian Orthogonal and Symplectic Ensembles and can be
viewed as multi-type coulomb gases.
