
* 1749103
* CAREER: Stochastic processes and embeddings on networks
* DMS,PROBABILITY, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2017,06/22/2021
* Allan Sly,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2022
* USD 325,486.00

Random processes on networks play a major role in a wide range of areas
including mathematical physics, machine learning, and theoretical computer
science. One such question we will address involves analysing algorithms for
detecting sub-communities within a social network by investigating the graph of
friendship relations. The proposal addresses questions from combinatorics and
computer science about when random combinatorial and computational problems have
solutions, such as when there is a colouring in a random graph. Ideas from
statistical physics give predictions for these thresholds which we will
mathematically prove. It also studies questions of how long it takes random
processes on networks, such as the Glauber dynamics Markov chain, to reach their
equilibrium distribution and how this depends on their initial starting
position. Such processes are used as algorithms for sampling high dimensional
distributions. The proposal focuses on development of mathematical theory with a
view to better understanding these problems. Finally the proposal will support
the development of new graduate courses in discrete probability and stochastic
process on random graphs as well as providing research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate researchers.

The main theme of this proposal is the development of new theory and
applications across a range of stochastic processes on networks. One aspect
involves studying phase transitions of Gibbs measures on random graphs,
particularly random constraint satisfaction problems. Here we hope to establish
conjectures from statistical physics for a range of models such as the chromatic
and independence numbers on random graphs. A second theme is the development of
new tools for establishing rough isometries and other geometric notions of
closeness between random metric spaces. In particular we will consider whether
independent copies of Poisson processes, percolation clusters and SLE curves are
rough isometries or quasi-symmetries. Finally the proposal will consider Markov
random fields such as the Ising model on lattices. At high temperatures it will
consider the question of universality of the cutoff phenomena as well as the
effect of different initial conditions on the mixing time. At low temperatures
it will pursue a better understanding of Ising interfaces in order to establish
rapid mixing results.
