
* 1810500
* Eigenvectors of Large-Dimensional Random Matrices and Graphs
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2018,04/04/2022
* Sean O'Rourke,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 81,533.00

Modern society produces massive amounts of data, much of which needs to be
analyzed and categorized to make informed decisions. This project is motivated
by fundamental questions that arise naturally in the study and analysis of large
datasets; some examples where such questions arise include the detection of
community structure in large-scale networks and the reduction of large
oversampled datasets to smaller, more manageable collections from which
inferences can be made. Designing, analyzing, and studying algorithms for these
tasks often rely on random graph and random matrix theory. For example, studies
have shown that many important networks (such as social networks, biological
networks, and power networks) can be modeled by random graphs. This project will
develop theoretical results concerning the eigenvectors of such objects, which
will help engineers and scientists implement algorithms and make reliable
inferences from large datasets.

This research project builds in part on the investigator's recent work to obtain
a clear picture of the properties and behaviors of eigenvectors of large
matrices, including those of a very discrete nature (for example, the adjacency
matrix of random graphs). Some of the topics considered include the study of
eigenvectors of Wigner matrices as well as the behavior of eigenvectors for
perturbed Wigner matrices. Such questions are motivated by a diverse collection
of applications including community detection, matrix completion, and matrix
sparsification. To address these problems, the investigator will develop and
utilize a collection of techniques including analytic techniques (e.g.,
resolvent techniques, concentration of measure), algebraic tools (e.g., linear
algebra), and probabilistic methods (e.g., Littlewood-Offord theory).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
