
* 1811444
* Asymptotic Problems in Random Dynamics
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2018,05/14/2020
* Yuri Bakhtin,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The influence of noise must be taken into account for adequate modeling of the
behavior of various natural phenomena studied in physics, life sciences, queuing
systems, finance, etc. This project is centered around the analysis of long-term
behavior of random dynamical systems that can be described by answering the
following questions: does the fundamental procedure of averaging large sequences
of measurements make sense? what do the results depend on and how? Answering
these questions is based on studying statistically stationary regimes of the
system's evolution. This project is targeted at existence/nonexistence of such
statistically stationary regimes, their description and behavior for several
types of random dynamical systems arising in various applications from traffic
to neuronal systems to the large-scale structure of the Universe: (i) randomly
forced Hamilton-Jacobi equations; (ii) small random perturbations of dynamical
systems with multiple instabilities; (iii) systems with random switching.

For general randomly forced Hamilton-Jacobi equations, the PI proposes to obtain
a description of the global behavior in terms of one-sided action minimizers and
their positive temperature counterparts, thermodynamic one-sided limits for
directed polymers. For this, the PI proposes an extension of the notion of the
directed polymer from quadratic to general Hamiltonians. Further questions that
the PI will address are: localization/delocalization, characteristic exponents,
the renormalization group associated with the flow of monotone transformations
defined by global solutions, the fixed points of this renormalization group and
simplified discrete models, statistics of shock magnitudes and ages. Small noisy
perturbations will mainly be studied for dynamical systems with heteroclinic
networks, consisting of multiple unstable equilibria connected to each other by
heteroclinic orbits, on much longer time scales than those already studied in
the literature. This will allow to make conclusions about the behavior of
invariant distributions and approach homogenization questions. For this, the
mechanism of unlikely transitions in the network and the associated time scales
will be studied in detail. The small scale analysis of the involved random
variables will involve Malliavin calculus. For systems with random switchings,
the previous work showed that under broad HÃ¶rmander-type hypoellipticity
conditions, these systems have a unique invariant measure and this measure is
absolutely continuous. Obtaining further regularity of the invariant density,
studying its smoothness and the character of singularities turned out to be a
hard problem. The recent progress by the PI and coauthors provides tools that
will be used to approach general hypoelliptic switching systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
