
* 1812114
* Spectral Properties of Random Matrices
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/2018,04/01/2020
* Paul Bourgade,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project will advance our knowledge of random matrices, a set of operators
that serves as a paradigm for many high-dimensional systems. While the Gaussian
distribution emerges universally from probabilistic models exhibiting
independence, random matrix statistics appear from correlated systems, so that
the scope of their applications have considerably expanded recently. For
example, integrable systems, growth models, analytic number theory and quantum
mechanics exhibit random matrix statistics. Moreover, random matrix techniques
have improved our theoretical understanding of numerical analysis and deep
learning networks.

Methods from probability (random walks and coupling), analysis (homogenization)
and mathematical physics (loop equations) were recently advanced in connection
with spectral analysis of random matrices, to prove eigenvalues and eigenvectors
universality. The PI will further develop such tools for the following problems:
(1) Delocalization for band matrices. The PI aims at understanding universality
beyond mean field models. One key question concerns band matrices in dimension 1
up to the ``Anderson'' transition. A recent approach to this problem involves a
mean field reduction and the connection with quantum unique ergodicity, and it
will be developed further; (2) Universality of extremal statistics. This
includes extreme spectral spacings, large values of the characteristic
polynomial, fluctuations of individual eigenvalues and more generally universal
aspects of log-correlated random fields; (3) Coulomb gases, the Gaussian free
field and Gaussian multiplicative chaos. Recent progress gave convergence of the
electric field of 2D Coulomb gases to the Gaussian free field. A natural
extension concerns convergence of the characteristic polynomial to Gaussian
multiplicative chaos; (4) Eigenvectors of non-Hermitian random matrices.
Physicists predicted in the 1990s the typical size of overlaps between
eigenvectors from the Ginibre ensemble. This was recently upgraded to an
explicit limiting distribution of diagonal overlaps, and to correlations of off-
diagonal overlaps. Extension of this new integrability to the joint law of all
overlaps will be studied.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
