
* 1812148
* Mathematical Models for Understanding the Effect of Long-Range Interactions and Intervention Measures on the Spread of Epidemics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2018,07/29/2019
* Shirshendu Chatterjee,NY,CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Developing efficient and cost-effective intervention and monitoring strategies
for preventing the spread of infection in the plant and human world requires an
understanding of the underlying mechanisms by which infection spreads spatially
and temporally, and of the quantitative effect of different intervention
strategies. In the case of plant pathogens, long-distance dispersal phenomena
and spatial heterogeneity of infection spreading can lead to failure of disease-
control strategies that are based on naive models. Furthermore, such weak
control strategies are often uneconomical and use copious amounts of pesticides
on crops. In the case of human-contagious diseases, better intervention
strategies can be developed if quantitative effects of quarantine are known. By
analyzing spatial epidemic models with long-distance dispersal and certain
intervention strategies, this research project aims to provide new insights into
the mechanistic underpinning of dispersal on features of plant epidemics, and
into the effects of quarantine strategies on restraining the spread of
contagious infection among humans. To guarantee that the results are relevant to
epidemiology, a part of the project will be carried out in collaboration with
ecologists and epidemiologists. The involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students in this research will enhance their ability to work at the interface
between mathematics and biology. This project addresses challenges in developing
more effective and economical intervention strategies for preventing the spread
of infection in the plant and human world. Most of the epidemic models that have
been analyzed rigorously to investigate the role of space in infection spreading
are nearest-neighbor in nature. However, there are many plant diseases where the
infection spreads via long-distance dispersals. To understand the effect of
long-distance dispersal on infection spreading, several complex agent-based
models have been analyzed using simulation and some heuristic methods in the
theoretical biology literature. These non-rigorous treatments of the epidemic
models sometimes lead to erroneous conclusions. One of the primary goals of this
project is to understand rigorously the effect of long-range interactions on the
spread of infections and associated features. In this project, the investigator
plans to study several aspects of long-range first-passage percolation models by
adding "long-range interaction" features to the standard (nearest-neighbor)
first-passage percolation models. The investigator also plans to study
intervention strategies for SIS models, which are frequently used for modeling
spread of recurring disease among humans, in one dimension and on complex
heterogeneous graphs. The rigorous analyses of these models will require the
development of novel mathematical techniques. These techniques are expected to
lead to a deeper understanding of a broad class of spatial stochastic epidemic
models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
