
* 1855523
* Degenerate Diffusions and Related Heat Kernel Estimates
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2019,07/14/2020
* Jing Wang,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 120,000.00

This research project lies at the intersection of several areas of mathematics:
probability, analysis and differential geometry. The PI will work on problems
related to diffusion processes and their heat kernels in degenerate geometric
settings, merging tools of the three mentioned areas. Some of the problems are
pertinent to various applied fields, including mathematical finance, control of
dynamic systems, machine learning, and others. The PI will integrate her
research expertise into teaching probability courses, mentoring students, and
organizing conferences. The PI will also continue her effort in encouraging
women and other underrepresented groups in math. The project focuses on random
diffusion processes that are subject to a priori non-holonomic constraints which
can perfectly fit into the framework of sub-Riemannian geometry. A recurring
theme of proposed topics is the interaction between the underlying geometric
structure and the limiting behaviors of the associated Markov processes. The
project is primarily concerned with three topics. The first is to study
stochastic processes and the explicit heat kernel on sub-Riemannian model
spaces, which provides great examples and strong intuition for the understanding
of general cases. The second topic concerns the limiting behaviors -in both
small and large time scale -of a general degenerate diffusion process, which
reflect the underlying geometric information of geodesic and Ricci curvature
bound respectively. The third topic is to study the heat content of bounded
domains in a sub-Riemannian manifold, which reveals the geometry of the domain
such as surface area and total mean curvature of the boundary.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
