
* 1855439
* Collaborative Research: Asymptotic Geometry and Analysis of Stochastic Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2019,04/04/2019
* Davar Khoshnevisan,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,073.00

This project is concerned with the development of a geometric/analytic theory of
random fields, primarily those that arise from stochastic partial differential
equations [SPDEs, for short]. Special emphasis is placed on certain SPDEs and
related random fields that play a central role in various areas of pure and
applied mathematics, mathematical oceanography, stochastic hydrology,
geostatistics, and mathematical physics. The investigators will develop
probabilistic, geometric, and analytic tools that will lead to a deeper
understanding of a large family of physically- and mathematically-interesting
SPDEs and related random fields. The investigators believe that these tools will
have sufficient novelty to open new research areas, solve a number of long-
standing open problems in the theory of SPDEs and related random fields, and
also further promote their applicability. In addition, the activities include a
sustained program to train graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, and to
develop their careers in the mathematical and statistical sciences.

It is both significant and challenging to characterize the fine local and
asymptotic structure of SPDEs and related random fields. In their past
investigations, the investigators have established a series of results on the
asymptotic behavior, intermittency, and macroscopic-scale multifractal
properties of the solutions of SPDEs and related random fields, developed
potential theories for additive Levy processes and the Brownian sheet, and used
them to resolve several outstanding open problems in Levy processes, the
Brownian sheet, and the theory of parabolic stochastic partial differential
equations. The investigators have developed ideas, based on probability theory
and geometric measure theory, for the analysis of non-Markovian Gaussian and
stable random fields. They have also introduced renewal-theoretic and coupling
techniques for the asymptotic analysis of solutions to a large class of
nonlinear SPDEs. They plan to continue their investigation of precise
quantitative connections between SPDEs, random fields, potential theory, and the
geometry of random fractals. They believe that further pursuit of these
connections will ultimately yield novel insights into the structure of
SPDEs,large-scale physical multifractals, and related random fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
