
* 1855694
* High-dimensional probability in ergodic theory and statistical physics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2019,04/19/2021
* Timothy Austin,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 270,000.00

In mathematical probability theory, stationary stochastic processes model
phenomena that reveal new, unpredictable outcomes as time passes, but whose
underlying probability laws remain constant: consider, most simply, the repeated
tossing of a coin. Ergodic theory studies abstractly what kinds of randomness
are possible in such a process, where two processes are regarded as equivalent
if either can be obtained by a suitable encoding of the other. However, many
random phenomena of great importance in modern coding theory, statistics, and
data science do not arise in the linear fashion that is dictated by the arrow of
time in a stationary process. Rather, they are structured according to a large
underlying network, which may itself be highly disordered. The current project
seeks to adapt methods of ergodic theory to this new setting or understand why
they fail and then develop replacements. For models of randomness governed by
underlying disordered networks, some of the main issues to be investigated
include: (i) whether the broad statistical features scale in a simple way with
the size of the network; (ii) whether the random behavior that is visible at a
particular node of the network can be estimated easily from the parameters of
the model; (iii) how one can determine effectively whether a given model of
network randomness can be re-encoded in some simpler form, such as pure
independent noise at each node. All of these issues arise in the theoretical
underpinnings of modern research in computer and data science and could serve as
a guide towards new discoveries in those fields. The pursuit of these questions
requires background knowledge from diverse parts of probability and pure
mathematics, and so the current project includes plans to develop educational
materials and train graduate students in a novel but valuable mix of those
disciplines.

The project has two more specific aims. The first is the further development of
the methods in the principal investigator's recent proof of the weak Pinsker
theorem in ergodic theory. This theorem asserts that any stationary ergodic
process may be re-encoded, in the sense of measure-theoretic isomorphism, into a
nearly deterministic component and a purely random component. The methods from
the proof apply to the joint distribution of a stationary sequence of random
variables, deriving a structural description from some basic information-
theoretic parameters of a joint distribution. Such implications are still in
their infancy, and the proposed project would explore a range of related
parameters and their consequences. The second aim concerns the broad and
important class of joint distributions in combinatorics and statistical physics
that are constructed over locally tree-like graphs. These models provide
examples of measure-preserving actions of free groups, and conversely methods
from free-group ergodic theory help to describe their asymptotic behavior. The
physics literature predicts novel and consequential phenomena such as shattering
and condensation, but only a few special cases have been established rigorously.
The project will explore these phenomena using notions and methods from ergodic
theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
