
* 1855417
* Stochastic Systems for Interacting Populations
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/20/2018,10/16/2018
* Wai Fan,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2022
* USD 129,073.00

This research project investigates probability questions arising in the study of
population dynamics and genealogies with multi-species interactions. The latter
study is a key to understanding biodiversity in ecosystems, epidemiological
spread, heterogeneity of cancer tumors, and the mechanisms underlying many
complex systems in nature. This project is the first step towards the
development of more refined models that not only address standing questions in
virology and ecology, but also catalyze the generation of new mathematical
methods. The involvement of undergraduate students in stochastic analysis and
simulations will enhance their ability to work at the interface between
probability and applied sciences.

The principal investigator aims to design various spatial stochastic models,
including nonstandard interacting particle systems, interacting superprocesses,
and coupled stochastic partial differential equations on general metric graphs,
to contribute to a deeper understanding of the effect of spatial structures and
randomness on various population dynamics and their genealogies in different
scales of observation. New challenges arise in the study of well-posedness and
time asymptotic properties of these models. The project will focus on two
research directions. (i) Explore new connections among these models. Outcomes of
this research are expected to include scaling limit theorems and duality
formulas that rigorously justify the new connections. (ii) Study the long-time
behavior of these spatial stochastic models. New probabilistic methods will be
developed to compute quantities of interest, such as the asymptotic shape of
competition outcome and the propagation speeds of travelling waves on networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
