
* 1855788
* Complex Stochastic Systems and the Effect of Discretization
* DMS,PROBABILITY, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/01/2019,07/15/2021
* Arnab Ganguly,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 206,822.00

Ubiquitous presence of randomness in behaviors of various physical and
biological systems is universally acknowledged. For example, cellular processes,
fluctuations in stock prices, weather patterns, movement of microscopic
particles exhibit different types of random behaviors. Furthermore, randomness
is a vital ingredient in most modern algorithms that are popular in data-
science. Hence, it is of fundamental importance that various types of randomness
are properly characterized for detailed understanding of system properties.
Mathematical models incorporating such randomness are typically expressed in
terms of stochastic equations, which often have complex dynamics. An important
component of mathematical studies of these equations includes computer
simulations of their temporal evolution, which are necessary for understanding
their behavioral patterns over time. Accurate statistical estimation of some key
parameters of these stochastic equations from observed data is also crucial, as
it leads to the "most appropriate mathematical model" underlying these data
points. This in turn leads to better predictive power of such models. The
research supported by this award will undertake proper mathematical analyses of
various numerical schemes that are used for these purposes. More specifically,
research in this direction will involve precise calculations of probabilities of
getting accurate results from these schemes and will describe conditions under
which these probabilities are very high. There is a critical need for such
theoretical results, since they will inevitably lead to design of faster and
more efficient algorithms, which in turn will be beneficial to society. The
project will involve undergraduate and graduate students and will help them to
gain valuable analytical and computational skills. The results of the project
will be published in well-known scientific journals and will also be presented
at domestic and international conferences. The research will focus on the
limiting behaviors of complex stochastic systems discretized by properly scaled
step sizes. Discretization is at the heart of various numerical schemes, but its
effect on the desired convergence properties is not always clearly understood.
For example, it is well known that approximating stationary distribution of an
ergodic stochastic differential equation (SDE) by time averages of sample paths
obtained from an Euler-Maruyama type discretization scheme (using fixed step-
size) could be problematic. In particular, such an estimator will have a bias,
which may or may not be quantifiable. These are infinite-time horizon problems,
and there is a deficit of proper asymptotic results in this direction even for
regular Ito-diffusions. Exploring proper scaling techniques to get desired
convergence along with convergence rates for such discretization-based schemes
is the central goal of this project. Stochastic models that will be considered
covers switching jump-diffusion models, multiscale systems and systems of
interacting SDEs with possible jumps. The last class is particularly important
for understanding particle-based methods for approximating nonlinear integro-
differential equations including Boltzmann-type equations. These equations are
connected to appropriate systems of interacting SDEs with jumps through McKean-
Vlasov type limits. The stochastic equations of interest will also include
Langevin SDEs, which model dynamics of molecular systems in presence of particle
interaction potential, damping and random forces, and which also play a pivotal
role in certain Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms. The research puts special
emphasis on large deviation asymptotics of error probabilities, which,
importantly, because of presence of both upper and lower bounds, give the
optimal exponential decay rate. This project is jointly funded by Probability
program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
