
* 1916547
* Conference: 40th International Conference on Quantum Probability and Infinite Dimensional Analysis
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2019,08/24/2022
* Aurel Stan,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This award will provide partial funding for ``The 40th International Conference
on Quantum Probability and Infinite Dimensional Analysis", in the period August
12-16, 2019, at The Ohio State University Campus in Columbus. This conference
represents the Annual International Meeting of the Association of Quantum
Probability and Infinite Dimensional Analysis (AQPIDA). It will be the first
Quantum Probability Meeting organized in the United States. AQPIDA was
established with the intention of promoting the area of Quantum Probability, a
mathematical field started by the efforts of John von Neumann, almost
simultaneously as Classic Probability was founded by Andrey Kolmogorov. The
development of Classic Probability was very fast, but the progress in Quantum
Probability was much slower. In the last two decades, great advancement was made
in Quantum Probability, specially by mathematicians from Italy, Japan, Korea,
and Poland. Our main objective, for organizing this meeting in the United
States, is to promote Quantum Probability among the American mathematicians and
scientists. This conference will also give the opportunity to mathematicians
working in Classic and Quantum Probability to come together, discuss problems
that are of common interest for both groups of people, and eliminate the
artificial barriers that separate the two fields. Among the invited people,
there are also several physicists, and this will contribute to the refreshing of
the traditional collaboration that existed in the past among mathematicians and
physicists.

Strict mathematical objectives include: codifying properties of probability
measures, having finite moments of all orders, in terms of their quantum
operators: creation, annihilation, and preservation operators, understanding how
the commutation relationships that exist among the quantum operators can lead to
new physical interpretations about interacting systems, making progress in
understanding the quantum Markov chains or fields, understanding how the
commutation relationships among the quantum operators affect the kernels of
second quantization operators and Wick products, using the kernels to prove
sharp inequalities about the norms of Wick products and hypercontractivity
inequalities involving the second quantization operators, making progress in
understanding the connections of instantons with the ``exotic Laplacians"
(higher order Levy Laplacians), making progress in the development of the theory
of quantum Markov semi-groups and of their generators, making progress in the
study of quantum networks, and making progress toward building a reliable
quantum computer.

The web-site of the conference is the following:
https://osumarion.osu.edu/events/icqp.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
