
* 1916351
* Collaborative Research: Asymptotic Statistical Inference for High-dimensional Time Series
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS
* 08/01/2019,07/18/2019
* Wei Biao Wu,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 190,000.00

The information era has witnessed an explosion in the collection of high
dimensional time series data across a wide range of areas, including finance,
signal processing, neuroscience, meteorology, seismology, among others. For low
dimensional time series, there is a well-developed estimation and inference
theory. Inference theory in the high dimensional setting is of fundamental
importance and has wide applications, but has been rarely studied. Researchers
face a number of challenges in solving real-world problems: (i) complex dynamics
of data generating systems, (ii) temporal and cross-sectional dependencies,
(iii) high dimensionality and (iv) non-Gaussian distributions. The goal of this
project is to develop and advance inference theory for high dimensional time
series data by concerning all the above characteristics. The project will
provide training to graduate students and publicly avaialble statistical
packages.

This project involves developing a systematic asymptotic theory for estimation
and inference for high dimensional time series, including parameter estimation,
construction of simultaneous confidence intervals, prediction, model selection,
Granger causality test, hypothesis testing, and spectral domain estimation. To
this end, a new methodology for the estimation of parameters and second-order
characteristics for high dimensional time series will be proposed. New tools and
concentration inequalities for the asymptotic analysis of high-dimensional time
series will be developed. To perform simultaneous inference and significance
testing, the PIs will investigate the very deep Gaussian approximation problem
and the high dimensional central limit theorems by taking both high
dimensionality and temporal and cross-sectional dependencies into account.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
