
* 1940092
* CAREER: Phase Transitions in Randomized Combinatorial Search and Optimization Problems
* DMS,PROBABILITY, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 06/01/2019,07/13/2022
* Nike Sun,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,928.00

This project centers on constraint satisfaction problems (csps) - archetypal
examples of combinatorial search/optimization problems - with a principal aim of
building mathematical theory for these problems. A further objective is to
promote connections to statistical physics and computer science, where random
csps are fundamental models. Indeed, recent progress on random csps has
crucially relied on the exchange of ideas among several disciplines:
probability, statistical physics, combinatorics, and computer science. The
proposed research will endeavor to advance this dialogue, which has potential to
open new research avenues in those disciplines. The proposed research is
interdisciplinary in nature: its primary focus is in the development of
probability theory, but it is expected that the research approach will be much
influenced by developments in statistical physics and computer science. The
educational component of the proposal seeks to further promote this
interdisciplinary aspect, in classroom education as well as in mentorship of
graduate students. With the proliferation of statistical inference problems on
large datasets, the development of fast algorithms for combinatorial problems
becomes an increasingly urgent problem. At the same time it becomes more
important to quantify fundamental barriers in these problems, in terms of
information-theoretic and algorithmic limits. This study is complemented by
proposing to develop more robust techniques to handle a wider range of problems,
including some concrete problems of interest for network theory and machine
learning. The educational component involves curriculum development at
undergraduate and graduate levels, graduate special topic course development,
and mentoring graduate students and postdocs.

Combinatorial search/optimization problems are prominent in a wide range of
scientific contexts. Broadly, the defining feature of these problems is that the
a priori solution requires exhaustive search over a combinatorial state space
such as {0,1}^n. A major challenge is that many such problems are expected to be
computationally intractable in worst-case instances (np-hard). In response to
this, significant attention has been directed towards random problem instances -
they represent natural average-case scenarios, and serve as a useful practical
benchmark. A deeper understanding of obstacles in the random setting has
potential to inspire algorithmic advances. Practical considerations aside,
random problem instances are of deep theoretical interest, and full of rich
connections among diverse fields of research. In probability theory, random csps
have contributed numerous long-standing open problems - especially ones
concerning various phase transitions, conjectured either from numerical
simulations or from physical heuristics. A notable problem of this type is the
location of sharp satisfiability thresholds. It is a widely held belief that for
many random csps, the solution space has a complicated geometric structure; and
that this is precisely what obstructs standard probabilistic approaches for
analyzing phase transitions. Moreover, it is conjectured that essential features
of the solution space geometry are universal to a large class of random csps.
Some components of this conjectural picture have been validated by recent
progress in the theory of random csps, including results on satisfiability
thresholds and partition function asymptotics. However, many key aspects of this
picture - particularly ones relevant to algorithmic challenges - remain at the
level of conjecture. One of the main goals of the current project is to shed
light on these questions: to this end, specific research problems are posed
regarding asymptotic properties of the solution space (in the search context)
and energy landscape (in the optimization context).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
