
* 1945172
* Career: Various Geometric Aspects of Kardar-Parisi-Zhang Universality: Fractal Dimensions, Noise Sensitivity, Line Ensembles, and Large Deviations.
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2020,07/05/2022
* Shirshendu Ganguly,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 232,829.00

Many growth models exhibiting a global smoothing in presence of local roughening
are predicted to behave in the same way as a canonical non-linear stochastic
partial differential equation known as the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) equation.
Although some remarkable bijections to algebraic objects such as random
matrices, Young diagrams and so on have led to a series of breakthroughs in the
mathematical verification of some of the predictions, many of the current
techniques based on integrable probability are not sufficient by themselves to
analyze some of the fundamental geometric properties of such systems. Continuing
an ongoing program to couple the integrable approach with a primarily
probabilistic and geometric perspective, the PI lays down a comprehensive plan
to investigate several aspects of such models which will fundamentally improve
our understanding and initiate new research directions. The program also has a
strong education component including mentoring graduate students and postdocs,
and curriculum development at undergraduate and graduate levels, aiming to
create multiple advanced research topics courses, and design the probability
content in foundational undergraduate courses. Various educational and
dissemination strategies including workshop organizing, writing survey articles,
teaching summer courses will be carried out as well.

A canonical model of growth predicted to be in the KPZ universality class is the
model of planar Last Passage Percolation (LPP) which puts random weights on the
vertices of a planar lattice and considers paths between vertices which accrue
maximum weights. Such maximal paths called geodesics are fundamental objects of
study. Besides further developing the picture of coalescence of geodesics in LPP
models, the project aims to study the entire energy landscape of paths and their
associated weights, with a focus on the geometry of almost maximal paths or near
geodesics. The PI will also investigate interlacing properties of geodesic
watermelons (collections of disjoint paths with maximal cumulative weight) and
their consequences with connections to various line ensembles and determinantal
point processes, as well as large deviation behaviors of geodesics. Finally the
program will initiate novel research directions concerning fractal geometry and
noise sensitivity, drawing inspiration from seminal works of a similar nature in
the context of critical planar percolation and spin glasses. Particular topics
include studying Hausdorff dimensions of various endpoint pairs admitting
exceptional geodesic behavior as well as computing exponents marking the onset
of chaos in natural dynamical versions of LPP. As necessary tools, several new
theories including discrete harmonic analysis for models in the KPZ universality
class will be developed. In particular, this is expected to create a bridge
between various communities in probability, mathematical physics and theoretical
computer science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
