
* 1954059
* Limiting Shape of First-Passage Percolation
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 09/01/2021,07/26/2022
* Christopher Hoffman,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 237,854.00

Physicists and other scientists use methods from probability to model the
dynamics of large collections of interacting components. Two-dimensional models
describe, for example, the growth of bacterial colonies in a petri dish or the
spreading of a fluid in a random medium. To better understand such systems, much
attention has been paid to how, for example in a bacterial colony, the boundary
of the region occupied by the colony changes over time. Kardar, Parisi, and
Zhang (KPZ) proposed that a stochastic partial differential equation could be
used to describe the evolution of these boundaries. This project will study a
large class of systems that are believed to be governed by this equation, with
the goal of verifying that the time evolution is well-described by this
probabilistic model. The project also provides research training opportunities
for graduate students.

The KPZ universality class is a collection of models of random growth in the
plane that all exhibit the same asymptotic behavior. Over the last two decades
there has been great progress understanding exactly solvable (algebraic) models
like exponential last-passage percolation and the longest increasing subsequence
in a uniformly random permutation. This project will study first-passage
percolation. This is a class of models which are believed to be in the KPZ
universality class and have the same asymptotic properties as the models
mentioned above. But without the algebraic tools of the exactly solvable models,
they have proven very difficult to analyze. This project aims to understand
basic properties of first-passage percolation such as the relative rate of
growth of the process in different directions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
