
* 1954233
* High-Dimensional Probability for High-Dimensional Data
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,07/12/2022
* Roman Vershynin,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 360,002.00

Artificial Intelligence is undergoing a revolution that is fueled by empirical
successes of deep learning, a class of machine learning methods based on
artificial neural networks. These successes reverberate across a broad spectrum
of data science problems. Nevertheless, theoretical understanding of deep
learning is scarce. This project is aimed at building rigorous mathematical
foundations for modern and future approaches to learning from big data. High-
dimensional probability is proposed as a natural framework for the mathematical
exploration of deep learning. This project has a double benefit. On the one
hand, it is aimed at theoretically explaining the successes of deep learning. On
the other hand, the project will inspire future theoretical developments in
high-dimensional probability, especially in random matrix theory. The project
also provides research training opportunities for graduate students.

This project will address theoretical problems in high-dimensional probability
that are inspired by open problems in data science. A pressing need for
mathematical justification is evident in the area of deep learning, whose
stunning success on real-world data applications is not theoretically explained
yet. This project proposes high-dimensional probability as a natural framework
for the mathematical exploration of deep learning. A unifying theme of most of
the problems in this proposal is nonlinear random matrix theory, where random
matrices are transformed by a nonlinearity, which alters their spectral and
geometric behavior. Nonlinearities empower neural networks and quantizers,
underlie the concepts of random Boolean threshold functions, random tensors and
geometric graphs. Exploring the unusual spectral behavior of pseudolinear and
inhomogeoenous random matrices are the main general thrust of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
