
* 1955175
* Analytic, Geometric, and Probabilistic Aspects of High-Dimensional Phenomena
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2020,05/06/2020
* Tomasz Tkocz,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 205,237.00

The complexity of mathematical objects arising in geometry and probability
increases as the dimension of the object increases. This is a result of a
growing number of possible configurations as well as a lack of intuition, which
is primarily built on low-dimensional examples. Sometimes, due to certain
underlying fundamental properties such as symmetry or independence of these
objects, we witness an order and universality present in high dimensions. This
project aims to deepen our mathematical understanding of such phenomena in
several contexts, such as volumetric aspects of high-dimensional random
polytopes (geometric objects with "flat" sides), or the sums of many random
quantities in which each quantity comes with a deterministic weight. In addition
to their fundamental interest, such problems are motivated by, and often find
applications in, related areas of statistics, computer science, big data and
machine learning. A vital part of this project is the student training and
educational activities that will result.

More specifically, this project is devoted to three topics related to analytic,
geometric and probabilistic aspects of high-dimensional phenomena: estimates for
moments and tails of sums of random variables, thresholds for the volume of
random polytopes, and efficient coverings of convex sets with its homothetic
copies (the Hadwiger covering/illumination problem). Our work on probabilistic
comparison inequalities, involving analytic and probabilistic techniques such as
chaining, will help us understand the concentration of measure phenomena for
random sums, with applications to the geometry of Banach spaces. Volume
threshold phenomena of random polytopes in high dimensions have been established
and satisfactorily understood only in the presence of a product structure or
rotational symmetry. The lack of these two in our problems creates a need for
new, more robust techniques and approaches. The illumination conjecture touches
upon very basic concepts: coverings and intersections of convex sets. This
project will exploit recent developments in geometric functional analysis to
open up perspectives on improving best asymptotic bounds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
