
* 2011385
* Support for the Southeastern Probability Conference
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 04/01/2020,04/14/2022
* Richard Durrett,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2024
* USD 36,000.00

This award will help support the 2020 edition of the Southeastern Probability
Conference to be held at Duke University May 11-12, 2020. The award will also
support the 2021-2023 conferences. The Southeast Probability Symposium is a
small regional conference supported by local resources that has been held at the
Duke mathematics department seven times in the last nines year. This award will
be used to (i) continue this successful series of conferences that highlight
exciting new directions in probability, (ii) provide support for participants
and include more probabilists from nearby universities, especially those without
colleagues in their area and those with limited access to federal funding.

Similar to the Midwest and Northeast Probability Conferences, our goal is to
serve the probabilists in the Southeast. However, in contrast to those meetings,
which attract a large number of participants from a wide area,ours is a small
meeting that allows ample opportunity for speakers and other participants to
interact. Graduate students and postdocs will also have a chance to learn about
recent developments from experts. A poster session at the end of the first day
will allow early career researchers to present their work. Slides of the main
lectures will be made available after the meeting on the conference web page to
more broadly disseminate their content. The Conference web site is:
https://services.math.duke.edu/~rtd/SEPC2020/SEPC2020.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
