
* 2045167
* Random Neural Networks
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2020,10/14/2020
* Boris Hanin,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2023
* USD 142,798.00

Neural networks are algorithms that in the past several years have achieved
state of the art in a variety of important machine learning tasks, ranging from
computer vision (e.g. self-driving cars) to natural language processing (e.g.
Echo, Alex, Google Translate, etc) and reinforcement learning (e.g. AlphaGo and
AlphaStar). Despite these impressive successes, it is not clear why neural nets
work so well. In this project, the PI will use tools from probability to develop
our theoretical understanding of neural networks. The goal is to give us a deep
understanding of why neural nets are so efficient at overcoming challenges in
optimization and high-dimensional data analysis. These theoretical insights
will, in turn, inform the intuition of engineers for building the next
generation of neural net-based machine learning systems.

Mathematically, the study of neural networks is a cross between approximation
theory and optimization, touching on topics from random matrix theory, Gaussian
processes, hyperplane arrangements, tensor decompositions, and optimal
transport, to name a few. The PI will focus specifically on (i) the stability of
gradient-based optimization of neural networks to both the linear statistics and
spectral asymptotics of random matrix ensembles given by products of many random
matrices in the regime where both the number of terms in the product and the
sizes of the matrices simultaneously group, and (ii) computing the correlation
functions of neural networks at initialization (e.g. with random weights and
biases). Questions of type (i) give quantitative information on the numerical
stability of neural network architectures at initialization. Questions of type
(ii), in contrast, aim at principles for data-driven architecture selection.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
