
* 2052659
* Spectral Properties, Cutoff, and Limit Profiles for Markov Chains
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2021,06/04/2021
* Evrydiki Nestoridi,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 224,195.00

Markov chains are random processes that retain no memory of the past. Over a
hundred years since they were firstly introduced, the study of Markov chains is
critical to mathematics, physics, computer science, statistics, engineering, and
bioinformatics. This project focuses on the study of the rate of convergence of
a Markov chain to the stationary distribution. The study of specific examples of
Markov chains has proven to be very useful in finding deep connections between
rapid mixing and spatial properties of spin systems, in sampling, approximate
counting algorithms and card shuffling.

The project has five broad aims all directed towards understanding cutoff,
developing old and new techniques, and on studying specific examples of Markov
chains that could help develop a theory. The first program focuses on the study
of random walks on random graph models via understanding their geometry. The
second program concerns the study of interacting particle systems, such as the
asymmetric exclusion process with open boundaries. The third program is focusing
on the existence of cutoff for random walks on trees. The fourth program
concerns the properties of Glauber dynamics for the Potts model and its
differences from the Ising model. The fifth program addresses several questions
about the mixing properties of random walks on matrix groups and general
configuration spaces that consist of matrices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
