
* 2052239
* Entropic Regularization of Optimal Transport
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2021,07/06/2022
* Soumik Pal,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 237,627.00

Optimal transport (OT) is the general problem of moving one distribution of mass
to another as efficiently as possible and is the continuum extension of the
discrete problem of matching. A matching problem involves associating with each
data point in one set (say patients), exactly one data point in another set (say
hospitals). There is a cost incurred for this match to occur (say the distance
the patient needs to travel to get to the hospital). An optimal matching is one
that minimizes the average cost. The mathematics of Monge Kantorovich OT has
grown to be a unifying theme in many scientific disciplines, from purely
mathematical areas such as analysis, geometry, and partial differential
equations to revolutionary new methods in economics, statistics, machine
learning and artificial intelligence. For example, the impact of optimal
transport in the study of geometric inequalities and Ricci curvature in
Riemannian geometry was highlighted by two Fields medals (Villani 2010, Figalli
2018) in the last decade. On the other hand OT has established itself as a
viable alternative to classical maximum likelihood based methods in analyzing
high-dimensional data coming from a manifold. Other notable applications include
analysis of neural networks and adversarial networks in machine learning and
artificial intelligence, new applications to stem cell biology, and economic
applications such as generalizations of the Nobel prize winning Gale-Shapely
algorithm, online auctions, and option pricing. Much of these are due to
impressive leaps in computational methods in OT that hinge on entropy based
regularizations. This project focuses on new probability questions in this area
of entropic regularization of optimal transport problems and their applications.
The project also provides training opportunities for graduate students.

The PI proposes problems at the intersection of probability and Monge-
Kantorovich OT that are broad and cut across several mathematical and applied
disciplines. It brings new probabilistic tools and perspectives (such as
exchangeability, Gaussian chaos expansions, Metropolis algorithm, mean-field
particle interactions) to problems of mass transport that are of interest to
statisticians, computer scientists, analysts and geometers. The primary focus is
on the asymptotic analysis of both discrete and continuous entropy-regularized
OT, also called Schroedinger bridges, either as the temperature goes to zero or
as the data size goes to infinity or both. One of the proposed problems involves
Markov chain based computational method for OT, which, if resolved, will have
immediate applications to various applied disciplines that depend on OT
computations. Other applications involve analysis of transaction costs in
mathematical finance and robotics where the dynamics of a large number of
interacting drones is described by a novel McKean-Vlasov type limit. A large
mathematical audience will find the material close to their interests and the
project is expected to spur further cross-disciplinary collaborations between
probabilists and non-probabilists working in OT. This is also facilitated by the
PI-led PIMS Kantorovich Initiative that creates an infrastructure for
interdisciplinary work based on OT located in the Pacific Northwest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
