
* 2118199
* DMS-EPSRC: Fast Martingales, Large Deviations, and Randomized Gradients for Heavy-tailed Distributions
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 04/01/2021,06/29/2022
* Jose Blanchet,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2025
* USD 175,832.00

This project investigates the theoretical underpinnings of Bayesian
computational methods that are key in studying heavy-tailed distributions. These
distributions are known to model the impact of highly consequential events that
may be difficult to hedge against, such as hurricanes, earthquakes, pandemics,
wildfires, economic shocks, among many others. In turn, Bayesian methods
encompass the body of statistical theory that explains how to combine observed
evidence with subjective beliefs. Despite the importance of the applications
mentioned earlier, most of the computational methods for Bayesian inference are
typically designed to efficiently study light-tailed distributions, which model
events that are in some sense easier to hedge against. The project's goal is to
study questions that lie at the heart of the convergence speed of computational
methods for Bayesian inference with heavy-tailed target distributions. The
methods studied in this project will provide the tools to design faster and more
efficient algorithms to accurately predict high impact events such as those
described above. Successfully enabling efficient and systematic Bayesian
inference for heavy-tailed targets requires a breadth of expertise and research
experience which would be very difficult to assemble within a single project
without the DMS-EPSRC Lead Agency agreement. The results obtained in this
proposal will be introduced in courses that will enhance broadening
participation. The PI will attempt to recruit personnel from under-represented
groups.

The main goal of the project is the study of the convergence analysis to
equilibrium of Markov chains which exhibit heavy-tailed features. While this
goal is theoretical in nature, its motivation comes from applications: the
existing theory does not apply to randomized Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
algorithms with heavy-tailed targets, which nevertheless arise frequently in
practice. Despite the fundamental importance of convergence to equilibrium
analysis, there are important questions that have not been well studied in the
literature. For instance, the presence of a spectral gap is known to be
equivalent to the geometric convergence of a Markov chain. However, even under
geometric convergence, ergodic estimators may still exhibit large deviation
behavior of the heavy-tailed type for standard empirical means. Contributions in
this direction will significantly extend the Donsker-Varadhan theory of large
deviations (which is fundamental in probability). Conversely, Markov chains with
heavy-tailed stationary measures typically do not have a spectral gap but might
nevertheless exhibit good convergence properties. Designing quickly convergence
Markov chains requires dynamics that are completely different from the standard
Langevin diffusion typically used in MCMC. The PI will investigate and build a
systematic theoretical treatment of the convergence to equilibrium of Markov
chains with heavy-tailed stationary measures arising in randomized algorithms of
computational statistics and machine learning (ML). This project will involve
students and a postdoctoral associates who will visit the research teams both in
the US in the UK. This will further enhance the human resource development of
these participants since they will be exposed to a broad network of
collaborators and ideas. The scientific output will have a substantial impact
beyond applied probability in a number of sub-areas of computational statistics
and ML where such targets arise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
