
* 2125961
* Random Walks in Random Potentials
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 03/01/2021,03/08/2021
* Christopher Janjigian,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2024
* USD 131,222.00

Irregular or random growth is a ubiquitous phenomenon in nature, occurring in
settings ranging from the growth of bacterial colonies and tumors to the
formation of coffee rings and the spread of forest fires. The last twenty years
have seen a renaissance in our understanding of mathematical models of these
phenomena, particularly in two space-time dimensions where many such models are
conjectured (and sometimes proven) to have the same statistical properties. This
project supports fundamental research into mathematical models of this type,
both in the two dimensional settings which have been the focus of much recent
work and in higher dimensions where much less is known. In addition to the
proposed research, this project includes outreach components aimed at connecting
students at levels ranging from middle school to graduate school to fun
mathematics in general and to the world of random growth models in particular.

The PI will study the structure of a class of models at the interface of
rigorous statistical mechanics and probability known as random walks in random
potentials, both in positive and in zero temperature. This class of models is
broad. On the lattice, it includes first passage percolation and directed last
passage percolation, directed polymers in random media, as well as random walks
in both static and dynamic random environments, with general admissible steps.
Continuum models like the continuum directed polymer and the associated
stochastic heat equation with multiplicative noise will also be considered. The
main goal of this project is to improve our understanding of the infinite volume
structure of such models through specific examples and to work toward a unified
treatment of that structure in the greatest generality that can be achieved.
Concretely, the main goal of the project will be to characterize the existence
and uniqueness properties of semi-infinite and bi-infinite volume measures
(respectively geodesics). The work will also consider related problems,
including investigating how infinite volume measures relate to the regularity
properties of the limiting free energy (respectively shape function), developing
computational tools in exactly solvable models and on understanding the
structure of the environment viewed from the perspective of paths drawn from the
infinite volume measure (respectively a geodesic).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
