
* 2153803
* Extreme Value Statistics in Probabilistic Number Theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2022,04/06/2022
* Louis-Pierre Arguin,NY,CUNY Baruch College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 51,120.00

Extreme value statistics is the study of rare events that occur in natural and
social systems. The appearance of such rare events may be understood by
investigating specific mechanisms arising from the interaction between the
components constituting the system. It turns out that a large class of functions
in number theory are formidable models to extend the current theory of extreme
value statistics. The aim of this project is to develop new probabilistic
techniques to describe at various scales the fine statistics of extrema of
number-theoretic functions. These techniques will then be applied to related
problems in physics and mathematics. The project will provide research training
opportunities for undergraduate students and graduate students in computer
programming, data science and mathematics.

More precisely, the Riemann zeta function (and to a larger extent the Dirichlet
L-functions) is a fundamental function in number theory as it encodes the
distribution of prime numbers among the integers. Large values of such functions
in particular contain information about the location of the primes, yet they
remain poorly understood. This research project builds on recent progress to
describe the large values of the zeta function in short intervals. The current
project aims at developing new probabilistic techniques to describe the precise
statistics of the large values of the zeta function as the size of the
observation interval is varied. In particular, the research carried out in this
project is expected to reveal new hybrid statistics at small scales. The project
also seeks to extend the techniques to Dirichlet L-functions, where few results
are currently available. The ultimate goal is to build better tools of extreme
value theory. The interdisciplinary nature of the project is expected to produce
new theoretical and numerical tools in probability as well as in analytic number
theory. The theoretical results and numerical experiments in combination will
clarify the elusive connection between random matrices and L-functions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
