
* 2153359
* Geometric Probability in Statistical Mechanics and Game Theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2022,03/24/2022
* Alan Hammond,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 180,000.00

This project will develop and employ geometric and probabilistic tools to solve
problems in the rigorous theory of statistical mechanics and in game theory on
graphs. In many classic games of skill, players move alternately. In random-turn
games, however, the players bid to win the right to move and must budget
resources in their efforts to win the game. Analyzing such stake-governed
random-turn games is a matter of understanding how a precious resource should be
budgeted in the long-term in order to maintain strategic advantage; seeking a
solution to how to play the game involves capturing the balance needed between
the short-term territorial gain of spending big and the long-term cost in
diminished capability that arises from such profligacy. Stake-governed random-
turn games lie at the intersection of probability and geometry and are one of
several directions that the Principal Investigator (PI) will explore in this
project. Indeed, techniques from probability and geometry will be also used to
address several important physical problems, including how trapping by obstacles
impedes a linearly progressing particle, or how random fractals formed as a
result of growth in a disordered random environment are sensitive to
perturbation of that environment by random disorder. By dissemination,
mentorship and collaboration, the PI will seek to ensure that the research
enhances the mathematical experience and trajectory of junior researchers
including graduate students via joint research to develop fundamental tools, and
high-school students via coding projects.

The PI will develop robust geometric and probabilistic tools in order to
elucidate several problems in the rigorous theory of statistical mechanics and
in game theory on graphs. The mechanism of trapping of a biased motion in the
supercritical infinite open cluster in the Euclidean lattice will be studied.
This work will harness basic tools involving resampling and surgical techniques
in the Ornstein-Zernike theory of subcritical lattice models that will be
developed under this grant. The fractal structure of scaled universal objects in
the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) universality class of models of growth in random
media will be studied; as will the sensitivity to noise of scaled KPZ
structures. For the latter purpose, tools in discrete harmonic analysis, such as
the spectral sample, which have been applied to solve problems in dynamics on
critical percolation, will be redeveloped for last passage percolation models.
Novel formulas will be proved indicating how skilful players of random-turn
games on graphs choose to spend budgets that dictate their local win
probabilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
