
* 2153869
* Random Systems from Symmetric Functions and Vertex Models
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/2022,03/24/2022
* Leonid Petrov,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 82,672.00

Modern probability theory is an area of pure mathematics instrumental in the
growing understanding of natural and social reality. The project studies complex
random systems motivated by real-world questions, including the structure of ice
and other condensed matter, magnetism, quantum systems, polymers,
thermodynamics, and traffic models. The PI aims to discover and analyze systems
living in discrete space that capture the essential large-scale and long-time
physical phenomena, yet are "integrable", that is, simple enough for exact
mathematical treatment. The analysis of integrable random systems is powered by
explicit formulas and various symmetries coming from algebraic structures. Of
special interest are time-dependent irreversible systems and models with
impurities displaying a wide range of conjecturally universal behavior. The
project provides research opportunities for graduate students as well as
training activities through organization of summer school on integrable
probability.

The project revolves around new and known integrable stochastic systems whose
structure is accessible through the Yang-Baxter equation or symmetric functions.
The scope of the studied models includes interacting particle systems on the
one-dimensional lattice with local or global interaction (asymmetric simple
exclusion process and discrete analogs of the Dyson Brownian motion,
respectively), random tilings, and other statistical mechanical systems. The
goals are three-fold: (1) discover new models with integrable structure (such as
q- and Macdonald analogs of Dyson Brownian motion); (2) find previously
overlooked symmetries in well-known models (such as time-reversal symmetries in
particle systems with arbitrary initial data); and (3) probe new asymptotic
phenomena and establish their universality (such as inhomogeneous deformations
of pure Gibbs states and the Gaussian Free Field). The goals will be achieved by
finding and analyzing exact formulas for moments and correlations (with the help
of symmetric functions and vertex models), and also by developing distributional
symmetries using Markov maps, or by introducing many inhomogeneous parameters
into the system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
