
* 2202247
* Conference: CRM Thematic Semester Spring 2022: Probabilities and PDEs
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 05/01/2022,04/22/2022
* Jacob Bedrossian,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2022
* USD 25,000.00

This project will support participation of graduate students, post-doctoral
researchers and early career researchers from the United States of America in
one of the workshops "Branching systems, reaction-diffusion equations, and
population models" to be held May 2?13, 2022 or "Unifying concepts in partial
differential equations (PDEs) with randomness" to be held May 16?27, 2022 at the
Centre de Recherches Mathematiques (CRM) in Montreal, Canada. The interplay
between mathematical models and probability is rich and profound with
applications far-reaching across all fields of science. This interplay can
appear in many physical settings in materials science and fluid dynamics, but
also in the modeling of various many-agent or many-particle dynamics, such as
the self-organized motion of organisms or the spread of an infectious disease
through a population. The Centre de Recherches Math√©matiques is organizing an
intensive thematic program on this topic, "Probabilities and PDEs" during the
period January 2022 -- July 2022. There will be four workshops, each with mini
courses specifically aimed at graduate students or early-career researchers in
related areas, and many long-term visiting scientists as well. This award
provides funding to support the participation of US-based graduate students,
early career researchers, and under-represented minorities through travel and
accommodation during one of the two workshops and accompanying mini-courses.
This will provide the participants with a perfect opportunity to interact with
each other and with leaders of the field and will help them to understand the
major questions and learn the cutting-edge methods of the field.

Probability and PDEs have always been intertwined and modern research continues
to intertwine them further. One common aspect concerns how introducing
randomness into PDEs, through e.g. random initial data, random environments,
random forcing will profoundly affect the long-term behavior, either because it
provides a flexible and realistic approach to study physical models or because
it is an inevitable feature of models of the underlying systems. Another aspect
is how one can obtain deterministic PDEs from underlying random many-agent or
many-problems, such as in classical kinetic theory or in many-agent problems
such as in mathematical epidemiology. The program will bring together world
experts and junior researchers in an intensive and focused program that will
help to greatly further the understanding of these phenomena and this award will
help train the next generation of US-based scientists in these methods. The
thematic semester website is maintained at
http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2022/Probab22/index_e.php the Branching systems,
reaction-diffusion equations, and population models workshop at
http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2022/Systemes22/index_e.php and the Unifying
concepts in PDEs with randomness workshop at
http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/2022/Concepts22/index_e.php.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
