
* 2210802
* Random Matrices with Application to Quantum Computing and Econometrics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, STATISTICS
* 08/15/2022,08/03/2022
* Tiefeng Jiang,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

This project develops new statistical and probabilistic methods and extends some
existing methods with novel applications in statistics and econometrics. The
core topic of these subjects is random matrix theory. The efficiency of the
proposed methodologies will be demonstrated via simulations and applications to
real data sets. The outcomes of the project will enhance the applicability of
methods for high-dimensional data settings, and the research results will be
applied in statistics and econometrics. The project will promote teaching,
training, and learning activities at the University of Minnesota. The main
educational goals are (a) to train PhD students at the University of Minnesota;
and (b) to promote collaboration among experts and students. The research
results will be disseminated through conference presentations and publications.

The investigator plans to develop new methodologies to investigate properties of
a few types of random matrices. They include Haar orthogonal/unitary matrices,
sample correlation matrices, Macdonald measures and circular orthogonal
ensembles. The investigator will then apply them to answer statistics and
econometrics problems. The project consists of the following main themes: (1)
the investigator plans to study the approximation of Haar-invariant
orthogonal/unitary matrices by independent normals. The solutions are known when
the approximation errors are measured by some well-known distances, including
the total variation distance. Besides their relevance in theoretical research,
they are also applied to data storage. The investigator plans to study the same
approximation question under the Wasserstein distance; (2) the investigator
plans to explore the Macdonald measure and show the eigenvalues are
asymptotically a Gaussian Free Field. A function of these eigenvalues is shown
to converge to a Gaussian multiplicative chaos. Nowadays active investigations
such as the construction of the Liouville measure in 2d-Liouville quantum
gravity or thick points of the Gaussian Free Field have appeared in many
branches. Inspired by this understanding, the investigator will study the
Macdonald measure; (3) the investigator plans to study the largest entries of
sample correlation matrices for dependent data. The same problem for independent
data is well-understood. Although the dependent case is more applicable, the
technical steps to analyze them are more intensive. The investigator proposes
new methods to solve this question; and (4) by using a new method on asymptotic
independence between sums and maxima of dependent data, which was established
recently by the investigator and his co-authors, it is planned to study problems
dealing with high-dimensional panel data arising in econometrics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
