
* 9123358
* Mathematical Sciences: Abstract Gambling Theory, Stochastic Games, and Statistics
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1992,02/17/1994
* William Sudderth,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen M. Samuels
* 12/31/1995
* USD 75,000.00

The principal investigator will work on a number of problems in abstract
gambling theory, which is a particular formulation of stochastic control, and on
related problems in the theory of two- person, zero-sum stochastic games. Some
of the research will treat fundamental questions about the optimal reward
function in gambling and the value function in stochastic games. One of these
questions for a general class of stochastic games is the existence of the value.
Some of the research will also treat specific stochastic control problems and
stochastic games. Finally research is also proposed on certain questions which
arise in the theory of Bayesian statistics. The principal investigator will work
on fundamental questions about optimal decision making through time in the
presence of uncertainty. Abstract gambling theory treats problems in which a
single decision maker needs to control a process so as to attain some well-
defined objective. In stochastic games two players have opposing interests and
each seeks to control the same process but toward opposite ends. The
mathematical details of such problems can be highly technical, but solutions are
of interest in many areas including economics, operations research, and finance.
