
* 9224990
* Mathematical Sciences: Markov Processes and Related Topics
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1993,01/11/1995
* Ronald Getoor,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1997
* USD 63,000.00

This research will study two different classes of problems for Markov
processes. The first is a study of the asymptotic distribution of certain
generalized occupation time formulas for special classes of Markov processes.
The investigator has recently obtained generalized arcsine laws for occupation
times of one dimensional Levy processes in joint work with M.J.Sharpe. He will
attempt to find higher dimensional analogues of these results. The second class
of problems deals with the potential theory of a general Markov process. In a
recent monograph the principal investigator has shown that for many purposes
excessive measures are more fundamental than excessive functions. He plans to
continue his investigation of the potential theory of excessive measures. In
particular the connection with capicitary measures and excursion theory. This
research is in the area of Markov processes. A Markov process is a mathematical
model of how certain random phenomena evolve in time. Examples are the diffusion
of a gas or liquid, or the motion of a collidal particle in a liquid subject to
molecular bombardment. This last example is called Brownian motion. Surprisingly
the mathematical model for Brownian motion also turns out to be of fundamental
importance in potential theory which encompasses electrostatic potentials and
equilibrium temperature distributions in solids among other things.
