
* 9308149
* Mathematical Sciences: Multiunit Reliability Systems: Optimal Allocation of Resources, Stochastic Orders and Aging
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1993,03/30/1995
* J. George Shanthikumar,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 09/30/1996
* USD 90,000.00

This research is concerned with applications of the concepts of multivariate
conditional hazard rate functions, and of stochastic convexity and concavity,
for the purpose of characterizing optimal allocation policies, stochastic orders
and aging in reliability theory. In many applications in reliability theory, the
main interest lies not necessarily in the total lifetime of the components of
the system, but in the total benefit delivered by the system during its
lifetime. This is particularly important when a limited resource is available
for enhancement of the components which make up the system. Using the notions of
majorization, stochastic convexity and stochastic concavity, the optimal
allocation policies will be sought. The performance of reliability components is
often strongly influenced by the environment in which they function. Using the
multivariate conditional hazard rate functions, it is possible to mathematically
model such environments in a relatively simple manner. This research is
concerned with the applications of concepts from statistics and probability for
the purpose of characterizing optimal allocation policies and aging in
reliability theory. Performance of reliability components is often strongly
influenced by the environment in which they function. Mathematical models will
be described and analyzed, and optimal policies for allocation of limited
resources will be characterized.
