
* 9312255
* Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotical Analysis of Dynamical Systems with Markov and Semi Markov Random Perturbations
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1993,07/09/1993
* Anatoli Skorokhod,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen M. Samuels
* 12/31/1995
* USD 40,000.00

Dynamical systems with random perturbations have been used intensively in
mechanics, physics, biology, and engineering. Many of these problems concern the
asymptotic behavior of randomly perturbed dynamical systems under unbounded
growth of intensities of perturbation. This research will investigate
boundedness in probability, ergodicity, boundedness with probability 1, and
stability for such systems. This will allow the investigator to develop the
principle of random averaging for systems in general spaces and types of
perturbations and to establish theorems on weak convergence of the distributions
of a perturbed system for large times to distributions of a diffusion Markov
process. The methods of investigation are based on martingale theory, stochastic
differential equations for complex systems, and limit theorems for stochastic
differential equations. The investigator will consider new general limit
theorems for jump processes in extending phase spaces to study the weak
convergence of complex Markov processes to more simple ones. Dynamical systems
with random perturbations have been used intensively in mechanics, physics,
biology, and engineering. There are many unsolved problems which are connected
with the study of the asymptotic behavior of randomly perturbed dynamical
systems under conditions of unbounded growth on the intensities of perturbation.
This research will investigate the main properties of such systems. The research
will advance the knowledge of the behavior of stochastically perturbed systems
and will provide significant applications to the engineering sciences.
