
* 9401194
* Mathematical Sciences: Probability Theory with Minimum Structures
* DMS,MODERN ANALYSIS, PROBABILITY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1994,03/01/1996
* Michel Talagrand,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1998
* USD 96,000.00

The main theme of this work is "probabilities with minimal structures", and in
particular the research of upper and lower bounds for stochastic processes under
general conditions. Connected sidelines are applications to Banach spaces, to
combinatorics, to probabilistic analysis of hard problems, to random Fourier
series and of course to more classical probabilistic questions such as
trajectories of stochastic processes and gaussian processes. The central
philosophy is to give priority to tools that require very little structure over
more specific arguments. The ideas of isoperimetry in product spaces, that have
given a new understanding of the notion of probabilistic independence will
continue to be a central tool. The true scope of these ideas has been realized
only recently, and the potential for future progress and applications should not
be underestimated. The main thrust of this research is to pursue the development
of abstract tools of probability in particular in relationship with the
classical idea of isoperimetry. It was realised by the investigator that the
classical idea of isoperimetry can be made meaningful in a much more general
setting than was previously believed. This gave rise to new families of
inequalities that have solved numerous problems in abstract probability, and had
impact in areas where probability is a tool rather than an object of study in
itself, and in particular operation research and theoretical computer science.
The potential of these idea, both at the theoretical level and the level of
applications starts only to be understood, and appears very promising.
