
* 9403224
* Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Matrix Analysis
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/1994,02/26/1996
* Carl Meyer,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1997
* USD 78,400.00

9403224 Meyer This research focuses on the analysis of stochastic matrices and
associated Markov chains concepts. Both theoretical and computational issues are
addressed. The theoretical objective is to make a significant impact on the
traditional perturbation theory for stochastic matrices and Markov chains. One
goal is to completely describe the nature and characteristic features of
sensitive Markov chains and to build a clear and concise theory of perturbations
in the eigensystems of stochastic matrices. This perturbation theory will be
used to better understand the convergence and stability properties of a variety
of multilevel algorithms for computing stationary probabilities. The
computational aspect is concerned with the numerical determination of stationary
probabilities associated with large-scale irreducible Markov chains with special
emphasis on those which are nearly uncoupled (systems comprised of a collection
of loosely coupled subsystems). The focus is on the development, implementation,
and analysis of aggregation/disaggregation algorithms. Both iterative and exact
aggregation/disaggregation methods are to be considered along with some hybrid
A/D techniques. This research focuses on the analysis of stochastic matrices and
associated Markov chains concepts. Markov chain techniques constitute a unifying
theme and are the basis for an extremely wide variety of mathematical models
which are used to describe, predict, and analyze the dynamics of large
evolutionary systems. Markov chain models are fundamental mathematical tools in
areas as diverse as engineering, economics, physical science, and social
science. In particular, analyzing and computing stationary probabilities
associated with large scale Markov chains is a primary concern in problems
involving queueing models and networks, telecommunications, computer performance
evaluation, economic modeling and forecasting, manufacturing systems modeling,
and more generally in applications where stochastic models are used to
understand the behavior of systems that evolve with time. This project
emphasizes both computational and theoretical issues, and special attention is
devoted to the analysis of nearly uncoupled problems (systems comprised of a
collection of loosely coupled subsystems). The following specific research
topics are to be investigated: (1) As they evolve with time, many physical
systems eventually settle down into some sort of steady state. If the physical
system is modeled by utilizing the theory of Markov chains, then the steady
state nature of the system is characterized by a set of probabilities called
"stationary probabilities." Consequently, analyzing the behavior of the
stationary probabilities is a fundamental issue. The theoretical component of
this research involves studying the stability properties of stationary
probabilities. The results of this research should clarify the understanding of
the mechanisms which contribute to either the stability (or instability) of the
underlying physical system being examined. (2) The computational facet of this
project is to develop new algorithms for computing stationary probabilities and
to develop new methods by means of which such algorithms can be analyzed. In
practical applications such as those mentioned above, it is usually the case
that the physical system under question involves an extremely large number of
components, but these components can often be grouped into clusters for which
there is strong interaction within any given cluster but weaker interaction
among the clusters themselves (e.g., consider the economy of the United States).
This research effort devotes special attention to analyzing and computing the
stability and steady state nature of such systems. Mathematically, this involves
computing and analyzing the stationary probabilities of such systems. To this
end, numerical algorithms known as aggregation/disaggregation techniques will be
designed to specifical ly to exploit the special features of these types of
nearly uncoupled systems.
