
* 9403644
* Mathematical Sciences: Interacting Particle Systems with Applications to Population Biology
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 05/15/1994,04/25/1994
* Claudia Neuhauser,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 04/30/1998
* USD 65,000.00

9403644: Neuhauser Abstract. The first two parts of the research concern the
investigation of several multispecies models from ecology and population
biology. These models are formulated as complex spatial systems on the integer
lattice in which each site is in one of a finite number of states indicating
whether a certain species is present on that site. These systems evolve over
time according to non-deterministic local rules which describe the dynamics of
each species and how they interact with each other in this spatial environment.
Models to be considered include host-parasitoid associations and a model for the
study of genetic diversity of a species in a subdivided habitat in which local
extinctions are frequent. These investigations are theoretical and experimental
(computer simulations). The main goal is to study how the spatial component
affects survival/coexistence of the species involved. In the third part,
problems concerning DNA sequence comparisons are addressed. One project is to
construct a statistical test that takes all types of mutations into account in
order to assess the statistical significance of such comparisons. The other
project is to investigate what happens when the sequences involved in the
comparisons are very different. Current tests always assume that the frequencies
with which letters in the sequences appear, are not too different. In the first
two parts, the investigator will study several multispecies models from ecology
and population biology. These models are formulated as complex spatial systems
that evolve in time according to non-deterministic local rules. Examples include
host-parasitoid associations and models for the study of genetic diversity of a
species in a subdivided habitat in which local extinctions are frequent. Some of
the proposed work is done in collaboration with researchers from the biology
department at the University of Wisconsin - Madison and the USDA Forest Service.
The main goal is to st udy ho w the spatial component affects
survival/coexistence. In the third part, problems arising in DNA sequence
comparisons are addressed. Such comparisons have revealed some unexpected
sequence similarities and there is the need for statistical tests to assess
statistical significance to such comparisons. Currently, there is no test
available that takes all types of mutations into account that occur in DNA
sequences. Furthermore, all available tests require the composition of the
sequences (i.e., the frequencies with which the letters in the sequences appear)
not to be too different. The proposed research addresses both problems.
