
* 9404330
* One Dimensional Fair Random Walk with Partial Reflection
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 10/15/1994,10/23/1998
* Burgess Davis,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 09/30/1999
* USD 60,000.00

The investigator will study reinforced random walk. If a fair coin is flipped
repeatedly and X(n) represents the number of heads in the first n flips minus
the number of tails in the first n flips, the sequence of integers X(1),
X(2),... is called fair random walk. Reinforced random walk is constructed in a
similar manner except that if X(n) is the maximum price seen so far then the
coin which determines X(n+1)-X(n) has probability p<1/2 of coming up heads,
while if X(n) is a record minimum the coin has probability 1-p, which of course
exceeds 1/2, of coming up heads. In words, this walk is fair random walk with
partial reflection back to previously assumed values at records. The fact that
the history {X(1),X(2),..X(n)} of the process is needed to determine the
probability of the next jump means that reinforced random walk is not a Markov
process, and renders the vast theory of such processes inapplicable. The
investigator has shown that X(n) divided by the square root of n converges in
distribution as n goes to infinity. He hopes to refine this result, for example
by identifying the limiting distributions, and to prove its analog for the
related processes which have probability greater than one half of setting new
records, if they are at a record. Oddly, this situation will require very
different methods. In another direction, the investigator will use Brownian
motion to study positive solutions of the Dirichlet heat equation in planar
domains, more specifically to find geometrical properties of the shape of the
domain which determine or ensure that the ratio of any two solutions at any
positive time is bounded throughout the domain, above and below, by positive
constants, a property which is called intrinsic ultracontractivity of the
Dirichlet heat semigroup. The investigator will study reinforced random walk.
Suppose the price of a stock always changes by one dollar. Track the price after
the first price change, the second, the third, and so on. Fair random wal k
models this under the assumption that each change is equally likely to be plus
one dollar or minus one, regardless of all earlier changes. Reinforced random
walk behaves the same way except when the current price is a record high, in
which case the next change is more likely to be down, or when the current price
is a record low, in which case the next change is more likely to be up. That is,
the walk shies away from setting records. It is a primitive model of a buy-low-
sell-high market. It is less tractable than fair random walk because the past
price fluctuations are used to determine the probabilities of the next step
being plus one or minus one. The investigator has recently shown how the average
net change in price behaves after a large number of changes, namely he has shown
that it is on the order of the square root of the number of changes. He will try
to refine this result and to prove a companion theorem for the related class of
processes which like to set records. In another direction, probabilistic methods
will be used to study how a flat metal plate cools, if it looses heat only out
the edges, which are held at absolute zero, more specifically how the shape of
the plate influences this cooling.
