
* 9406294
* Mathematical Sciences: Structure of Stationary Stable and Other Infinitely Divisible Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/1994,06/27/1994
* Jan Rosinski,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/1998
* USD 57,000.00

This project is intended to establish and explore new connections between the
theory of certain infinite variance stationary processes and the ergodic theory
of nonsingular flows. This connection leads to a natural classification of such
random processes and gives a base for their systematic investigation. A new
approach has been necessary because the ideas and techniques based on harmonic
analysis of square integrable processes have a very limited use in the infinite
variance case. On the other hand, many results of the ergodic theory of
nonsingular flows have their natural counterparts in the theory of infinite
variance stationary processes. For example, the famous Hopf decomposition of
flows into dissipative and conservative parts permits us to identify and isolate
the moving average parts of the corresponding stationary processes. Building
upon these connections, structural and path properties of certain important
classes of infinite variance stationary processes will be investigated.
Stochastic stationarity can be observed in the long-time behavior of many random
phenomena when the same patterns of behavior occur with time independent
frequencies. For example, in a noisy communication channel the initial signal is
superimposed with a random noise giving a stationary random process on the
channel's output. In recent years there has been a growing interest in the
investigating of highly random (infinite variance) models. The existing
methodology and tools of harmonic analysis, that have been very successful in
the study of moderately random stationary processes, have shown a very limited
applicability in the infinite variance case. This project is intended to
establish and explore new connections between certain classes of infinite
variance stationary processes and the ergodic theory of nonsingular flows. This
new approach reveals the structure of highly random stationary processes and it
is anticipated that it may lead to a new methodology i n the study of such
processes.
