
* 9408799
* Spectral Theory of Large Dimensional Random Matrices and Its Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1994,06/24/1994
* Zhi-Dong Bai,PA,Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen M. Samuels
* 06/30/1995
* USD 20,400.00

The principal investigators (Z.D. Bai and Jack W. Silverstein) plan to study
several remaining questions concerning the eigenvalues of a class of random
matrices of sample covariance type, where the numbers of variables and
observations are proportionally large. Theoretical problems include the
convergence and convergence rates of the empirical spectral distributions to
some nonrandom limits, limits of extreme eigenvalues, separation between
eigenvalues when the population ones are separated, and analogues when the
underlying samples are dependent, such as stationary ergodic. The principal
investigators also plan to apply the theory of spectral analysis of large
dimensional random matrices to the detection problem in array signal processing
when the numbers of (unknown) sources and the sensors are both large. Recent
work has shown that, when applying known results, the number of measurements
needed to estimate the proportion of the number of sources to the number of
sensors can be much smaller than what is required when using classical
multivariate analysis. However, extensive simulations reveal an interesting
phenomenon: the exact number of sources can be detected with the same relatively
low number of samples. Intensive investigation of these problems is of great
interest in both probability theory and signal processing. Some other
application problems are also proposed. The principal investigators (Z.D. Bai
and Jack W. Silverstein) plan to study certain properties of random matrices of
high dimension used in modeling multivariate random phenomena. The motivation
stems from the detection problem in array signal processing. For example, when
determining the number of sources impinging on a bank of sensors in the presence
of noise when the number of sources is sizable, known results on large
dimensional random matrices can be used to reliably estimate the proportion of
the number of sources to the number of sensors with a number of measurements
much smaller than what is needed according to standard multivariate analysis.
However, extensive simulations reveal that, with high probability, the exact
number of sources can be detected with the same relatively low number of
samples. The principal investigators intend to mathematically analyze the
observed phenomena which allows for exact detection, and its dependence on the
number of sensors and the sample size. Several other remaining questions on
large dimensional random matrices important to applications will also be
studied.
