
* 9500307
* Mathematical Sciences: Strong Mixing Conditions for Random Sequences and Random Fields
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/1995,06/06/1995
* Richard Bradley,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/1997
* USD 40,000.00

9500307 Bradley Abstract This proposal concerns the study of random sequences
and random fields satisfying strong mixing conditions. A random sequence is said
to satisfy a "strong mixing condition" if (according to an appropriate
criterion) the amount of stochastic "dependence" between the "past" and the
"future" becomes uniformly arbitrarily small as the amount of "time" between
past and future becomes sufficiently large. For random fields, the notions of
"strong mixing" are similar, involving the uniform asymptotic independence
between sets of observations as the "distance" between them becomes large. For
such random sequences and random fields, both "structural properties" and limit
theorems are investigated. In particular, this proposal involves a continuation
of some recent work by the principal investigator in which the central limit
theorem is proved for a certain class of random fields under strong mixing
assumptions considerably weaker than in earlier similar theorems by other
researchers. This proposal concerns the study of probabilistic models that
involve "weak dependence," in which the "past" and "present" might have
considerable influence on the "near future" but much less influence on the "far
future." For example, the average annual national unemployment rate is one of
many phenomena which appear to fit such a model; the unemployment rate for the
year 1995 could presumably have considerable effect on the rate for the year
1996 or 1997 but not much effect on the rate for the year 2050. This proposal
involves an investigation into various kinds of "structural properties" of
probabilistic models of weak dependence, and also various long-term "laws of
averages" that such models might satisfy. In particular, part of this proposal
involves a continuation of some recent work by the principal investigator which
considerably enlarges the class of weak dependence models that are known to
satisfy a certain important law of averages. This proposal also concerns the
study of similar types of probabilistic models in which observations are
separated by location instead of time.
