
* 9501611
* Isoperimetric-Type Inequalities Arising from the Study of Brownian Motion in Domains Normalized by their Inradius
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/1995,04/09/1997
* Elizabeth Housworth,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/1998
* USD 51,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9501611 PI: Elizabeth Housworth Institution: U. of Oregon Title:
Isoperimetric-Type Inequalities Arising from the Study of Brownian Motion in
Domains Normalized by their Inradius ABSTRACT: This Career award will fund
research on two main mathematical questions as well as an innovative education
plan. The first mathematical problem concerns an integral mean inequality which
would constitute a sharpening of a known lifetime result for Brownian motion in
convex, simply connected planar domains normalized so that the largest disk they
contain has radius one (or asymptotically one.) The second problem concerns a
packing measure analysis of harmonic measure which would provide an analogue to
the results of Makarov which relate a lower bound on the growth of the
derivative of a univalent function to the proper Hausdorff measure function for
the support of harmonic measure on the boundary of a domain. The education plan
includes redesigning the senior/beginning graduate mathematical statistics
courses to give the students a feeling for data and teaching a course for
undergraduate mathematics majors by a modified Moore method, in order to give
our undergraduates insight into the process of doing mathematical and
statistical research. This award will fund both research in mathematics and
course development in the mathematical sciences. During the award period, it is
proposed to redesign an upper level statistics course to include work with
actual data instead of focusing entirely on the mathematical theory behind
statistics. There are also plans to teach a course for mathematics majors using
self-discovery techniques in order to give undergraduates insight into the
process of doing mathematical research. Two mathematical questions will be
researched during the award period. One problem involves studying the
pathological behavior of a certain class of mathematical functions. The
techniques employed are related to those used for the study of fractals. The
second pr oblem is derived from considering the lifetime of a particle moving
randomly inside a region and dying when it touches the boundary of the region.
Different regions allow the particle to live different lengths of time.
Applications of this research are relevant in applied contexts, such as in
studying stress on beams.
