
* 9503519
* Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/1995,03/27/1997
* Michael Marcus,NY,CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/1998
* USD 210,000.00

9503519 Marcus Abstract The investigators will continue their study of
continuity properties of additive functionals of Markov processes and their
limiting behavior. Using an isomorphism theorem of Dynkin and results from the
theory of probability in Banach spaces and random Fourier series they will
explore relationships between continuous additive functionals of Markov
processes and Gaussian processes and chaoses and random Fourier series. In this
way they expect to be able to use known results about each of the different
processes to obtain new results about the other ones as they did in their work
on local times and Gaussian processes. They also plan to use techniques
developed in their earlier work to study the number of intersections of random
walks, particularly in the critical and super-critical cases. Motivated by the
importance of a special class of second order Gaussian chaoses related tm Wick
squares in the study of positive continuous additive functionals, they will try
to find necessary and sufficient conditions for the continuity of these chaoses.
They will also attempt to use self-collision local times of superprocesses to
construct a self-interacting measure valued diffusion and study the large
deviations of additive functionals of super Brownian motion. This research deals
with fundamental properties of stochastic processes and has potential
application in all areas that deal with random phenomena. The investigators will
consider data that evolves in time in a random fashion, such as electrical
signals received from distant satellites or dollar values in financial
transactions. In particular they will consider the amount of time the data takes
specific values or is in a small, heavily weighted, range of values and how this
amount of time varies as the set of specific values vary. They plan to do this
for a wide class of processes called Levy processes. These processes have often
been thought of as models for many important practical applications but, so far,
they have b een considered too difficult to analyze very deeply. The authors
plan to use several new and powerful methods, recently developed by themselves
and others, to accomplish this deep analysis.
