
* 9503665
* Mathematical Sciences: General Limit Theorems in Probability and Local Empirical Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/1995,06/07/1995
* Uwe Einmahl,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/1997
* USD 40,000.00

9503665 Einmahl Abstract This proposal addresses questions from three different
areas: (1) Universal Results on the Behavior of Sums of Independent Random
Variables (2) Local Empirical Processes (3) A General Law of the Iterated
Logarithm in Banach space. The work in area (1) is motivated by some recent
universal results on the almost sure behavior of sums of independent random
variables. Contrary to the classical results in this direction, these results do
not require moment type conditions. The main difficulty is to find suitable
norming and centering sequences which are specific to the particular situations
under investigation. Among other things, quantile transformations will be used.
The work from area (2) is mainly devoted to the limit behavior of local
empirical processes which have useful applications in density and regression
function estimation. The third part of this proposal finally addresses a number
of questions in connection with a recent general law of the iterated logarithm
in Banach space. This proposal addresses a number of questions on limit theorems
in probability and empirical processes. Limit theorems in probability such as
the central limit theorem, and laws of large numbers provide the basis for many
widely used statistical techniques to handle large data sets. Some of these
results, however, can only be applied under relatively restrictive conditions.
Over the last decade, powerful methods have been developed in probability. It is
proposed to use these new techniques to further extend the applicability of the
basic limit theorems, and, at the same time, to gain some insight into
situations, where the classical techniques have failed. Some applications to
statistical estimation theory will be considered as well, where the main
emphasis will be on so-called empirical processes.
