
* 9503375
* Several Questions in Probability Theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/1995,02/19/1997
* Theodore Hill,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/1999
* USD 105,000.00

9503375 T.P.Hill Abstract This research project involves several topics related
to the mathematical theory of probability including: optimal stopping theory --
the study of stopping a stochastic process to achieve some goal such as
maximizing the expected value of the process at the time of stopping, with
emphasis on finding good stop rules based on incomplete information;
partitioning problems -- the study of bisection (e.g., ham-sandwich theorems),
fair-division (cake-cutting inequalities) or general partitioning (Lyapounov
convexity) of an object as well as applications to hypothesis testing and game
theory; empirical distribution theory -- the study of estimating an unknown
distribution based on random samples from that distribution, with emphasis on
new alternative weight functions; convergence and invariance principles -- the
study of representations of measures and their relationships to limit laws; and
the significant-digit problem -- the study of non-uniformity in significant
digits of empirical data, and its applications to mathematical modelling and
computer design. This project is mostly theoretical, but has potential
applications in statistics, economics and computer science, as well as in other
areas of pure mathematics such as measure, integration and function theory. This
research project involves several topics in mathematics related to the theory of
probability. These topics include: the theoretical aspects of controlling or
stopping a random process such as pollution-level fluctuations or inflation
rates; the theory and application of fair-division problems in which an object
such as a parcel of land or other assets must be divided and distributed among
several parties; the study of estimating the distribution of an unknown
population based on random samples and observations; and general theories about
long-range behavior of random processes such as population growth or global
temperature fluctuations. This pro ject is primarily theoretical, with direct
applications to statistics and other areas of mathematics, and potential
applications to other areas of science such as economics, operations research,
and computer technology.
