
* 9503419
* Mathematical Sciences: Markov Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/1995,03/27/1997
* Srinivasa Varadhan,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/1999
* USD 292,695.00

ABSTRACT We study complex systems modeled by interacting particles, or, more
generally, by Markov Processes with a high dimensional state space. In the
presence of conservation laws, the Markov Process will have several invariant
measures. If the interaction is local then the evolution will take the system
quickly to a local equilibrium parametrized by the local averages of the
conserved quantities. These parameters that are functions of space and time will
evolve according to some evolution law after suitable rescaling. There are
several examples of this phenomenon, known as hydrodynamic scaling: the
transition from Hamiltonian Equations for particles to Euler Equations for a
fluid, Nonlinear diffusion equations for the bulk diffusion of various
interacting particle systems etc. The project investigates rigorously this
transition for several classes of models. One of the central problems in the use
of mathematical models in the physical as well as social sciences, is the
problem of scaling. One has a complex system consisting of a large number of
interacting components which is evolving in time. Its properties are specified
at the level of individual components. However one is interested in how certain
small number of measurements made on the large or global scale evolve in time.
The aim of this research is to make a mathematically valid link between the two
in certain specific physical models.
