
* 9503702
* Mathematical Sciences: Degenerate Stochastic Differential Equations and Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/1995,05/26/1995
* Salah-Eldin Mohammed,IL,Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/1998
* USD 40,000.00

In their previous work, the proposers have used probabilistic methods to
establish an optimal extension of Hormander's theorem for second order
differential operators. Their extension asserts hypoellipticity under hypotheses
that allow the usual Lie algebra condition to fail at an exponential rate on a
collection of hypersurfaces. The proposers use these techniques to investigate a
series of further problems in the areas of partial and stochastic differential
equations. In particular, they study the Dirichlet problem for exponentially
degenerate operators on smooth domains in Euclidean space. They also investigate
the existence of smooth densities for a large class of highly degenerate
stochastic functional equations. The research deals with two important problem
areas that arise in physics and engineering. The first area concerns an
important class of mathematical models, called partial differential equations,
that play a fundamental role in the study of heat conduction, electric potential
and fluid flow. The second area of investigation is devoted to a class of models
that are used in physics, engineering and biology in order to analyze dynamical
systems whose evolution is influenced by random fluctuations and past history.
These models are very important in a variety of diverse areas ranging from
signal processing, stock market fluctuations, economic and labor models,
aircraft dynamics, materials with memory and population dynamics. The
investigators use techniques from the calculus of probability in order to
develop a deeper understanding of the above-mentioned models.
