
* 9504557
* Mathematical Sciences: Multiscale Processes and Stochastic Dynamics in Geosciences
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1995,10/23/1998
* Rabindra Bhattacharya,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 04/30/1999
* USD 90,000.00

9504557 Bhattacharya Abstract Probabilistic methods are proposed for the
analysis of three broad classes of problems in hydrology, climatic prediction
and global change phenomena. All these phenomena are governed by nonlinear
dynamics with a hierarchy of scales in space and time, which make their analysis
and prediction complex and challenging. Of the three broad topics considered
here, Topic 1 is devoted to the problem of contaminant transport in natural
media such as aquifers. The class of Fokker-Planck equations which govern this
transport involve multiple spatial scales of heterogeneity. Topic 2 concerns the
fine scale structure of a class of random measures which arise in the
statistical theories of turbulence and rainfall. The mathematical theory to be
employed for such highly singular phenomena is that of random cascades. Topic 3
is concerned with climatic changes and global change phenomena over much larger
scales of time than envisaged under Topic 2. Here the aim is to analyze
interannual climatic events using randomly perturbed dynamical systems. The main
objective of the proposal is the development of nonlinear stochastic dynamical
theories for (1) the prediction of the spread of pollutants in the environment
with time, (2) making improvements in short-term weather forecasting, and (3)
the understanding and eventual prediction of long-term climatic and global
change phenomena. An important example under Topic 1 is the problem of the
spread of chemical and other pollutants in natural underground water systems.
Since even slightly different velocity fields of water in these systems often
lead to dramatically different rates of spread of the pollution in the long run,
careful and precise modeling and analysis are required and proposed here. With
regard to Topic 2, different techniques are needed for the study of the space-
time distribution of thunderstorms and rainfall. These are expected to provide
better inputs into the numerical models which are generally used for we ather
forecasts, thus improving their predictability. Although scientists have been
somewhat successful in such short-term weather forecasting, they have had little
success in the understanding and prediction of long-term climatic phenomena.
Since it is impossible to provide an adequate deterministic model for the
latter, the main aim under Topic 3 is the analysis of these long-term phenomena
using models with random perturbations. An example considered is the prediction
of the advent and intensity of the El Nino--a warming of the Tropical Pacific
causing extensive rainfall and flooding--and its opposite the dry La Nina.
Realistic nonlinear stochastic models are sought here and their analysis is
proposed.
