
* 9504462
* Mathematical Sciences: Percolation and Related Problems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/1995,02/27/1997
* Kenneth Alexander,CA,University of Southern California
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 11/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9504462 Alexander Abstract Percolation is perhaps the most fundamental model in
which one can study how small-scale randomness produces large-scale phenomena,
such as phase transitions, which are essentially nonrandom. Alexander proposes
to investigate the following aspects of the subject. (1) The use of percolation
ideas to analyze the behavior of two-dimensional incompressible flows with
random potentials. (2) The properties of a new random cluster model which, like
the standard FK random cluster model, is closely related to the Ising model. (3)
The use of percolation ideas to create a model, defined on a small scale, for
large-scale phenomena which occur when water containing impurities freezes. (4)
The geometry of finite clusters, and its relation to the cluster size
distribution, for certain continuum models of percolation. (5) The interrelation
between percolation behavior of the graph and other properties for the "minimal
spanning forest" of a stationary random labeled graph. (6) The size of the
fluctuations in the boundary of the region which can be reached by a fixed time
in first-passage percolation. Additionally, Alexander will investigate a string-
matching problem related to the reconstruction of DNA sequences from many short
overlapping segments. This work is part of an ongoing effort by mathematicians
and physicists to understand how small-scale randomness is reflected in large-
scale, or "macroscopic," properties of various systems in the natural world. A
typical example is a piece of iron--each atom has a magnetic field aligned in a
particular direction. These directions are random, but nearby atoms tend to
align in approximately the same direction, particularly when the temperature is
low. In essence, the tendency toward randomness, which increases with
temperature, competes with the tendency to align. Clusters of atoms with similar
alignments--all "up,", all "down," etc.--are formed, and the random geometry of
these clusters--what sizes of clusters occur with w hat probabilities--helps
determine macroscopic properties of the iron. When the temperature goes below a
certain precise "critical point," there is a sudden change in the macroscopic
behavior of the iron--the tendency to align wins out, so that a very large
cluster of aligned atoms is formed, and the iron can become a magnet. Such
"critical phenomena"--sudden changes in macroscopic behavior when some
measurement crosses a critical value--occur in a variety of contexts; recently,
for example, there has been concern that the density of manmade junk orbiting
the earth is approaching a critical level, above which the frequency of
collisions will dramatically increase. Other systems in which small-scale
randomness determines macroscopic properties, and critical phenomena may occur,
include (i) waves traveling through irregular materials, such as seismic waves
through the earth's crust; (ii) transport of heat by ocean currents in the
presence of turbulence, which affects global climate; and (iii) percolation of
liquid through a porous material, such as water or oil through underground rock.
Mathematicians and physicists have long understood that many aspects of the
relation between small-scale randomness and macroscopic properties, including
critical phenomena, do not depend on the particular system being studied. One
can therefore gain insight into real-world phenomena by studying abstract
systems not intended to model specifically magnets, or porous rock, or any other
particular part of the physical world. The systems which Alexander will
investigate are examples of such abstract systems.
