
* 9504227
* Mathematical Sciences: Second North American Meeting of New Researchers' in Statistics and Probability
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 05/01/1995,04/21/1995
* Nabendu Pal,LA,University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 04/30/1996
* USD 10,150.00

9504227 Pal ABSTRACT The Second North American New Researchers' Meeting,
organized by and for new researchers, is the only conference that addresses the
interests and concerns of recent Ph.D. recipients in Probability and Statistics
in the United States, Canada, and Mexico. Because many new researchers are
isolated from the statistical community, with little or no contact with junior
and senior colleagues in their field, this meeting provides a unique opportunity
for new researchers to exchange ideas and initiate contact with one another. We
hope that this conference will assist in the professional development of new
researchers, by helping them become full participants in the statistical
profession, and by providing an opportunity for them to act as peer mentors for
each other as they begin their scientific careers. The ultimate effect of this
process is a strengthening of the research base of the statistical community in
North America. All those attending the conference are expected to actively
participate by presenting their current research---either in a talk or displayed
in a poster. There will be no parallel sessions. The program also includes
several talks by senior statisticians and probabilists actively involved in the
most up-to-date areas of research. These people will be invited to share their
research ideas and enthusiasm for research, and to provide tactical suggestions
on how to build a thriving research program and succeed in the academic world
and larger statistical community.
