
* 9504758
* Mathematical Sciences: General Limit Theorems in Probability and Local Empirical Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1995,01/22/1997
* David Mason,DE,University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 12/31/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9504758 Mason Abstract The investigator plans to study problems in three
different areas. These are (1) universal results for the behavior of sums of
independent random variables, (2) local empirical processes and (3) the fractal
nature of empirical increments. Area (1) concerns the study of the law of the
iterated logarithm for partial sums and their increments that hold under little
or no assumptions. Area (2) involves the investigation of a new mathematical
entity called the local empirical process, which is the random mechanism
governing density estimators, regression function estimators and tail index
estimators. Area (3) deals with the uncovering of the somewhat unexpected
fractal nature of the increments of various random processes. The proposed
research is concerned with the study of the limit behavior of certain random
processes and its applications. Very often a random process will exhibit stable
properties as it is observed over a long period. The classical example is the
random process of tossing a coin. If the coin is fair, the long time average
number of heads will with certainty get arbitrarily close to 1/2. This fact is a
special case of the law of large numbers. Statisticians take advantage of this
law to construct estimators based on a large sample of data that are close with
high probability to the population parameter of interest. The areas that will be
investigated in this project should have a number of useful applications to the
construction of such estimators.
