
* 9505167
* Probability & Statistics Applied to the Theory of Algorithms
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* J. Michael Steele,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1998
* USD 165,000.00

9505167 Steele Abstract The aim of this project is to build a deeper
understanding of the stochastic behaviors present in some of the central
problems of Euclidean combinatorial optimization. Examples of problems that are
to be investigated include the stochastic models of the traveling salesman
problem, the minimum spanning tree problem, and several of their related
approximations. The more specific objectives of the project include (1) further
development of the distribution theory for the traveling salesman problem and
minimal spanning tree problem, (2) more extensive development of Talagrand's
theory of configuration functions, (3) refined understanding of the tail
behavior of the increasing subsequence functional, and (4) development of the
basic limit theory for functionals associated with non-optimal heuristics. The
methods that will be used in this investigation include Talagrand's
isoperimetric theory, Talagrand's theory of irregularity of distribution, the
theory of subadditive Euclidean functionals, the general efficiency theory for
statistical estimation, and the theory of vector quantization. Each of these
tools is of considerable importance in its own right, and the expectation is
that useful insight will be gained into the strengths and weaknesses of these
tools through the study of the concrete problems of probabilistic combinatorial
optimization. The interface of probability theory and optimization has
experienced remarkable growth over the last five years, and this development has
had substantial impact on both theoretical computer science and the practice of
algorithm development. The aim of this project is to build a deeper
understanding of the information and assistance that probability can provide in
some difficult and important problems of computation. In particular, the project
aims to develop probability theory that helps describe the behavior of several
important quantities in the theory of combinatorial optimization, a subj ect
that studies the minimization and maximization of functions that are defined
very large finite sets. The more specific objectives of the project include
development of a distribution theory for the length of the shortest path through
a large number of points whose locations are determined by a probability
distribution, and the development of the basic probability for some of the most
important approximation methods of optimization theory.
