
* 9505129
* Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Models in Population Genetics
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1995,06/06/1997
* Peter Donnelly,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/1999
* USD 75,000.00

9505129 Donnelly Abstract The proposed research falls in three broad areas. The
first of these concerns measure-valued population models. A particle
representation is used to study properties of a general class (including the
Dawson-Watanabe and Fleming-Viot) of "neutral" processes and their induced
genealogical structure. A major aim of the proposal is to extend this
construction, most notably to incorporate selection (equivalently location
dependent branching rates in the spatial setting), but also (in the genetics
context) to allow for recombination and population substructure. Motivated by
problems in the interpretation of human population genetic data, the
investigator and his colleagues study particular subclasses of the general
models with a view to understanding the effects on genealogy, and hence on
genetic data, of various assumptions about population dynamics, and possible
demographic correlations. A second area of the proposal concerns properties of
geographically structured population genetics models. Recent results relating to
coalescence times in these models allow explicit calculation of moments of
identity measures for mutation structures (beyond infinite alleles) relevant to
molecular DNA data. Conversely, an understanding of the models motivates a study
of measures of population differentiation (and associated estimators) for
molecular genetic data which generalize Wright's F_st coefficient. The third
area of the proposal concerns the application of existing and anticipated
theoretical results to statistical questions in the analysis of genetic data.
These include exact likelihood ratios for a wide class of selective models
against neutrality (and hence efficient inference procedures), the potential for
use of information on the age order of alleles in testing neutrality, the
correlation structure of estimates of evolutionary parameters from samples of
linked genes, and the (non-)existence of consistent estimators of certain
evolutionary parameters from singl e-locus data. The project is concerned with
advancing our understanding of evolutionary processes. The development of
mathematical models allows an examination of the consequences of particular
evolutionary mechanisms: one may ask "if evolution acted in the following way,
what sort of patterns would we expect in genetic data?". Mathematical modeling
is necessary because many evolutionary forces operate over extremely long time
scales for which direct observation, or experimentation, is impossible.
Comparisons of model predictions with actual genetic data then provides insight
into the extent to which the posited mechanisms are acting. The investigator
studies, at a general level, the consequences of particular assumptions about
the structure and demography of populations of interest. Particular aspects of
the project relate to models for the evolution of human populations. Various
statistical questions which arise in the interpretation of genetic data are also
included.
