
* 9508700
* Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Models for Simulated Annealing and the Genetic Algorithm
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1995,06/07/1995
* Susan Lee,NM,New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 12/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9508700 Lee Abstract The investigator is interested in the analysis of
stochastic processes which are connected to two widely-used algorithms for
global optimization: simulated annealing and the genetic algorithm. In one
dimension, classical simulated annealing can be modeled in continuous time as a
certain diffusion process with drift. Given a function to be minimized, the
drift term is the negative of the derivative of that function; and the
infinitesimal variance, also called the rate of cooling, is inversely
proportional to the logarithm of time. Under mild assumptions, it has been shown
that such a diffusion converges in distribution to a random variable whose
distribution is concentrated on the global minima of the function to be
minimized. The investigator is studying the conjecture that if one uses a
symmetric stable process in place of Brownian motion as the source of noise in
the model, then one can cool at a rate proportional to time to a certain
negative power, which is much faster than the logarithmic cooling required in
the classical model. The genetic algorithm, as might be guessed from its name,
is based on ideas from genetics. The investigator is investigating the
efficiency of the genetic algorithm for the optimum partitioning problem. She is
also comparing the performance of the genetic algorithm with deterministic
algorithms. Optimization problems occur in almost every human endeavor.
Businesses want to maximize profits and minimize cost. Many industrial robots
are programmed so that the robot will accomplish its assigned task with a
minimum amount of energy within a finite time period. This research studies ways
to improve the performance of two widely-used computer-intensive algorithms for
optimization: simulated annealing and the genetic algorithm. Simulated annealing
has been used, for example, in computer-aided design of integrated circuits, in
image processing, and in modeling the structure of proteins. As its name
suggests, simulated annealing is an algorithm based on concepts from the
physical process of annealing, where a substance is heated and then cooled
slowly.. The genetic algorithm imitates the concept of "survival of the fittest"
from Darwinian evolution.
