
* 9625126
* RUI: Interacting Particle Systems in Biology
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/1996,06/18/1996
* Rinaldo Schinazi,CO,University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/2000
* USD 54,137.00

9625126 Schinazi ABSTRACT Interacting particle systems are spatial stochastic
models on a countable set (usually the lattice). The investigator uses these
systems to model several biological phenomena. Many of these models have already
been considered in the mathematical biology and physics literature but very few
rigorous results have been proved. So far most of the mathematical theory about
interacting particle systems deals with monotone (or attractive) systems. When
one deals with epidemics, monotonicity does not hold. To prove results for non-
monotone systems is crucial since so many phenomena in our world are not
monotone in any (mathematically ) useful way. Interacting particle systems are
very useful in studying epidemics. For instance, The investigator proposes the
following model for the spread of an epidemic. There is a grid of sites and each
site is either empty, healthy or infected. Healthy and infected individuals give
birth to healthy individuals on empty nearest neighbor sites. Healthy
individuals get infected by infected nearest neighbors. Healthy and infected
individuals die at different rates. This seems adequate for epidemics like the
AIDS epidemic for which infected individuals may give birth to healthy
individuals. One of the results proved by The investigator is that, given an
infection rate which is large enough, the epidemic will persist if and only if
the rate at which infected individuals give birth is high enough. While the
model considered is a gross simplification of the real world it does give an
interesting idea to test. Namely, is it true that the countries where the AIDS
epidemic is the most devastating are the countries where the rate at which
infected individuals give birth is the highest?
