
* 9625458
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems in Probability Theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1996,02/13/1998
* Harry Kesten,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1999
* USD 172,796.00

9625458 Kesten ABSTRACT The investigator studies several problems in probability
theory. More specifically, the main problems deal with first-passage
percolation, ordinary percolation and central limit theorems for optimizing
functionals. For the usual first-passage percolation model the proposer wishes
to establish some general properties of the asymptotic shape of the set of
points which can be reached in a large time; this asymptotic shape should be
strictly contained between a romboid and a cube. He also is investigating how
the asymptotic shape varies when one allows the passage-time of a vertex to be
dependent on how many neighbors have already been reached. In ordinary
percolation the investigator (with several colleagues) is investigating the
distribution of the size of the largest cluster in a big box, and hopes to
establish a number of analogues to known results for the largest cluster on a
complete graph in which each edge is present with a certain probability (the
Erdos-Renyi random graph). Finally, in a different area, he is attempting to
prove central limit theorems for some optimizing functionals which are somewhat
similar to minimal spanning trees. The problems in this proposal are motivated
in part by statistical physics and by behavior of certain optimization
algorithms. Through the first part of this work one gains insight into the large
time behavior of some stochastic growth models, and how variations in the local
rules (i.e., rules for the behavior of the system in small neighborhoods)
influence the global behavior of the system. The research on optimization
algorithms deal with quantities which depend on the distances between a large
number of randomly chosen points. These studies are expected to give us an
understanding of the typical behavior of some difficult and important
optimization problems for which no good computational methods are known at
present.
