
* 9626175
* Mathematical Sciences: Lp and Tail Probability Approximations for Sums of Dependent Variables
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1996,06/29/1998
* Victor de  la Pena,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2000
* USD 74,259.00

9626175 de la Pena ABSTRACT The study of the behavior of sums of dependent
random variables plays a central role in both the theory and applications of
probability and statistics. U-statistics are commonly encountered in problems
concerning estimation, while multilinear forms arise in research pertaining to
multiple stochastic integration, regression and covariance analysis, and
invertibility of matrices. Randomly stopped sums of independent random variables
and martingales are found at the core of the studies of sequential analysis, and
such diverse areas as queuing theory, inventory theory and reliability theory.
The investigator and his colleagues consider fairly general problems involving
sums of dependent random variables, including extensions of Wald's equation in
the case of martingales, quadratic forms and double stochastic integrals;
approximations of the tail probabilities of multilinear forms; generalization of
the principle of conditioning to a wider class of problems; and determination of
speeds of convergence of related limit theorems. In tackling the proposed
problems, the investigator and his colleagues draw from their recent results
which include two fundamental contributions to the theories of sequential
analysis, U-statistics and empirical processes. The investigator and his
colleagues deal with several problems whose solution would have a beneficial
impact on several areas of probability and statistics. The broad area consists
of the study of the properties of phenomena that exhibit high levels of inter-
dependence and, hence, are hard to analyze on their own. The difficulty stems
from the strong links present with other components. The approach followed by
the investigator and his colleagues when dealing with this type of problem
consists in introducing a new set of phenomena that closely resembles the
original one but which in addition has desirable independence properties. In
probabilistic language, one calls this approach to dealing with dependence a de-
coupling of t he dependence of a phenomenon. Up to now there are several results
developed in this area which typically produce optimal results. The investigator
and his colleagues continue to apply this theory to problems in sequential
analysis, U-statistics and stochastic integration. The statistical theory of
sequential analysis was introduced during World War II as a means of optimizing
resources. In sharp contrast with the typical statistical approach of assigning
a prefixed sample and analyzing the data only after the sample size has been
achieved, the sequential approach permits the optimization of resources by
closely following the development of the process at each stage of the
experiment. The sequential approach is particularly useful in cases of
destructive sampling, as in equipment and supply lifetime studies in military
equipment and industrial applications. In medical studies, its application
allows both to optimize resources and to deal with the ethical issues of
terminating early a clinical trial when there is strong indication that the drug
under study is harmful or proven to be beneficial, without having to wait until
a pre-fixed sample size has been attained in accordance with the classical
approach.
