
* 9626764
* Stochastics Models in Population Genetics and Ecology
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/1996,07/29/1996
* Stephen Krone,ID,Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 01/31/1999
* USD 32,000.00

9626764 Krone ABSTRACT The projects in this proposal fall into two categories:
population genetics (especially genealogical processes and sampling theory in
models with selection) and interacting particle systems (especially multitype
models motivated by ecology). Due in large part to the recent explosion of DNA
sequence data, two significant trends have emerged in population genetics over
the past 20 years. Firstly, the theory now focuses on sampling distributions and
the inferences that can be drawn from them. Secondly, the retrospective view
(often referred to as coalescent theory) replaced the former prospective view.
By studying ancestry, much of the unnecessary structure is stripped away and
simple flexible models emerge. Coalescent theory has had much success in
analyzing neutral models (i.e., models with no selection); however, the
corresponding selective theory has, for the most part, remained out of reach.
Recent progress by one of the PI's has opened up many avenues of research on
biologically relevant problems. It is shown that genealogical information is
embedded in the dual processes of certain interacting particle systems. The
investigators propose to extend these techniques to include a variety of models,
most notably models involving DNA polymorphism and recombination. Sampling
theory for models with selection will also be developed. The sampling theory for
a large class of models is characterized and is analogous to the exponential
family. Thus the theory of inference, including parameter estimation,
information criteria, hypothesis testing, and model selection will be developed
rigorously. Interacting particle systems are ideal for modeling biological
systems with spatial structure. In recent years, tools have been developed for
dealing with multitype particle systems. These multitype systems are
particularly relevant in ecological models. A number of multitype models of
competition and succession are proposed. Some of the key features in the
proposed model s are the effects of different dispersal ranges and random
environments. The problems in this proposal are motivated by important issues in
population genetics and ecology. Mathematical models are useful for several
reasons. The time scales of interest in many biological settings are often
hundreds or thousands of years (e.g., forest succession, evolutionary changes,
etc.), and hence it is important to be able to predict long-term effects when
certain characteristics of the population are changed. Another example of a
timely issue which precludes a "wait and see" approach is the extinction of
endangered species. The models and analysis proposed will allow for qualitative
and quantitative predictions, as well as efficient simulation strategies.
Significant contributions to the mathematical underpinnings of these models are
also expected. The proposed work on population genetics will address the effects
of natural selection on genealogy. This is crucial for developing efficient
tests for selection, determining how powerful these tests are, deciding which
selective models are realistic and what their properties are. Spatial models in
ecology will be approached through "interacting particle systems." Issues such
as the spread and control of disease in plant communities, extinction of
populations in subdivided habitats, and the effects of inhomogeneous
environments will be addressed. The models proposed are much more complicated
than most models in the literature because they take into account the spatial
structure that is inherent (and important) in real populations.
