
* 9626675
* Stochastic Spatial Models
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/1996,07/16/1996
* J. Theodore Cox,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 07/31/1999
* USD 69,000.00

9628290 Cox ABSTRACT This proposal involves research on several topics in the
theory and application of interacting particle systems. Among the phenomena
these systems model are: competition of species, epidemics, spread of genetic
traits, catalytic chemical reactions, as well as many others. The investigator
will pursue research on several specific problems. The first project involves
the parabolic Anderson model as an interacting diffusion, and associated
critical phenomena. The second project concerns the behavior of one-dimensional
interfaces regions. This continues work on a model for hybrid zones or "narrow"
coexistence zones of different species. The third project attempts to model
species abundance distributions with an interacting particle system model. This
builds on related work modeling the relationship between species number and
area. The fourth project involves possible extensions of a recently discovered
comparison technique for interacting systems. Since exact calculations are
usually difficult or impossible to make, comparison methods are important tools
for analyzing new systems. This proposal involves research on several topics in
the theory and application of interacting particle systems. . Among the
phenomena these systems model are: competition of species, epidemics, spread of
genetic traits, catalytic chemical reactions, as well as many others. The goal
of this research is to obtain a better qualitative understanding of various
complex phenomena that interacting particle systems model well. For example, a
simple model for the evolution and extinction of species, to study species
abundance questions, fits into this framework. It is based on the birth, death,
movement, and reproduction, with a small mutation rate, of individuals. The
investigator hopes to show that this type of model can explain the data patterns
observed in the field. Part of the proposed research concerns very specific
models and questions such as this one, and part of the proposed researc h will
aim at developing general mathematical techniques for handling models of this
type.
