
* 9626196
* Mathematical Sciences: Interacting Particle Systems and Queueing Networks
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/1996,08/01/1997
* Maury Bramson,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/1998
* USD 92,930.00

Bramson The investigator's research is in stochastic processes, primarily in the
areas of interacting particle systems and queueing networks. Although typically
appealing to different groups of researchers, both areas deal with large systems
of objects, such as particles or customers, which are connected together by some
interaction rule. Interacting particle systems research usually deals with
lattice-valued random systems which update according to some local rule. Such
systems model various complex random systems and exhibit a wide range of spatial
behavior; they frequently occur in the context of mathematical physics and
mathematical biology. One is interested in the long-time behavior of such
systems, such as the behavior of the associated equilibria. The investigator
intends to work on topics such as the structure of multitype particle systems,
systems with annihilation and creation, the equilibria of certain semi-infinite
systems, and interface dynamics. Queueing networks research studies the
evolution of queues of individuals under different rules for routing and
assigned priorities. As time evolves, individuals enter the system, move from
one queue to the next, and, upon completion of service, exit from the system.
Depending on specifics, such a system may or may not be stable; the goal of much
recent research has been to analyze such behavior. A recent important tool for
such problems is the use of fluid limits, with which problems on stability of
networks can be reduced to the stability of the associated fluid models. The
investigator intends to investigate the properties of some of the main classes
of fluid models, and apply this analysis to the study of stability questions for
networks and to the related topic of heavy traffic limits for networks. The
investigator's research lies primarily in two areas of probability theory,
interacting particle systems and queueing networks. The field of interacting
particle systems typically deals with large random systems. The compon ents of
these systems can represent, for example, particles, cells, or various
organisms. Such systems model various complex random systems and exhibit a wide
range of behavior; they frequently occur in the context of mathematical physics
and mathematical biology. One is typically interested in the long-time behavior
of such systems. The topics the investigator intends to work on include
biological models for the diversity and stability of different species, and
physical models for the evolution of chemical reactions. The field of queueing
networks studies the behavior of lines of individuals in general settings. These
individuals can, for example, be customers waiting to be served, or components
involved in some manufacturing process. As time evolves, individuals enter the
system, move from one line to the next, and, upon completion of service, exit
from the system. A general unsolved problem is to find which systems are stable,
that is, the lengths of their lines do not tend to grow as time increases. This
information can then be used to indicate more efficient algorithms for the
service of customers, with the goal of saving time and materials. A recent
important tool for the analysis of queueing networks is the use of fluid models,
which are nonrandom simplifications of the original networks. The investigator
intends to continue his work in the area by studying and applying the properties
of fluid models.
