
* 9626412
* Mathematical Sciences: Random Access Approximations in Combinatorics and Number Theory
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1996,06/28/1996
* Richard Arratia,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1998
* USD 40,000.00

9626412 Arratia/Tavare ABSTRACT The investigators study the probabilistic
properties of some of the most basic structures in combinatorics and number
theory, such as partitions of sets and integers, and the factorization of
uniformly chosen integers into primes. They apply techniques learned from the
study of genetics and random permutations, including couplings, the total
variation distance and Wasserstein metric for processes observing some or all of
the possible component sizes, size-biased permutations of the components,
sampling properties for populations, and Stein's method. The interaction between
pure and applied method can be fruitful for both. Techniques motivated by the
needs and intuitions from each field can illuminate the other. For example, the
applied study of genetics naturally involves sampling from populations, which
leads to the notion of a size- biased permutation, which simplifies the
understanding of a question from pure math, involving the large prime factors of
a random integer. In the other direction, results proved about primes, such as
bounds on the "total variation distance", anticipated by three decades important
work in statistics on the comparison of sampling with and without replacement.
The proposed investigation attempts to straddle the boundary between pure and
applied math as it relates to genetics, sampling, and prime numbers.
