
* 9626236
* Further Study of Random Sums, Bilinear Forms, Multilinear Forms, Stopping Times, Expectations, Tail Probabilities & Limit Theorems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1996,06/19/1996
* Michael Klass,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1999
* USD 45,000.00

9626236 Klass ABSTRACT The Principal Investigator and his colleagues study the
behavior of random sums. Work in three areas is proposed: quadratic (bilinear)
forms having a fixed number of summands, ones having a random number of
summands, and improved tail probability approximations for Poissonized sums of
independent random variables. In the first such area it is anticipated that
results will be obtained which identify the order of magnitude of the
expectation of a function of the absolute value of a bilinear form (and also of
a generalized U-statistic) of a fixed number of independent real-valued random
variables, for any non-decreasing function of at most polynomial growth without
further assumptions on the bilinear form, the generalized U-statistics, the
distributions, or the number of independent variates. The second problem area,
worked on if time permits, will attempt to establish similar results regarding
the expectation of the maximum absolute value of one specific family of bilinear
forms of independent and identically distributed mean zero random variates,
maximized up to a stopping time determined by the variates themselves. Thirdly,
the proposer and colleagues will attempt to produce improved and best possible
tail probability approximations for Poissonized sums of independent random
variables satisfying certain constraints. Probabilistic issues crop up whenever
numbers are important and total knowledge or command of the situation is
rendered humanly impossible. For example, the management of a chain store (e.g.
Sears or Macy's) must continually make decisions concerning how much of its
capital to allocate to each of a multitude of items. Yet it does not really know
the entire sales picture. Not only does management not know future trends, it
doesn't know what the current sales results are for comparable or competitive
items sold by other companies in similar locations -- and management may not
have full comprehension of the contributory factors influencing its own sales
pattern. To make good financial decisions, management needs a fairly
comprehensive and continually updated mathematical model of its fiscal
situation. For instance, it needs to know what is the chance that it will have
more than d unsold dresses of cost c or more in a given store, as well as
throughout the company. To assess the sensitivity of its profitability to
variations in materials and labor costs as well as consumer demand the company
may want to compute expectations involving quantities which mathematicians
recognize as quadratic forms or generalized U-statistics. Thus, if their utility
were properly recognized, the results to be obtained in this proposal might well
be of substantial industrial interest.
