
* 9703815
* Weak Convergence Results for Particle Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1997,03/16/1999
* Thomas Mountford,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 157,000.00

9703815 Mountford The subject of interacting particle systems is of particular
interest when a given process has multiple stationary distributions. In this
case it is of interest to know which initial configurations converge to which
stationary distributions. For the contact process the complete convergence
theorem provides the perfect answer to the above question. This solution may be
carried over to a large class of supercritical, attractive, reversible nearest
particle systems. Such a complete convergence theorem cannot hold for the
critical reversible nearest particle systems as finite systems die out almost
surely. Mountford is interested in examining the above question in this case.
The convergence question for the voter model is well understood and a good
description of the stationary distributions is given, but it remains difficult
to address large deviation and percolation issues. Mountford wishes to
investigate these and similar questions. Mountford will also continue his work
on the structure of level sets for the Brownian sheet, in collaboration with
Professor Robert Dalang. Professor Mountford is continuing his work on
interacting particle systems. Interacting particle systems are processes where a
large (often infinite) population have associated variables that evolve in
random fashion; a particular individual's variable will typically evolve
according to its value and those of its close neighbors. For instance the
population may be trees in an orchard, the variable values may be sick or
healthy and an individuals value may change from sick to healthy or vice-versa
depending on the health and sickness values of the immediately surrounding
trees. These processes provide a rich family of models for the spread of
disease, the propagation of knowledge, the establishment of consensus. The
subject of interacting particle systems for infinite populations becomes
particularly interesting when the system admits distinct equilibria. The n one
important issue is to say which (if any) equilibrium a system will converge to,
when starting from a given initial configuration. Another important area of
research is to describe the distinct equilibria. If the population is large but
finite, then although usually there is only one equilibrium, multiple equilibria
in the corresponding infinite population translate into the existence of initial
configurations for the finite system that take a very long time to reach
equilibrium.
