
* 9703648
* Particles, Stochastic Partial Differential Equations, Random Fields
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1997,05/10/2001
* Peter Kotelenez,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2002
* USD 94,000.00

9703648 Kotelenez The investigator will work on the derivation of physically
meaningful stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) from systems of
diffusing and interacting particles. The main difference from the traditional
approach for N diffusing particles is that the fluctuations will be represented
by "correlated" Brownian motions (representing the fluctuation forces), where
the strength of the correlations depends on the distance of two given particles
and a parameter, the so-called correlation length. Consequently, the SPDEs will
depend on the correlation length as a parameter. Macroscopic and central limit
theorems are expected, as the correlation length tends to zero. Further, the
investigator will study the qualitative properties of the SPDEs. Homogeneous,
isotropic and stationary random fields shall be derived as solutions of the
SPDEs, and the spectral analysis of the random fields in terms of the
coefficients of the SPDEs shall be conducted. Mathematically, the proposed work
will build a bridge between 4 different areas of mathematics, namely particle
systems, SPDEs, random fields and partial differential equations. Many physical,
biological and economic phenomena consist of a large number of components. The
large number and the rapid changes of the components make an exact description
of the time evolution of all components very difficult , if not impossible.
Examples are turbulence, chemical reactions, diffusion, spreading of diseases
(viruses, bacteria), population growth, environmental pollution, climate,
weather, financial markets etc. To build a mathematical model of those
phenomena, the real world systems of atoms, molecules, viruses etc. are replaced
by random particle systems whose time evolution can serve as a good predictor
for the real world systems. A more traditional model for the same phenomena are
macroscopic (deterministic) partial differential equations, many of which, more
than a century ago, became the ma in theoretical tools in different areas of
physics and engineering and also, more recently, in some areas of the
biosciences and economics. Such an equation typically describes "how much mass
(of some matter) is at a given place at a given time." Mathematically, most of
those macroscopic equations can be derived from particle systems by a limit
procedure, assuming that the number of particles becomes infinite and their
respective masses become very small, and that the motion of particles is always
statistically uncorrelated. This derivation also explains why the macroscopic
equations often do not correctly predict the time evolution of the real world
systems, but that in the long run they appear to be an average of many
observations. Macroscopic equations, however, are easier to compute than
particle systems. The investigator will extend the model of macroscopic partial
differential equations to a model of mezoscopic (stochastic) partial
differential equations. The mezoscopic equations shall be derived from particle
systems in the same way as the macroscopic equations, but under more realistic
assumptions on the particle systems, namely that the motion of particles is
statistically correlated, when they are close to one another. As a result the
mezoscopic equations should be in better agreement with observations than the
macroscopic equations, while preserving the computational simplicity of the
latter ones. Moreover, the macroscopic equations will appear as the limiting
case of the mezoscopic equations. Mezoscopic equations will have diverse
applications in physical chemistry, the biosciences, fluid mechanics and
financial markets.
