
* 9703811
* Fluctuations in Asymmetric Processes with Static and Dynamic Random Environments
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1997,07/11/1997
* Sunder Sethuraman,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 09/04/1998
* USD 59,079.00

9703811 Sethuraman The fluctuation behavior of a single, or "tagged" particle
moving in certain asymmetric stochastic dynamical systems is studied. The
stochastic systems fall into two model classes: Conservative particle systems,
and Brownian trapping models. The first category includes the simple exclusion
and zero-range systems, while the second category considers variants of the
"Wiener Sausage" model. An important difference between these two classes lies
in that the random environments presented to a particular particle are "changing
in a comparable scale" in the first and "slowly varying" in the second. Although
the tagged particle fluctuations are well understood with respect to reversible
versions of these models, little is known when these processes possess a drift.
This project focuses on developing various estimates and limit theorems which do
not depend on symmetry, so as to identify the non-reversible tagged particle
fluctuation picture. Two sample questions which are addressed in this work are:
What are the effective statistics governing the behavior of a typical passenger
interacting with other passengers moving in a complex Customs queue? Consider a
thick porous stone roof of a cave; what is the chance that a rain drop will
weave its way through the fissures in the stone to drip into the cave, and what
strategy does it take to avoid being absorbed into the stone? These two
questions fit into the framework of the so-called "tagged" particle problem
which is the main subject of this project. Abstractly, a particle, such as a
passenger or a rain drop, interacts with a random environment. The goal of this
project is to understand the fluctuation probabilities of this particle
interaction in various systems with asymmetries. The motivation for this work is
that the most general situations in many physical phenomena of interest, such as
fluid flow, queuing, and chemical ion trapping behavior, are well modeled by
these asymmetric p rocesses. The significance of this project is that asymmetry
is a main feature of the models considered; previously, research proceeded under
the less palatable assumption of symmetry which often simplified the models
beyond application.
