
* 9703891
* Multidimensional Diffusions and Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1997,06/27/1997
* Ruth Williams,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2000
* USD 75,000.00

9703891 Williams A number of mathematical problems for multidimensional
diffusions arising in applications are being studied. These are grouped under
three headings. (i) Approximation of multiclass queueing networks in heavy
traffic. Most queueing network models cannot be analyzed exactly and must be
approximated by more tractable models. A certain class of diffusion processes,
known as reflecting Brownian motions, have been shown to approximate heavily
loaded single class and some multiclass queueing networks. However, currently
there is no general limit theorem to justify such approximations for heavily
loaded multiclass queueing networks with feedback. Although it is known that
such approximations do not hold in complete generality, the PI seeks to identify
broad classes of multiclass networks for which they do hold and to provide limit
theorems to support such approximations. (ii) Long run behavior of reflecting
Brownian motions. For the purpose of obtaining approximate measures of
performance for queueing network models and as a problem of intrinsic
mathematical interest, it is natural to consider the long run behavior of
reflecting Brownian motions. In particular, conditions for positive recurrence
of semimartingale reflecting Brownian motions are being sought by study of a
related deterministic dynamical system. (iii) Stochastic differential equations
with discontinuous/degenerate coefficients and applications to nonlinear time
series. The need for nonlinear models in time series analysis has become
increasingly apparent in recent years. Continuous time models can greatly
facilitate the analysis of irregularly spaced data. A useful class of nonlinear
continuous time models are the continuous time threshold autoregressive models.
These are defined by stochastic differential equations with a discontinuous and
degenerate diffusion coefficient. A compelling problem for future use of these
models is to resolve the problem of uniqueness for solutio ns of these equations
when the order of the model is larger than two. This problem, as well as
multivariate versions of it, are being studied. Multidimensional diffusions
processes are used as stochastic models in a wide variety of applications in the
physical, biological, engineering and social sciences. Motivated by such
applications, a number of mathematical problems for diffusions are being
studied. As an illustrative example, queueing networks are of current relevance
for analyzing congestion and delay in computer systems, communication networks
and complex manufacturing systems. These networks may process more than one
class of customer or job (e.g., voice, video and data may pass through each node
in a communication network), have complex feedback structures (e.g., as in
reentrant lines for semiconductor wafer fabrication) and are frequently heavily
loaded. In general such models cannot be analyzed exactly and one is naturally
led to seek tractable approximations, such as multidimensional diffusions. A
challenging mathematical question here is when is such an approximation valid?
Results of recent years have revealed this to be a complex issue for multiclass
networks with feedback. This question and others for multidimensional diffusions
are being pursued under this grant.
