
* 9703923
* Cellular Automata and Percolation Models of Growth and Competition
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/1997,07/21/1997
* Janko Gravner,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 07/31/2001
* USD 75,000.00

9703923 Gravner This project addresses the behavior of deterministic and random
cellular automata (CA). Such processes describe configurations on lattices which
evolve by a repeated update of a local rule. The research goals consist of three
main parts. The first part focuses on deterministic and random growth models,
emphasizing emergence of asymptotic shapes, limit laws for first passage times,
as well as hydrodynamic and other continuum limits. The second part is devoted
to competition theory, especially to cases which lead to approximation with the
motion by mean curvature. On finite universes, long-time evolution of such
dynamics depends on topological properties of the underlying space. The third
part consists of studying percolation on hypercubes in high dimensions; the goal
is to understand how the number of species is determined by the structure of
viable genotypes and various mating strategies. This research is accompanied by
development of computer software, which is used for simulation, statistical
analyses, numerical computation and combinatorial searches. This project studies
several classes of deterministic and random evolutions of spatial
configurations. The basic property of these evolutions is that they are governed
by local rules; they are referred to as deterministic and random cellular
automata (CA). The study of CA offers insights into fundamental organizational
principles in many scientific contexts. CA complement differential equations,
the prevailing method of describing physical processes, by demonstrating how
differential equations arise naturally from local rules. In biological contexts,
the CA models under study shed light on how harshness of the environment affects
diversity of species, how equally fit species compete for the available space
and how spread of biological agents is affected by spatial anomalies. Emergence
of shapes in growth models is often seen as the basic example of global
structure arising from local dynamics, and studying proper ties of such shapes
leads to challenges in probability theory, geometry and complexity theory.
Finally, computer analyses of CA are not only indispensable for mathematical
development, but they also provide a worthy testing ground for parallel
computation schemes and visualization hardware.
