
* 9703740
* Probability Measures of Vector Spaces; Basic Results and Applications
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 05/15/1997,03/16/1999
* James Kuelbs,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 04/30/2001
* USD 201,000.00

9703740 Kuelbs The principal investigator will continue his research in
probability theory. It includes non-logarithmic large deviation probabilities
for partial sums of independent random vectors via dominating points in the
infinite dimensional setting, and also the application of these results to a
Gibbs conditioning principle for certain infinite dimensional statistics. Limit
sets for random samples of processes, as well as related coverage problems will
be examined, and a primary focus will be to further examine the link between
small ball probabilities and metric entropy problems in approximation theory.
For Gaussian measures, this linkage has been useful in a number of problem
areas, but a more detailed examination from several points of view is proposed.
Problems concerning vector valued partial sums, empirical processes, self-
normalized partial sums, and limit theorems for convex hulls for Brownian motion
are also to be considered. Applications of probability in modern science
frequently involve the study of random quantities with many components
(dimensions), or perhaps even of a geometric nature. Thus they require
probability estimates and limit theorems which are applicable to random sets, or
which are dimension free (hence, in essence, infinite dimensional). A major
theme in the investigator's previous work and in much of the currently proposed
research addresses both of these issues in a variety of settings. As a first
example consider the link between small ball probabilities and metric entropy
problems, which showed certain probability estimates are equivalent to problems
in approximation theory. This link led to the solution of a long standing
problem in approximation theory, and portions of the proposed research involve
important unsolved analogues of this problem. Another example is the study of
the Gibbs conditioning principle of statistical mechanics for statistics with
infinitely many components. To begin to handle this type of problem one needs
non-logarithmic estimat es of large deviation probabilities which are dimension
free. Such estimates were obtained recently, and their application to Gibbs
conditioning is being initiated. Additional problems exhibiting these general
features are also to be considered, and connect with classical geometry,
analysis, and statistics.
