
* 9704426
* Research on Stochastic Processes and Optimization
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1997,04/01/1999
* Paul Dupuis,RI,Brown University
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 08/31/2000
* USD 124,299.00

9704426 Dupuis This project covers three topics: (i) theory and applications of
the Skorokhod Problem; (ii) large deviations and risk sensitive control and
robust control of queueing networks; and (iii) computational methods for
deterministic optimal control problems and related first order nonlinear PDE.
The solution to the Skorokhod Problem defines what might be considered the
input/output map for a number of exact and approximate models in queueing,
communication, economics, and other areas. Except in special cases, little is
known about the analytical properties of this mapping. This research will build
on prior work of the investigator and H. Ishii which takes a geometric approach
to obtaining regularity conditions for the Skorokhod Problem. The main thrust of
the present work is the development and application of methods based on convex
duality. The second part of the project studies large deviations for queueing
networks. The main topic here is the formulation and analysis of risk sensitive
criteria for the control and regulation of queueing networks. In almost all
models for networks there are errors, approximations, and model uncertainty, and
one would like to design control schemes that are insensitive to such errors.
Using the duality between exponential integrals and the relative entropy
function, one can (at least in the context of diffusions) give a precise
quantitative characterization of the additional robustness properties that are
obtained when a risk sensitive criteria is used. The investigator will formulate
and analyze via large deviation techniques such criteria in a queueing context.
The final part of the project considers cmmputational methods for deterministic
optimal control problems. The main emphasis here is on the development of
practical algorithms with good qualitative properties. This will be done for a
class of problems with very similar features that arise in large deviation for
diffusions, certain problems fr om computer vision, and robust nonlinear control
and robust filtering. Modern communication, computer, and queueing systems are
very complicated, and in fact too complicated to analyze in complete detail. As
systems become more and more heterogeneous (e.g., different data classes,
different quality of service requirements, etc.) the control and regulation of
these systems becomes more difficult and less intuitive. The first two parts of
this project investigate two approaches to dealing with such systems. When
analyzing queueing and communication systems one needs (relatively) simple
system models which capture the most important aspects of the true system.
Linear systems are unable to capture the system behavior caused by hard
constraints (non-negativity of queue lengths, limits on buffer sizes, etc.) and
discontinuities that occur naturally in well designed routing and service
protocols. Part of this research is to look at alternatives to linear systems.
The second part focuses on the study of risk sensitive criteria for such
systems. Risk sensitive and robust criteria provide alternatives to traditional
criteria for the evaluation of system performance, and it is now understood that
they are very useful in situations where model uncertainty and robustness
against modeling errors are important. Such robustness properties are always
important for communication and manufacturing systems. The aim here is to
properly formulate and analyze risk-sensitive criteria for random networks, and
to quantify the robustness properties when compared to traditional criteria. The
last part of the project is devoted to the development of usable and efficient
computational methods for deterministic optimal control problems, and in
particular to the class of problems that arise in the second part of the
proposal.
