
* 9704197
* Phase Transition: Questions in Percolation and Interacting Particle Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1997,07/25/1997
* Thomas Liggett,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1999
* USD 20,323.00

9704197 Liggett Alan Stacey proposes to work on problems in percolation,
interacting particle systems and probabilistic combinatorics. He proposes to
work (partly with Tom Liggett) to try to extend work of theirs (and others) on
contact processes on trees: to prove a conjecture of Liggett which would
complete a significant characterization of the three phases of the process on a
homogeneous tree; to understand more fully the behavior in the three phases; and
to use this detailed knowledge of the behavior to complete work with Robin
Pemantle in which certain exponentially growing non-homogeneous trees are found
where the branching random walk and/or the contact process only have one phase
transition. Alan Stacey also proposes to extend methods developed by van den
Berg to show almost sure uniqueness of the Gibbs measure of a two-dimensional
spin-glass model at parameter values where the Gibbs measure for the
corresponding Ising model is not unique. He proposes to work on problems in
percolation such as trying to prove that percolation occurs in certain models
where this is not known for any non-trivial value of the parameters, including a
percolation model with long-range dependencies which arises from a question
about random walks on a graph; a more ambitious project (in the light of the
unsuccessful attempts by many distinguished probabilists) is to show that the
percolation probability at the critical value is zero for standard bond
percolation in three dimensions. Stacey also proposes to work on an appealing
conjecture that the rates of convergence are the same for two different Markov
chains arising from a card-shuffling situation. The problems described concern
mathematical models for important physical and biological processes such as the
spread of disease and the growth of populations (both human, and those
consisting of other organisms). Although the mathematical descriptions are
abstract and are not typically based on one specific real-world situation, a
detailed understandi ng of the abstract models helps one to understand and
predict important physical model; indeed, one or two simply described
mathematical models can be of relevance to a very large number of physical
systems. One key phenomenon common to the abstract models and the empirical
observations is phase transitions: a system can exhibit two or more quite
different types of behavior (or phases) under different conditions; a classic
example is that of a disease which may spread out of control under certain
conditions and fizzle out under different circumstances. The change from one
phase to another is often quite dramatic and can be the result of a very small
change in the parameters on which the system depends, such as the susceptibility
of the individuals in a population or (in another classic example of phase
transition -- that of a substance turning from a solid to a liquid) the
temperature. The work proposed explores the nature of the phase transition and
the types of phases that can occur in a number of different models. They include
the contact process -- a model for the spread of disease -- which can exhibit
two phases in certain environments, and three phases in others; and spin glasses
-- which model magnetism in a substance with impurities -- where, in a certain
case, it is thought that no phase transition exists and the system has similar
behavior at all temperatures; but this conjecture is not yet proven.
