
* 9704552
* Probability and Statistics and Related Biomolecular Sequence Analysis
* DMS,Genetic Mechanisms, PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1997,01/04/2001
* Samuel Karlin,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 188,700.00

9704552 Karlin This research centers on developing new probabilistic and
statistical tools of relevance to biomolecular sequence analysis with particular
emphasis on: (i) The use of scan statistical analysis of marker arrays in
multiple correlated sequences. Specifically, to find asymptotic distributions of
extremal r-scan lengths for several stochastic models, extending earlier work of
the investigators by accommodating dependent and/or transformed data. These
asymptotics then serve as benchmarks for interpreting various biological
correlated multiple sequence data by providing estimates of probabilities of
clustering or over-dispersion of markers along one or more sequences. (ii) To
provide a flexible and general framework for characterizing residue clusters and
statistical significance of unusual compositions in protein 3D structures as
well as the means of assessing statistical significance of strong local
similarities among two or more such structures. The proposed framework is based
on the study of random models for weighted labeled graphs and as such it
generalizes previous work on the probabilistic foundation of general score based
methods for use in protein sequence comparison. Since 1995, several prokaryotic
genomes and one eukaryotic genome have been reported, and many are forthcoming.
These genomes provide opportunities and pose challenges for characterizing
genomic inhomogeneities, for detecting significant sequence patterns, and for
evolutionary comparisons. Availability of complete genomes and massive amounts
of DNA and protein sequences opens a new era in bioinformatics research.
Advances in (i) and (ii) above can provide much needed tools for biomolecular
data analysis and for comparison of protein sequences and corresponding three-
dimensional structures. Software approaches are often used to find relationships
between newly discovered sequences and the existing data banks. Similarities
detected can be used to predict biologi cal characteristics of new structures,
suggest directions for further experimental study, and point to possible medical
applications. However, due to the accelerating growth of the data banks, random
correlations might at first appear significant and thus mask the true biological
information existing in the data. This research aims at putting biomolecular
data analysis procedures on a firm mathematical foundation, and concomitantly
reducing the masking effect of random correlations.
