
* 9732810
* Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Analysis & Modeling in Financial Mathematics
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1998,06/14/2000
* Ioannis Karatzas,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2001
* USD 216,000.00

DMS-9732810 STOCHASTIC ANALYSIS AND MODELING IN FINANCIAL MATHEMATICS Principal
Investigators: IOANNIS KARATZAS and JAKSA CVITANIC Research is proposed on
various open mathematical problems of stochastic analysis and control, which
arise in the context of the modern theory for financial markets. Most of these
problems are formulated in the context of a continuous-time model for a market
with one riskless and several risky securities, and involve (i) questions of
single-agent optimization, multi-agent equilibrium, hedging and pricing of
contingent claims in markets with prices that can depend on the investment
strategy of a "large investor"; (ii) optimization, least expensive hedging, and
pricing, in markets with transaction costs; (iii) questions of fair pricing in
arbitrary incomplete markets, including markets with portfolio constraints; (iv)
maximization of the probability of hedging, in various models; (v) study of new,
game-type options; (vi) dynamic measures of risk; (vii) stationary equilibrium
in strategic market games; (viii) related questions of stochastic analysis such
as existence and uniqueness of certain Forward-Backward Stochastic Differential
Equations, existence and uniqueness of viscosity solutions to certain PDE's and
variational inequalities, solving non-standard stochastic control problems where
the loss function has a random component. It is expected that known tools from
stochastic analysis and martingale theory, convex duality theory, functional
analysis, stochastic control and viscosity solutions to partial differential
equations and variational inequalities, will prove valuable in the resolution of
these questions, but also that new tools will have to be developed to solve
nonstandard problems that arise. Thus, the project should result in the
advancement of the understanding of both the theoretical and applied aspects of
these fields. The significance of the proposed research is related to the fact
that one of the main gaps between theory and practice of financial markets is
the prevailing assumption in most of the models that the markets are perfect,
implying that every financial contract can be priced in a unique way, and its
risk can, in principle be fully controlled (hedged). In reality, however, this
is not the case; markets are "imperfect" or "incomplete" due, among other
things, to investment constraints, transaction costs, different interest rates
for borrowing and lending, different patterns of information, presence of
"large" or "informed" investors who can influence prices, etc. Thus, it is very
important to develop new methods for studying the risks and the ways of pricing
financial instruments in imperfect markets, some of which are suggested in this
proposal. In particular, these methods should prove useful in newly developing
markets such as re-insurance, catastrophic insurance, energy derivatives,
credit-risk derivatives and other insufficiently liquid markets.
