
* 9801085
* Limits and Deviations for Interacting Random Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1998,07/08/1998
* Timo Seppalainen,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 62,076.00

9801085 Seppalainen

This project develops precise mathematical understanding of certain macroscopic
phenomena that result from the interaction of a large number of microscopic
components. There is randomness in the behavior of the microscopic components,
so the models are stochastic in nature. The project covers several models of
current interest: longest increasing subsequences, moving interfaces,
Hammersley's process, the exclusion process, models with frozen disorder, and
the random-cluster model. The investigation addresses two basic questions: (1)
Is there predictable macroscopic behavior that does not depend on the
particularities of the random microscopic motions? The answer sought can be the
numerical value of an interesting quantity, a function that describes the shape
of an interface, or a differential equation that describes the macroscopic
evolution. (2) What are the chances that the microscopic evolution deviates
noticeably from the macroscopic description? Answers to this question are large
deviation theorems and central limit theorems, and may involve finding an
entropy function that the system seeks to maximize or minimize.

In many situations macroscopic behavior of a system depends on interactions of
microscopic components. The microscopic components can be of many types,
depending on the model under study: vehicles on a freeway, customers in a
sequence of queues, or fluid particles in a pipe or in a porous medium such as
soil. The outcome of this project is a better understanding of the overall
behavior of such a complex system. For example, in the traffic model the
investigator seeks to describe two distinct situations, a low density phase and
a high density phase, with qualitatively different patterns in the movement of
vehicles. In a queueing model one seeks a description of the flow of customers
through the network, to understand whether the system can become dangerously
clogged and unstable. Such models form part of the theoretical underpinnings of
modern communication technology. For a model of a moving interface the
interesting properties are the speed, the eventual shape, and the roughness of
the interface. These models and their relatives are intensely and concurrently
studied by mathematicians, physical scientists, and engineers. In many cases
simulations have not yielded conclusive pictures of the behavior. Consequently
there is great need for basic mathematical work to aid the more applied
scientists' understanding of such phenomena.
