
* 9802663
* Spanning Trees, Matroids and Group-Invariant-Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1998,06/25/1998
* Russell Lyons,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 74,000.00

9802663 Lyons

The investigator has collaborated recently with Benjamini, Peres and Schramm in
the area of probabilistic processes on graphs whose distributions are invariant
under automorphisms of the graph. One of the areas concerns uniform spanning
trees, where an enormous number of new questions have opened up because of the
interconnections of the field with other areas of probability such as random
walks and Dirichlet functions. The investigator proposes to work on several such
questions. Another area concerns percolation, both classical Bernoulli
percolation and more general invariant percolation. A large number of questions
in this area are also proposed.

The earliest result directly related to this investigator's work was discovered
by the physicist Kirchhoff in 1847, who showed that electrical network problems
are precisely related to certain probabilistic properties of special subnetworks
called spanning trees. The connections between these topics have flourished in
recent years and have also found links to other fundamental probabilistic
processes known as random walks and percolation. Random walks model many sorts
of random change, such as prices on the stock market. Percolation is a
probabilistic model of diffusion through a porous medium, such as groundwater
seeping through soil. The proposed work involves various connections among these
and other fields. The investigator aims to further the fundamental understanding
that is part of basic research.
