
* 9802451
* Self-Normalized Limit Theorems and Small Ball Probabilities
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/1998,07/15/1998
* Qi-Man Shao,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 07/31/2001
* USD 77,850.00

9802451 Shao

This project focuses on two topics in probability and statistics, namely, self-
normalized limit theorems and small ball probabilities. The first topic is
devoted to the study of limit theorems for self-normalized processes in general,
and for self-normalized partial sums in particular. The normalizing constants in
classical limit theorems are usually sequences of real numbers. Moment
conditions or other related assumptions are necessary and sufficient for many
classical limit theorems. However, the situation becomes very different when the
normalizing constants are sequences of random variables. The recent discovery of
the self-normalized large deviations shows that no moment conditions are needed
for a large deviation type result. A self-normalized law of the iterated
logarithm remains valid for all distributions in the domain of attraction of a
normal or stable law. This reveals that the self-normalization preserves much
better properties than deterministic normalization does. This also suggests many
further questions, such as what is the rate of convergence of self-normalized
approximation, what are necessary and sufficient conditions for the self-
normalized law of the iterated logarithm, finding tail probabilities of self-
normalized trimmed and censored sums, and finding self-normalized limit theorems
for independent but not necessarily identically distributed random variables.
The second topic concerns small ball probabilities for Gaussian processes which
serve as models in many applications. Small ball probabilities provide sharp
estimates for rare events. A primary focus of this part of research is a better
understanding of rare random phenomena related to Gaussian processes.

The self-normalized sums are closely related to the celebrated ``Student
t-statistic" and studentized ``U-statistic". This part of the research is
related to determining when the t-statistic and U-statistic can safely be used.
This study will help to understand the behavior of large classes of statistical
functionals since t- and U-statistics are their building blocks. The small ball
problems often arise in estimating the chances for rare events to occur in areas
where such events are of fundamental importance, such as weather, economic
indices, and epidemics. The first part of this research may lead to the
development of a new limit theory in probability and statistics while the second
part of the research may provide significant new knowledge about Gaussian
processes as well as about our random environments.
