
* 9802423
* Stochastic Partial Differential Equations with Applications to Nonlinear Filtering
* DMS,PROBABILITY, CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
* 07/01/1998,06/13/2002
* Boris Rozovsky,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2003
* USD 33,300.00

9802423 Rozovskii Each time an outfielder tracks and catches a fly ball, he
intuitively solves a problem of target tracking. That problem has stymied
engineers, mathematicians, and computer scientists for years. Two great
mathematicians, American, Norbert Wiener and Russian, Andrey Kolmogorov, first
approached the problem during World War II. Rather than catching fly balls,
Kolmogorov and Wiener were trying, in the days before computers, to develop
mathematical algorithms that would help to track enemy aircraft by radar. The
research started by Kolmogorov and Wiener has developed into a thriving area of
applied mathematics known as Filtering Theory. Filtering, estimation of a signal
or an image from noisy data, is the basic component of the data assimilation in
target tracking. It is of central importance in navigation, image and signal
processing, control theory, automatic tracking systems and other areas of
engineering and science. This research is a joint collaborative effort between
researchers at the Institute of Mathematics and Informatics, Vilnius, Lithuania,
and researchers at the University of Southern California. The project is devoted
to applications of stochastic partial differential equations to nonlinear
filtering. The focus of the research is twofold: (1) Cauchy- boundary problems
for parabolic partial differential equations arising in nonlinear filtering of
stochastic processes evolving under some constraints; and (2) nonlinear
filtering with distributed observation and applications to tracking of low-
observable targets in images. The research will also consider the numerical
aspects of nonlinear filtering. It is expected that relatively simple nonlinear
filtering algorithms which are not too demanding in computational and memory
requirements for on-line implementation and yet are nearly optimal from a
statistical viewpoint will be developed for a wide variety of applications. The
applications include air traffic control, human-computer interfaces based on
motion- capture, and advanced optical and magnetic registration systems.
