
* 9802753
* Stochastic Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1998,05/19/2000
* Michael Marcus,NY,CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 162,000.00

9802753 Marcus

Professors Marcus and Rosen will continue their study of continuity properties
of functionals of symmetric Markov processes and their limiting behavior. Using
an isomorphism theorem of Dynkin and extensions that they have obtained they
will exploit the interplay between high order Wick power and Wick product
Gaussian chaos processes and the renormalized self-intersection local time of a
large class of Levy processes, to study the phenomenon of ``near-intersections''
of a Levy process and path properties of local times of Levy processes on lines
and curves. The processes considered include Brownian motion and stable
processes in dimensions one two and three, as well as processes in their domains
of attraction. Marcus and Rosen plan to characterize the self-intersection local
time functional as the process of zero quadratic variation in the decomposition
of an associated Dirichlet process. Given that the self-intersection local time
functional has zero quadratic variation it is natural to ask what is its precise
p-variation. They plan to investigate this question as well. They expect to be
able to use techniques developed in an earlier paper based on the theory of
random Fourier series to expand the definition of the self-intersection local
time functional by replacing measures by distributions. They will continue their
study of continuity properties of high order Gaussian chaos processes and stable
moving averages, and level crossings of absolutely continuous infinitely
divisible processes. They will also study the multifractal spectrum of
occupation measures and intersections of random walks on a four dimensional
lattice.

This research deals with fundamental properties of stochastic processes. It
exposes a deep relationship between two classes of stochastic processes, Markov
processes and Gaussian chaos processes that previously were considered to be
unrelated. This relationship leads to increased understanding of the two
component processes, an understanding that cannot be obtained by considering the
processes separately. These results may have long range applications in the
transmission, reception and analysis of data, in quantum physics and in the
analysis of financial derivatives.
