
* 9802368
* Probability Models from Statistical Mechanics
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/1998,05/25/2000
* Kenneth Alexander,CA,University of Southern California
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/2002
* USD 161,441.00

9802368 Alexander Probability models from statistical mechanics are a framework
for studying how small-scale randomness produces global-scale phenomena, such as
phase transitions, which are essentially nonrandom. Alexander proposes to
investigate the following aspects of the subject. (1) The use of random-cluster
representations to study Gibbs uniqueness, dilution and its effect on critical
temperatures, disordered models, lattice gases with weak interactions, bounds on
critical points, and monotonicity of various quantities as a function of system
parameters. (2) Two-dimensional systems (percolation and the Ising model)
conditioned so as to exhibit the formation of a large droplet, that is, a
macroscopic region enclosed by a long contour, with emphasis on the discrepancy
between the actual and ideal shape of this droplet. (3) Confetti percolation, a
model which is both isotropic and, in two dimensions, self-dual, and hence is a
natural setting in which to study conformal invariance and related phenomena.
(4) The use of percolation ideas to create a model which mimics certain features
of the freezing of water which contains impurities. (5) The geometry of finite
clusters, and its relation to the cluster size distribution, for certain
continuum models of percolation. This work is part of an ongoing effort by
mathematicians and physicists to understand various systems in the natural world
in which nonrandom global-scale phenomena reflect aspects of small-scale
randomness. Examples include (i) magnetic properties of materials; (ii) waves
traveling through irregular materials, such as seismic waves through the earth's
crust; (iii) impurities in semiconductors; and (iv) percolation of liquid
through a porous material, such as water or oil through underground rock. It has
long been understood that many qualitative aspects of the relation between
small- scale randomness and macroscopic properties, including critical
phenomena, do not depend too closely on the particular system being studied. One
can therefore gain insight into real-world phenomena by studying abstract
systems not intended to model specifically magnets, or porous rock, or any other
particular part of the physical world. The systems need only exhibit parallel
features, such as clustering and critical phenomena. The systems which Alexander
will investigate--percolation, random cluster models, Ising and Potts models,
and other spin systems--are examples of such abstract systems.
