
* 9803140
* Markov Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/01/1998,04/14/2000
* Srinivasa Varadhan,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/2002
* USD 350,948.00

9803140 Varadhan

In this project the investigator will study the behavior of complex interactive
systems with conserved quantities. Their evolution is often described at the
microscopic level while questions are asked at a much larger or macroscopic
scale. The transition from one scale to another always requires some averaging
at the microscopic level and sometimes, as in the non gradient models, getting
rid of certain divergences as well. In the case of hyperbolic scaling, the
macroscopic equation is a nonlinear hyperbolic equation that develops shocks.
The characterization of the microscopic profile of the shock is an interesting
problem. Studying the rescaled motion of a single tagged particle that interacts
with large number of particles requires a central limit theorem to be proved
under very minimal mixing assumptions.

Many complex physical systems consist of a large number of elementary
components. Each of these components interacts in some fashion only with a few
neighboring ones. However, the large system, as a whole, evolves in some complex
manner due to the interactions of the individual components. This project is
devoted to the exploration of this phenomenon, in several concrete examples. The
goal is to provide mechanisms for making inferences about the behavior in the
large scale based on assumptions on the nature of the interaction in the small
scale.
