
* 9803598
* Mathematical Problems in Percolation and Ising Models
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/1998,07/17/2000
* Chris Wu,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 01/31/2003
* USD 70,203.00

9803598 Wu The aim of this research is the study of random spatial systems on
the finite dimensional hypercubic lattices and infinite dimensional hyperbolic
lattices. Three topics concerning percolation, Ising (ferromagnetic) models, and
contact processes will be studied. The first topic concerns percolation and
Ising models on hyperbolic lattices. Although Ising models and percolation on
the hypercubic lattices have been studied intensively and extensively since they
were introduced, these models on hyperbolic lattices have just started to
receive attention from physicists and mathematicians. They are found, by both
numerical studies and mathematical proofs, to exhibit a phenomenon of multiple
phase transitions. Although a few results have been rigorously proved, many
statements suggested by numerical studies are to be proved; and many more are to
be explored. The second topic concerns a roughening transition of (independent
and dependent) percolation on the hypercubic lattices with dimensions larger
than or equal to three. This is the analogy of a roughening transition of
ferromagnetic Ising models. The third topic is about a phase transition of
models with low-dimensional inhomogeneity. These models include percolation,
Ising ferromagnetic systems and contact processes. This research by an
investigator at an undergraduate institution involves the study of percolation
and interacting particle systems. These are probabilistic models, which have
been useful in understanding physical systems. Further understanding of these
probabilistic models can be helpful to physicists.
