
* 9803240
* Fine Properties of Levy Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/15/1998,06/18/1998
* Renming Song,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2001
* USD 80,000.00

9803240 Song

Although a lot is known about symmetric stable processes and Levy processes,
until recently, little was known about the counterparts to some of the deep
results and fine properties of Brownian motion and diffusion processes. The PI,
jointly with Zhen-Qing Chen, has recently obtained sharp estimates on the Green
function and Poisson kernel of symmetric stable processes on bounded smooth
domains. And these estimates have been applied to study the intrinsic
ultracontractivity and conditional gauge theorem for symmetric stable processes
on smooth domains. The PI intends to continue this study of the fine properties
of symmetric stable processes first and then to investigate the fine properties
of more general Levy processes or Markov processes. More precisely, he intends
to do the following: 1) study the Martin boundary and integral representations
of positive superharmonic functions of symmetric stable processes; 2) establish
the intrinsic ultracontractivity and conditional gauge theorem for symmetric
stable processes on rough domains; 3) establish the boundary Harnack principle
for symmetric stable processes on domains rougher than Lipschitz domains; 4)
find some nontrivial estimates on the first eigenvalue of the generator of the
killed symmetric stable processes; and 5) generalize the results proposed above
to more general Levy processes.

One of the most important classes of Markov processes is the Levy processes or
processes with independent stationary increments. And one of the most important
classes of Levy processes is the symmetric stable processes. Brownian motion is
the only symmetric stable process with continuous sample paths. Brownian motion
plays a central role in modern probability theory and has been intensively
studied. In the last few years there has been an explosive growth in the study
of physical and economic systems that can be successfully modeled with the use
of stable processes and other Levy processes. Stable processes and Levy
processes are now widely used in physics, operations research, queueing theory,
mathematical finance and risk estimation. These widespread applications are the
motivation for this investigator to study the fine properties of Levy processes.
The principal investigator expects that this proposed study will make symmetric
stable processes and Levy processes applicable to a wider range of practical
areas and to more difficult problems.
