
* 9803597
* Random Processes on Graphs, and Planar Brownian Motion
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1998,06/16/1998
* Yuval Peres,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2002
* USD 86,689.00

9803597 Peres The principal investigator will analyze various random processes
on graphs. For instance, a model of noisy propagation on trees has been studied
independently in Statistical Mechanics, in Computer Science and in Genetic
Reconstruction. This model is well understood only when the propagating
variables take two values, when it can be identified with the Ising model. There
are two distinct critical temperatures, one for uniqueness of Gibbs states and
another for purity of the Markovian state that corresponds to free boundary
conditions. The second critical temperature is not known for the Potts model,
where the propagating variables can take more than two values. To study large
homogeneous graphs that are not trees, the investigator will apply a new "mass
transport method" developed recently with several collaborators. Problems on the
geometry of the planar Brownian path will also be investigated; a key tool will
be the intersection equivalence of the paths with random sets constructed via
"fractal percolation". Mathematical biologists studying the spread of genetic
mutations in a family tree, and computer scientists studying the propagation of
errors in a noisy communication network, were led independently to the same
mathematical model that was considered earlier in statistical mechanics. The
principal investigator will attempt to unify and extend some of the earlier
results on these models, by using recent probabilistic techniques; some of this
involves collaboration with computer scientists. Recently, new methods have
emerged to exploit symmetries in the geometry of the underlying network, to
obtain better understanding of random processes on it; the investigator will
develop and apply these methods further. Finally, the trace of the erratic
random motion of a particle has been studied intensively by probabilists; this
research will investigate certain new approaches to these traces to try and
elucidate their geometric structure.
