
* 9803249
* Random Discrete Structures
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 05/15/1998,05/01/1998
* Robin Pemantle,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 09/01/1999
* USD 62,608.00

9803249 Pemantle The PI will study several problems on the interface between
probability theory and discrete mathematics. One of these problems is
essentially combinatorial, having to do with enumeration of lattice paths and
with solving a class of recursions arising in this problem. The problem arose
from an application in computer science, but the applications of this
combinatorial analysis extend to particle systems, and to many other enumeration
problems. The second research area is the theory of random processes on
countable groups. Many basic processes such as percolation, random walk, and
Markov random fields are symmetric with respect to the action of some group.
When the geometry of the space is hyperbolic, the group is typically non-
amenable, and the symmetry of the process under the action of such a large group
forces the process to be at least somewhat well behaved. The PI will attempt to
exploit some recently developed mass transport methods to obtain such results.
Finally, he will continue research into random processes on trees, and in
particular, the examination of the rotor model, the contact process, branching
random walk, and invasion percolation. Often quantities of mathematical and
physical interest are encoded in a power series, which is a very powerful tool
for obtaining expressions for the quantities of interest, provided one can in
the end decode the information. It is known how to do this for power series in
one variable, but relatively little is known when there is more than one
variable. Even a reasonable approximation is in general unknown. The results
from this research are expected to include a reliable method for approximating
the coefficients of power series in more than one variable. This will then allow
approximate solutions to problems that range from path enumeration, to queuing
problems (computing efficiency of networks of production), to analysis of the
speed of algorithms (the original motivation for this project).
