
* 9970943
* Some Problems in Probability Theory: Random Walks and Percolation
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1999,03/28/2001
* Harry Kesten,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* K Crank
* 12/31/2002
* USD 195,061.00

9970943

Various probability problems will be studied. The principal ones deal with
systems of weakly interacting random walks and with rho-percolation. In the
random walk systems one starts with one particle at each site of the integer
lattice in d dimensions and lets each particle perform a continuous time random
walk on this lattice. Interactions occur only when a particle jumps to a site
which is itself occupied or is adjacent to an occupied site. In this case the
particle which just jumped may coalesce with one of the particles at or adjacent
to the site to which it jumped. In another version the particle which just
jumped may annihilate another particle. The asymptotic density of such systems
will be investigated. Rho-percolation has the same set-up as ordinary site
percolation. The sites of a lattice are independently chosen to be occupied or
vacant with probability p or 1-p, respectively. One says that rho-percolation
occurs if there exists an infinite self-avoiding path on the lattice whose lower
density of occupied sites is at least rho. The proposer intends to investigate
analogues of various power bounds which are already known or conjectured for
ordinary percolation.

This research will study problems about systems of particles which undergo
random motion and which have an interaction which removes particles from the
system when two particles come close to each other. One motivation for studying
such systems is that they can be viewed as crude models for certain chemical
reactions. It is hoped that the variants of the model proposed for investigation
here are somewhat more realistic than the models usually considered. Another,
unrelated, class of problems in the proposal considers a system which undergoes
a phase transition. Almost all materials have phase transitions at some
temperature or magnetic field. Even though a great deal is known in statistical
physics on the non rigorous level about phase transitions, they are still only
poorly understood on a mathematical level. It is hoped that interesting and
instructive calculations can be carried out for the relatively new model of rho-
percolation.
