
* 9971608
* Cooperative Research in Statistical Estimation and Asymptotic Analysis
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/1999,06/11/1999
* Rafail Khasminskii,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/2003
* USD 42,000.00

9971608 Khasminskii

To facilitate the cooperative research opportunity, this proposal presents a
continuing effort to carry out in-depth study and collaborations for a number of
Russian leading experts and researchers at Wayne State University. The proposed
project encompasses the following topics: statistical approach to ill-posed
problems for ordinary and partial differential equations (ODEs and PDEs),
analysis of optimal input signals for parameter estimation, and averaging and
singularly perturbed systems with transient and null-recurrent diffusions. To
treat the ill-posed problems, the techniques will be based on statistical
approaches. Assuming that the observation is the solution of an ODE or a PDE
plus a white Gaussian noise with small intensity, the attention will be devoted
to the estimation of the unknown source of nonlinear PDEs and certain
coefficients appearing in linear differential equations. The nonparametric
estimation approach to reconstruction of initial/boundary conditions for PDE
with partial observations in white noise will be studied. Focusing on analysis
of optimal signals for parameter estimation, the main effort is to find
asymptotically efficient adaptive estimation procedures. Asymptotically stable,
neutral, and unstable systems will be examined. A two-step estimation procedure
will be adopted. The first step builds a preliminary estimator based on input
signals, and the second step fine tunes the estimate using a Newton-Raphson type
correction. Analyzing asymptotic properties of diffusion processes where the
fast changing process does not possess a finite invariant measure, both null-
recurrent cases and transient processes will be treated. In addition to
obtaining certain results on limit distribution of integral functionals of null-
recurrent diffusions, the asymptotic properties of the singularly perturbed
systems will be examined in detail. The proposed topics are motivated by various
applications in control, optimization, image processing and other related
fields. The expected results will have a wide range of applications.

The fast-paced progress in technology and the complexity of modern systems
necessitates communication, exchange of ideas and cooperative research at the
international level. The proposed project presents an effort of cooperative
research between researchers from Wayne State University and outstanding
scientists from Russia. By combining force and expertise, asymptotic analysis
for singularly perturbed stochastic systems will be examined and statistical
estimation problems will be studied. The results of the research will be useful
for many applications in manufacturing systems, data analysis, image processing,
control and optimization of stochastic systems. The continued and increased
collaborations will bring both short and long term fruitful returns. The
proposed project will be successful and effective in accelerating progress in
these fields. The cooperative research project will also foster the
establishment of long term significant collaborations among the researchers in
the U.S. and Russia, which will also be beneficial to the international
scientific community.
