
* 9971571
* Complex Stochastic Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/1999,02/27/2001
* Thomas Kurtz,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/2002
* USD 120,000.00

9971571 Kurtz Research programs will be carried out in the areas of stochastic
analysis, measure-valued processes, stochastic filtering and control, large
deviations, and spatial point processes. Work in the area of stochastic analysis
will focus on stochastic partial differential equations, the analysis of
simulation schemes for stochastic equations, and the relationship between
stochastic equations and martingale problems. Filtering equations for
nonstandard observation structures will be derived and analyzed. Previous work
on the martingale characterization of regular control problems will be extended
to singular and partially observed control problems. Methods for the study of
large deviations for Markov processes based on convergence of nonlinear
semigroups will be extended to new classes of models. Spatial point processes
characterized as stationary distributions of Markov birth and death processes
and as solutions of stochastic equations driven by Poisson random measures will
be studied. The work will focus on spatial ergodicity and central limit theorems
with applications to parameter estimation in mind. The study of stochastic
processes is concerned with mathematical descriptions of natural phenomena
governed by "random" or "chance" mechanisms. Mathematical models of such
phenomena may attempt to describe variation in time, in space, or both. The
research to be performed is concerned with developing methods for specifying
these mathematical models, approximating complex models by simpler ones,
obtaining information about the true state of a system from corrupted or "noisy"
observations, and determining how to influence or "control" the evolution of the
models and the phenomena they represent. In particular, filtering equations
provide a method of processing information about phenomena that cannot be
directly and/or accurately observed, by using a mathematical model for the
relationship between the unobserved phenomena and quantities that can be
observed. Examples of the kind of situations that will be considered include
models in which the observed information is spatially distributed such as might
be obtained from satellite observations and models of communications networks in
which one attempts to obtain information about the state of the network from
observations at a few points in the network.
