
* 9971868
* Stochastic Spatial Processes
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 06/15/1999,06/17/1999
* J. Theodore Cox,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 05/31/2002
* USD 74,994.00

9971868 Cox This research deals with several topics in the theory and
application of stochastic spatial processes. Such processes are stochastic
models for large systems with many interacting components. Among the phenomena
these systems model are competition of species, epidemics, spread of genetic
traits, and catalytic reactions. Research on several specific problems will be
considered. The first project involves a model for mutually catalytic branching.
The goal is to understand the simultaneous evolution of two spatially
distributed populations undergoing random motion and reproduction, where
individuals from one population reproduce and die only in the presence of
individuals from the other population. The second project involves measure-
valued scaling limits of interacting particle systems. The goal is to study
further the phenomenon, only recently discovered, that certain lattice systems
with strong local interactions converge, when scaled appropriately, to super-
Brownian motion. In particular, a detailed description of this phenomenon for
the voter model in two or more dimensions is a primary goal; both spatial and
genealogical structure will be studied. The third project involves questions
which arise in the study of mathematical models of hybrid zones. The goal here
is to describe the large scale behavior of models with a spatially dependent
selection mechanism, especially when the selective advantage parameter is small.
This research involves several topics in the theory and application of
stochastic spatial processes. The goal of this research is to obtain a better
qualitative understanding of some of the complex phenomena exhibited by systems
made up of a large number of interacting components, with the interaction having
a stochastic or random element. Such systems occur in many applications, one
notable area being theoretical biology and ecology, where there is great
interest in improving older mathematical models which do not allow for explicit
spatial dependence (as do these models). Stochastic spatial models are used to
study questions involving predator-prey interactions, species coexistence, and
genetic diversity. These models often have dozens of parameters and interaction
rules; consequently, they are generally not amenable to rigorous mathematical
analysis. The investigator plans research on several specific models which
retain the interesting qualitative behavior of more complicated models, but are
"simple" enough to allow for the possibility of mathematical analysis. By
studying these models, the investigator seeks to give rigorous mathematical
arguments which explain the observed behavior of the models. The investigator
also plans to study what appears to be an intimate connection between two
apparently different types of stochastic spatial models (discrete models with
strong interactions and continuous models with weak interactions).
