
* 9971720
* Stochastic Differential Equations and Related Topics
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/1999,01/29/2003
* Philip Protter,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 01/31/2004
* USD 260,000.00

The principal investigators will study various issues involving stochastic
differential equations (hereafter SDEs). These include numerical approximations
of expectations of both functions and functionals of solutions of SDEs, whether
they be diffusions or more generally Markov processes with jumps. Models
inspired by Stochastic Finance theory will receive attention; one example is
forward-backward SDEs, where a general weak existence and uniqueness theorem is
sought. Further a special emphasis is devoted to filtering theory where a new
Monte Carlo approach is developed, and also a martingale problem approach will
be tried to treat the infinite dimensional case. Stochastic partial differential
equations will be studied via a new method of viscosity solutions, hopefully
yielding existence, uniqueness and stability results in the fully nonlinear
case. Quasi-linear backward SDEs will be studied with an eye to applications in
Stochastic Finance theory; in addition several problems in Finance theory will
be treated directly, including complete markets with jumps and competitive price
equilibria in incomplete markets. The principal investigators of this project
study stochastic differential equations. A differential equation models
phenomena that vary with time, dealing with rates of change. A stochastic
differential equation includes the possibility that the change comes from random
forces. Examples of applications can be found in modeling radio and x-ray
transmissions, and cellular telephone signals, where the randomness comes from
static noise; biological examples where growth of viruses and plants have a
random component; and also in banking and finance where interest rate models,
commodity prices, and securities prices are modeled with random components. The
stochastic differential equations are complicated and sophisticated and cannot
be solved with explicit solutions: the desired quantities need to be
approximated by using a high speed computer. Efficient algorithms are needed and
these methods are not yet well understood; by consequence the practitioner has a
choice to use models that are too simple but with methods that work, or models
that better approximate the true state of nature but for which methods work
poorly, if at all. We propose to remedy this situation to a large extent by
developing algorithms that work for the better models, and in addition we
propose to quantify to what extent the models are effective.
