
* 9972237
* Processes With Dependent Increments: Boundary Crossing, Self-Normalization and Limit Theorems
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 07/01/1999,05/22/2001
* Victor de  la Pena,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 12/31/2002
* USD 138,000.00

The principal investigator (PI) considers problems which involve sums of
dependent variables and whose solutions require the use of existing and new
results of the theory of decoupling. Decoupling theory has been very successful
in translating problems involving dependent variables into ones involving
independent variables through the use of inequalities specially designed for
that purpose. In this research the PI will study three major problems, and
consider approaches (including decoupling methods) that may be used in solving
them. The first problem involves a general and natural approach to approximate
the expected waiting time for a random process to hit a boundary in terms of the
function determined by the expected value of the supremum of the process. This
approach permits the use of the historical averages in developing useful
approximations. The second problem concerns an approximation to the speed of
convergence of sums of dependent variables in terms of known results for sums of
independent variables. This problem has the potential of widely expanding the
applicability of the principle of conditioning, a method that extends the
martingale central limit theorem. The third problem develops probability
approximations for self-normalized martingales. Results from this problem have
the potential to impact several areas of probability and statistics, including
the theory of hypothesis testing and confidence intervals, since typically self-
normalized variables serve as pivotal quantities in the construction of
confidence intervals and tests of hypothesis. A common assumption made in the
development of statistical and probabilistic methods concerns the predicate that
the variables or processes are independent or have independence properties, that
is, what happens to one of the variables does not affect what happens to the
other. This independence assumption has the effect of simplifying the
mathematical complexity of the problem and is quite common in practice. Due to
this simplification it seems natural to seek approaches that would permit the
use of results involving independent variables in the case the variables are
dependent. The PI has been heavily involved in such a project through the
development of ``Decoupling'' theory which has the above paradigm as its goal.
His first problem in the current research is to develop a probabilistic theory
for the use of historical data to obtain estimates of the time dependent
processes take to reach a boundary. His preliminary work provides useful
connections between the study of this problem and the study of the case of
boundary crossing by non-random functions through the use of the average (or
expected) behavior of the processes involved. This work has the potential to
impact profoundly several areas of scientific knowledge where boundary crossing
times are important and historical knowledge of the behavior of the process in
question is available. Examples of specific areas of application include
approximations to waiting time for: 1) an earthquake to happen, 2) for the next
tornado to arrive, 3) for a dam to overflow, 4) for a computer to crash. All
this when historical records are available. The second problem involves the
development of results connecting the efficiency of approximations used
involving independent variables to obtain similar approximations for dependent
variables, a potentially cost saving device for choosing between competing
statistical procedures. The third problem involves the study of self-normalized
statistics based on dependent variables or processes. This type of statistic
provides key quantities used in the development of confidence intervals for
parameters. An example of how dependence enters into this type of problem
concerns the development of interval estimates for the percentage of voters
which will vote for a given candidate in the case the voters do not act
independently but influence each other's decisions.
