
* 9972417
* Refined Approximation of Tail Probabilities, Expectation and Exponential Bounds for Partial Sums and Self-Normalized Martingales
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/15/1999,07/06/2001
* Michael Klass,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2003
* USD 129,600.00

The investigator plans to do work in two principal areas, sums and self-
normalized sums. He (together with a co-author) intends to write up a very
accurate result which can be applied to the approximation of tail probabilities
of both real-valued and Banach space-valued partial sums of independent
variates. Armed with certain functions defined from the marginal distributions
of the variates, approximations of partial sum quantiles and p-th moments of
great precision should follow. Secondly, the proposer (and co-authors) will
address questions concerning exponential moment and tail probability upper
bounds for self-normalized martingales. It is anticipated that statistical
applications will occur as a consequence. Probabilistic and statistical issues
arise in a broad variety of theoretical and applied contexts. Most commonly the
issues involve the probability of an event, the expectation of a random
function, or a test of hypothesis. Real world applications of such results are
wide-spread, extending from theory to data analysis in the social sciences,
pharmaceuticals, finance, economics, engineering, the physical sciences, and the
performance of algorithms. The investigator has worked in the area of sums of
independent random variables for many years. He (together with co-authors) now
is pursuing results of very refined precision. Included in this list are
substantial improvements in the approximation of tail probabilities of partial
sums and the location of their quantiles, expectation bounds, plus tail
probability, exponential and moment generating function bounds for so-called
self-normalized martingales.
