* 9200630
* FASEB Summer Conference:  Folate, B-12 and One Carbon       Metabolism - August 1992, Vermont Academy, Saxtons River,   Vermont
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1993
* Robert Allen, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 11/30/1993
* USD 6,000.00

Funds are requested for partial support of the fourth Conference on Folic Acid,
Vitamin B12 and One Carbon Metabolism, to be held under the auspices of the
Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology from August 2-7, 1992
at Vermont Academy, Saxton's River, Vermont. This conference offers a unique
opportunity for scientists from a broad group of disciplines, who share an
interest in folate, B12 and one carbon metabolism, to interact both formally and
informally. Sessions have been scheduled on the biosynthesis of folic acid and
cobalamin, on the mechanisms of folate- and cobalamin-dependent enzymes, on the
structures of these enzymes, on transport and compartmentation of folates,
antifolates and cobalamin derivatives, and on clinical evaluation of antifolates
now in various phases of clinical trail. A second major focus will be on the
role of folate and B12-dependent enzymes in metabolism. Sessions are planned on
the evaluation ofthe nutritional of both normal and diseased humans, and the
effects on metabolism of drugs that intervene in folate and cobalamin-dependent
reactions. %%% This conference will bring together researchers and students who
are exploring the basic biochemistry and health/disease aspects of folic acid,
vitamin B12 and one carbon metabolism. There will be formal presentations of
advances in these fields and informal discussions.