* 9200895
* Biodiversity of Caddisflies (Trichoptera) in the Interior   Highlands of North America
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Kenneth Stewart, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1996
* USD 53,607.00

Caddisflies are one of the dominant, beneficial orders of insects in most
Nearctic stream and lake ecosystems. They constitute a major component in the
diet of fishes, and are therefore important to sport and commercial fisheries
management. Caddisflies are also important pollution indicator organisms,
because most species are intolerant of adverse water quality. Insects and other
invertebrates account for an estimated 90% of the earth's animal biomass and 95%
of all animal species. They undergird the world's biological systems, and are
critical to maintenance of those systems. This study will survey and document
for the first time the biodiversity of this important group of insects in the
Interior Highlands. This mountainous region is an important biogeographical link
between the Appalachian and Rocky Mountain chains. The research will provide the
first major treatment of caddisfly biodiversity for any major mountain region of
North America, and will correlate caddisfly species with geological,
physiographic, hydrological and vegetational characteristics of the region.
Correlations of species with environmental parameters will be made, using
Geographic Information System (GIS) computer program. The study will greatly
enhance our knowledge of caddisflies in the region and allow aquatic ecologists
and fisheries scientists to make predictive inference as to which Trichoptera
species can be expected in certain types of aquatic systems.