* 9200467
* Group Travel: XIX International Congress of Entomology; to  be held in Beijing, China, June 28-July 4, 1992
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1993
* Wynn Hansen, Entomological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* None
* 11/30/1993
* USD 42,500.00

A block travel grant will provide support for 32 U.S. scientists to attend the
International Congress of Entomology in Beijing in summer of 1992. It has been
difficult for scientists from Asia and particularly China to attend
international meetings and this Congress represents important opportunities for
communication and scientific exchange. The quadrennial schedule of Entomology
Congresses means that they are milestone events in summarizing the past and
formulating the future course of insect sciences. The program for the congress
consists of symposia, workshops, contributed papers and other activities in 17
sections representing the entire range of entomology and associate sciences.
Broad participation by U.S. scientists is desirable; unfortunately, costs of
travel and other expenses will be substantial, if not prohibitive, particularly
for students and junior-level scientists. Application forms for travel grants
will be widely distributed and all U.S. scientists will be eligible. A committee
has been formed to review applications and make wards. Half of the awards will
be made to students and preference will be given to junior scientists.
Applications will be ranked based on proposed contributions to the Congress and
the degree to which attendance will further the work of the applicant or others.