* 9200928
* Survey of Prokaryotic Marine Plankton
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Jed Fuhrman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 06/30/1994
* USD 152,699.00

Although prokaryotes are ubiquitous and immensely important biologically, the
diversity of marine communities is almost unknown. A major obstacle is poor
culturability required for standard identification. This proposed project will
survey planktonic prokaryotes in several ocean locations, with the objective of
classifying them by means of 16S rRNA gene sequences obtained direct from
biomass. This approach has provided an extremely broad phylogenetic framework of
classification, and is the only one that can now be used without culturing the
organisms. The results are in the form of sequences, interpreted via
phylogenetic analysis. Previously, the Principal Investigator and others have
applied this approach to a few open ocean samples, and major new taxa have
already been discovered (e.g. an archaebacterial group whose nearest known
relatives are as evolutionarily distant as animals are from plants). It is
likely that other novel major taxa, as well as additional members of better-
characterized ones, are awaiting discovery. The proposed project will extend
these studies to deep sea, coastal, polar, and coral reef habitats that have not
previously been examined this way. The Principal Investigator has already
collected most of the samples, and funds will be used for work- up and analysis.
The results can be used in preliminary tests of hypotheses in ecology,
biogeography, and phylogeny, but primarily will serve as a framework for future
such studies.