* 9200267
* RUI:  Vortex Arrays in Superconducting Multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* James Garner, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1994
* USD 47,400.00

RUI: Vortex Arrays in Superconducting Multilayers - in the current context, a
vortex is a tube of magnetic field which penetrates the bulk of a
superconducting material. The structure, distribution, and elastic properties of
vortices in superconducting multilayer materials is of fundamental importance to
both their physical characterization and to their potential for technological
applications. Vortex arrays play a role in determining the upper and lower
critical magnetic fields for multilayer superconductors. Intrinsic and extrinsic
pinning of vortices due to layering or to defects at interfaces is likely to be
of great importance for understanding of superconducting multilayers. Similar
issues, such as the flow and creep of vortices in the presence of a transport
current and the melting of a flux lattice, currently limit the application of
high-Tc superconductors. The proposal is to study the effects vortices have on
Josephson-coupled multilayers consisting of alternating layers of
superconducting sheets and insulating layers. Using Ginzburg-Landau theory, the
properties listed above will be studied for real materials in realistic
environments. The results are expected to be relevent to high-Tc materials. %%%
Superconductors are of particular interest to materials science because they
represent both a splendid example of a quantum mechanical phase transition and a
unique class of materials having many potential applications. Under conditions
of high magnetic field (or high current density), some superconductors become
threaded by small tubular regions of normal material, called vortices. One class
of superconducting materials which admits vortices consists of thin layers of
superconductor separated by thin layers of normal material. This is a common
configuration for superconducting materials intended for real-world
applications. Understanding the properties of such materials well enough to
predict and utilize their special nature is crucial to developing applications
for both typical and the high-Tc superconductors. This is the goal of the
current study.