* 9200080
* Scattering from Liquid Surfaces: Construction Funds for     Beamline Xl9C at The National Synchrotron Light Source,     Brookhaven National Laboratory
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Mark Schlossman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Thomas C. Farrar
* 02/28/1994
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program will help the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Chicago renovate the beamline X19C
at the National Synchrotron Light Source, which will be used in research
investigations in the following areas of chemistry: 1) determination of the
structure of surfaces of complex fluids composed of polymers, lipids, lyotropic
and thermotropic liquid crystals, 2) the structure of the liquid metal-vapor and
liquid metal-liquid dielectric interfaces, and 3) the structure of monolayers of
amphiphiles at the liquid-vapor and liquid-liquid interface. Surface sensitive
x-ray scattering techniques are used to study phenomena occuring at liquid
interfaces. These techniques require that the x-ray source have high brilliance,
i.e., typically a synchrotron source must be used. A high-brillance source is
needed because the number of scattering molecules at the interface is very
small, the intrinsic scattering power of the organic compound of interest is
very low, and the beam size required for grazing incidence Bragg diffraction is
very small. The areas of potential technological application of the techniques
which will be enabled by the instrumentation which will be provided are polymer
surfaces and interfaces for improved lubrication and adhesion, cohesion of
composite materials, synthetic thin films, coatings, and electrodes.