* 9200040
* Undergraduate Research at the Rocky Mountain Biological     Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Susan Lohr, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 09/30/1995
* USD 150,000.00

This award provides funds to continue a successful Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site at The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory. Ten
undergraduate students per year for three years, will be supported to
participate in research focusing on field biology studies. The RMBL has a strong
tradition of field research and education, and has been providing undergraduate
research opportunities for 64 years. Each student will attend the RMBL for 10
weeks. Guidance will be provided in scientific design, project selection and
initiation, and project completion. A ratio of one supervising research mentor
for each student will be maintained. Students will be encouraged to participate
in the many research opportunities available at the RMBL, such as formal and
informal seminars, interactions with visiting scientists, and exposure to all
levels of a field biology community. The intellectual progress of each student
will be monitored carefully by the Program Coordinator and by each research
mentor, as the summer proceeds and students move from relative dependence to
relative independence in their research pursuits. The RMBL is particularly proud
of its success in educating women interested in field biology, and in attracting
senior female scientists. Plans for increasing minority student participation
are included in this award.