* 9200082
* CRB:  Stimulation of Woodland Restoration:  Inital Patch    Size Effects on Spread of Vegetation and on Soil Development
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Steven Handel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/29/1996
* USD 282,000.00

Derelict land commonly found in metropolitan areas often fails to support normal
succession to woodland vegetation, for reasons that are not known. Restoration
of diverse communities of native woody plants on such sites is important because
of the need to increase habitat for wildlife and plant biodiversity, create
corridors and decrease distance between areas of natural habitat, support
migratory birds, and provide opportunities for environmental education and
recreation in densely populated urban areas. We propose to test methods that may
stimulate woody plant colonization of closed landfills, an abundant type of
derelict land, by planting small patches of woody plants that can rapidly
colonized the site. We will experimentally determine the patch size site, and
will test a series of hypotheses concerning the causes for the inhibition of
natural succession. The study will be conducted on a recently closed landfill at
Fresh Kills, NY. Patches of 7, 21, and 72 individuals of 7 species will be
created in a randomized block design. Seed rain, recruitment and survival of
seedlings, and herbivory will be monitored in the patches and on transects
extending outward from each patch; these studies will test hypotheses that
dispersal and herbivory limit natural woody plant establishment. Soil qualities,
including organic matter, pools of N and P, N mineralization rae, root growth
and mycorrhizal infection, will also be monitored within the patches and
transects, and will test hypotheses concerning below- ground changes over time
will permit testing of hypotheses concerning linkages among these processes. By
evaluating hypotheses regarding both above- and below-ground processes, we will
be able to compare their relative importance during succession. Subsequently,
this project will result in design recommendations for restoration methods used
on derelict land throughout the region.