* 9200598
* Surface Chemistry of Electronic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Jeffrey Schwartz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 02/29/1996
* USD 551,600.00

This award is made by the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research under
the Materials Synthesis and Processing Initiative. The research will study the
synthesis and characterization of interfaces of metal oxides or activated
organic surfaces with organometallic-derived overlayers. Methods will be
developed for activation of surfaces of conductors or insulators by introduction
of -OH or -NH groups. The reaction of metal atoms or organometallic complexes
with these surface groups will be studied and contrasted with solution analogs.
It will be possible to create various types of mixed overlayers in specific and
reproducible ways. These interfacial layers will covalently bond between
components of the composite. Investigations will be performed in parallel on
bulk oxide or nitrogen analog substrates under ambient and ultra-high vacuum
using single crystal supports. The use of characterizable single crystal
materials will enable an investigation of the precise nature and extent of
covalent interation between the overlayer and the surface of the support. %%%
Development of methodology for synthesis of surface-bound species, and
application of surface analytical techniques to analogous bulk and film
supports, will augment our understanding of materials synthesis and interface
structure at the microscopic level. Such information forms a basis for
understanding mesoscopic physical and chemical interfacial properties of
increasing importance as electronics components become smaller