* 9200020
* CRB:  Africa's Savanna Parks:  Natural Islands or           Interdependent Communities?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Nicholas Georgiadis, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 08/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

The fate of most of Africa's savanna parks is to become islands in a sea of
humanity. The effects of park isolation n community dynamics will depend
fundamentally on the degree to which wildlife populations are naturally linked
by dispersal and gene flow. I propose to address an issue that will affect the
future management of the large herbivores that to a great extent are
characterize and justify these protected areas: To what extent are Africa's
savanna parks already conserving naturally isolated lineages, and by
implication, dynamically independent populations? Since all parks and species
cannot be studied, a framework for predicting the gross population structure of
a given species is required. This is provided by the 'Resource Use Hypothesis'
(RUH) which states that vegetation and geographic discontinuities form barriers
to gene flow for species that are habitat 'specialists', but not for species
that are habitat 'generalists'. While ecological and macroevolutionary evidence
supports the RUH, the microevolutionary component of the hypothesis has not been
examined. The RUH will be tested by examining the population structure of six
large herbivore species (elephant, buffalo, impala, zebra, giraffe, and
wildebeest) that are common to three savanna parks in Tanzania (Serengeti and
Tarangire) and Botswana (Chobe). These species were chosen because they have
strongly contrasting food and habitat preferences. These savanna parks were
chosen because they have similar large mammal communities and, most important,
because their geographical attributes create an ideal setting to test the RUH.
If the RUh is supported it will provide a mechanistic model for prediction the
population structure of species with known habitat requirements within a region
of known habitat characteristics.