* 9200584
* Mathematical Sciences: Essential Laminations and the        Topology of 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1996
* David Gabai, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1996
* USD 136,600.00

The main goal of this project is to explore the interrelationships between the
topology of a 3-manifold and the types of laminations and foliations it can
support. The investigator will look into the nature of group actions on the 2-
sphere and their extensions into the 3-ball. The main questions he plans to
consider are the following. (1) If M is irreducible, N is laminated, and M and N
are homotopy equivalent, are they homeomorphic? (2) If M is laminated, then are
homotopic homeomorphisms isotopic? (3) What manifolds have essential
laminations? (4) If G is a 2-sphere convergence group which extends to a
properly discontinuous action on the 3-ball, is that extension unique up to
conjugation? The study of 3-dimensional manifolds is aided by the fact that our
experience of living in such a space endows us with a strong intuition for what
can and cannot take place. Studying the topology of higher dimensional manifolds
is necessarily dependent upon the algebraic machinery available to assist in it,
but in 3 dimensions we also have at our disposal a direct avenue of perception.
It is therefore surprising to learn that some questions that have natural
generalizations to higher dimensions have been answered already for these higher
cases, while the 3- dimensional case that inspired them remains obdurately
unassailable. There is a classical conjecture of Poincare about spheres that is
the most notorious example of this phenomenon. What appears to be at work in
thus violating our natural over- estimate of the advantage that geometric
intuition should confer in 3 dimensions? It is at least partly a naive faith in
intuition and mistrust of computation, but it is also the fact that the known
methods of computation perform best with the luxury of excess dimensions in
which to maneuver. They are somehow cramped in the presence of only three
dimensions. In this setting one can see that the investigator's exploitation of
laminations as a tool particularly adapted to the 3-dimensional environment and
our intuition about it constitutes a welcome and enormously promising
development.