* 9200081
* NSF/AID (CRB): Declining Amphibian Populations in Lower     Central America: Evaluation of the Phenomenon and its       Possible Causes
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Jay Savage, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1995
* USD 310,922.00

Much attention has been focused recently on the apparent worldwide decline in
amphibian populations. While the decline of some species may be attributed to
habitat destruction, a perplexing number of declines have taken place at
protected reserves on all major continents. Although the mostly anecdotal
evidence for worldwide declines is compelling, studies providing quantitative
data on changes are required in order to understand and mitigate the source or
sources of biological trauma responsible for the declines. The present project
undertakes such a study for Lower Central America (Panama and Costa Rica), where
spectacular declines among amphibian populations were among the first to be
recognized. The study will involve: resampling previously investigated sites
following the original sampling protocols; establishing a series of attitudinal
transects in areas of obvious declines and where declines are not evident for
future repeated sampling; and sampling individual species believed to be
particularly sensitive to environmental deterioration. Data obtained from the
sampling program will demonstrate the extent of decline, whether the entire
amphibian association or only a subset is affected and whether an apparent
difference between upland localities (marked decline in many species) and
lowland (no clear declines overall) sites is real. It is anticipated that the
project, the first regional study of amphibian declines utilizing a repeatable,
quantitative approach, will answer fundamental questions as well as serving as a
model for similar comparative studies in other geographic regions.