* 9200916
* Long and Medium-term Research:  Inertial Confinement and theAuto-collimation of Jets
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Adam Frank, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1993
* USD 15,200.00

Long & Medium-Term Research: Inertial Confinement and the Auto-collimation of
Jets This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of
Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three
to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.
The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of
unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a four-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr.
Adam Frank to the University of Leiden to work with Dr. Vincent Icke. The
researchers will focus on a class of problems associated with the formation of
astrophysical jets. Based on a study of bipolar outflow in Planetary Nebulae,
Drs. Frank and Icke believe that a single mechanism associated with a single
geometry is responsible for the ubiquitous, well collimated flows. They will use
sophisticated numerical hydrodynamic code to simulate the interaction of
aspherical stellar outflows and the production of jets. The goal of this project
is to demonstrate the efficacy of this process over a wide range of length and
time scales beginning with stars and ending with galaxies. They will then go
further and provide "theoretical observations" allowing detailed comparisons of
the models with what is seen in the telescope. The award recommendation provides
funds to cover international travel and a stipend for four months plus a
dependent allowance.