* 9200672
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in Nonlinear Optics
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* David Kaup, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1996
* USD 8,150.00

This award supports Professor David J. Kaup of Clarkson University to
collaborate in nonlinear optics research with Dr. Heinz Steudel of the Central
Institute of Optics of the Academy of Science of Berlin, Germany. The objectives
of their joint research are to develop new solutions and applications of
integrable systems to nonlinear optics, including such phenomena as Stimulated
Raman Scattering, Two- Photon Propagation, Superfluorescence, Three-Wave
Interactions and Harmonic Generation. This modest support for Dr. Kaup's visits
to Berlin and other forms of communication will add impetus to their
collaboration which has been extremely productive recently. With current
technology, it is possible to generate coherent pulses whose widths are on the
order of, or less than, typical relaxation times. In these cases, entirely new
coherent phenomena can occur which offer the possibility of new technological
applications. While considerable effort has been devoted to the development of
relevant mathematical techniques and solutions, very little work has been done
to explain the experimental results. The collaborating U.S. and German
scientists in this project have been involved for many years in the development
of the mathematical descriptions of such coherent phenomena. They now propose to
develop practical applications from the existing theoretical base.