* 9200221
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Undergraduate      Geologic Research in Pennsylvania: A Consortial REU Site    Proposal
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1993
* Lawrence Malinconico, Jr., Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Marvin E. Kauffman
* 10/31/1993
* USD 60,000.00

The Geology Departments of Bryn Mawr College, Bucknell University, Lafayette
College, and Lehigh University have successfully formed a consortium fostering
undergraduate geologic research. Important research opportunities in
Pennsylvania and surrounding areas will be undertaken by undergraduates from
these institutions in subjects as diverse as tectonics and hydrogeology. To
comprehend fully how a research project is conceived and conducted, students
will generate a proposal, conduct field work, sampling, and/or laboratory
studies, as appropriate, and periodically report on their research progress.
Ultimately they will present their results formally to faculty and colleagues at
a Consortium symposium. Independent, undergraduate research begins with close
supervision and guidance by one or more faculty members and may evolve into
senior theses or projects that reflect original and individual student effort.
These projects are materially improved by discussion and interaction with other
students, working on allied problems. Follow up activities will focus on
revision of the student reports in preparation for presentation of the findings
in a symposium session, involving students and faculty, not only from the
Consortium Schools, but also from non-participating schools. Special efforts
will be made to invite students and faculty from schools with large proportions
of underrepresented students, both to promote the efforts of the previous
student projects and also to recruit potential student/faculty pairs for the
following year's projects.