* 9200900
* Tolerance Synthesis for Design and Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Hsu-Pin (Ben) Wang, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 02/28/1994
* USD 43,568.00

Tolerance synthesis is a major task of product and process design and is in a
period of extensive study due both to increased demands for quality products and
to increasing automation of machining and assembly. Optimum tolerance design and
synthesis ensures good quality product at low cost. The primary goal of this
research project is to develop an analytical methodology for concurrent
optimization of design and manufacturing tolerance syntheses to enhance product
manufacturability, quality and cost effectiveness. Based on a more complete
understanding of the relationships between dimensional tolerance and machining
cost, process capability and tolerance, mathematical models for these
relationships are to be formulated. As its objective function the minimum
manufacturing cost, and optimization model for concurrent tolerance syntheses
will then be developed based on the above relationships. The project will extend
and augment previous research on the development of solution procedures for the
tolerance optimization model. In particular, simulated annealing algorithm and
discrete optimization techniques will be investigated and implement. This
research project will tie together disparate efforts that tend to treat design
tolerance synthesis and manufacturing tolerance allocation as separate problems.
The goal is to achieve more economical manufacturing through tolerance
optimization.