* 9200634
* Mathematical Sciences: Fourier Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1996
* Andreas Seeger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1996
* USD 205,000.00

Work supported by this award will focus on several areas of mathematical
analysis related to singular integral operators, averages over curves and
surfaces, maximal functions, Fourier integral operators, and Fourier multipliers
on compact and noncompact manifolds. One of the central problems in mathematical
analysis is that of recovering a function through various differentiation
techniques applied to integrals of the function restricted to curves or
surfaces. Although there is now a considerable body of literature on this
subject, the curves have always been confined to those satisfying strong
curvature conditions. Efforts to obtain more general information will require
local maximal function estimates on compact sets. The thrust of the research
will be to find these estimates first. This work, in turn, has close connections
with singular integral operators of Calderon-Zygmund type. One of the
obstructions is the dependence of past arguments on the Fourier transform. There
is now some evidence that progress is possible which will bypass this
impediment. Other work will concentrate on local smoothing properties for wave
equations. The general idea behind local smoothing is one of establishing
measurement of the size of a solution of a wave equation for time periods rather
than for a fixed instant of time. The measurements are given in terms of the
boundary values associated with the equation. Some local smoothing results have
been obtained, especially in higher dimensions. The most difficult cases are
spatial dimensions two and three. Ultimately, one must establish variants of the
Kakeya- maximal operator and control of its p-th power norm. Work on estimates
of degenerate Fourier integral operators, radial Fourier multipliers on
noncompact Riemannian manifolds and estimates of the Szego kernel for
pseudoconvex domains will continue. Mathematical research in harmonic analysis
seeks to study the fine structure of mathematical functions and their underlying
domains of definition. The tools developed by this work bring out hidden
relationships not ordinarily detected by more classical methods.