* 9200524
* RUI:  Analytical and Numerical Studies of Relativistic FluidFlows Accreting onto a Magnetized Schwarzschild             Black Hole
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Ernesto Esteban, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 06/30/1995
* USD 48,750.00

This research employs analytical methods and numerical simulations to
investigate (in the context of relativistic astrophysics) the accretion
processes around a black hole immersed in an external magnetic field. The black
hole's exterior spacetime is modelled by a solution of the combined Einstein-
Maxwell equations (the magnetized Schwarzschild metric). Equipotential surfaces
and Von Zeipel cylinders of relativistic rotating thick disks are analytically
investigated. Computer algebra systems will be used to tackle some of the
cumbersome calculations expected in this part of the project. A numerical
approach is also needed in regions where the analytical method fails (outside
the closed potentials). This numerical approach involves converting the
relativistic hydrodynamic equations into finite difference schemes to be solved
on a supercomputer. Image processing techniques and color images will be
necessary to interpret the numerical output. One important aim of the project is
to involve undergraduate science majors in research experiences. This project
will provide talented students with the opportunity for planning, carrying out,
and reporting scientific research. Moreover, by using advanced computational
tools, they will develop computing skills needed for their future advancement in
science or engineering.