* 9200723
* Thin Films Growth and Deposition Studies under Energetic    Conditions:  Ion Beams and Electron Cyclotron Resonance     Plasmas
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Eugene Irene, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 02/29/1996
* USD 225,000.00

This research deals with the fundamental aspects of initial film formation
mechanisms from a bare semiconductor surface to a complete thin film under
energetic process conditions involving ion beams and plasmas. The key feature of
the project is the use of in-situ spectroscopic ellipsometry operated during the
film formation process which enables the measurement of nucleation pathways,
substrate damage and film properties. The effects of many process parameters can
be determined with an economy of experiments and the correlation of process
variations on film formation kinetics and resulting film properties can be made
in a direct way. A novel immersion ellipsometric technique will be used to
access dielectric-film interface optical properties. Relevant and well known
electronic materials are chosen for the study: Si, Ge, InP and GaAs substrates
with grown and deposited oxides and nitrides. In this way, general and
meaningful fundamental materials science relationships will be uncovered and
models for film formation developed. %%% This research embodies in-situ
materials diagnostics during process study of film formation on semiconductor
substrates under energetic process conditions. The objective is to elucidate the
film formation mechanisms from the nucleation stage forward and to correlate
film formation with electronics properties. In this way an understanding of
important processes for technologically relevant materials will be obtained.