* 9200041
* Workshop on Sharing of Collections-based Data and Data      Ethics: Honolulu, HI; August 1992
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* K. Elaine Hoagland, Association of Systematics Collections
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 01/31/1994
* USD 14,986.00

The Association of Systematic Collections is sponsoring a workshop on Sharing
of Collections-based Data and Database Ethics. As data associated with natural
history collections are increasingly used for research, conservation, resource
management, and other purposes, there is a compelling need to explore the
opportunities and constraints for data exchange. The funding of computerization
and network projects suggests that there will be enormous growth of data sharing
in the near future. However, current patterns of data sharing, recent problems
within natural history collections and elsewhere in the scientific community,
and expressed concerns all indicate that there are serious unresolved issues
that limit willingness of institutions to allow free access to collections data.
These issues will be addressed in the format of a workshop preceded by a series
of introductory lectures, and followed by publication of guidelines by ASC.
Participants will come from the academic and museum communities, the
conservation community and other users of collections-based data, database
professionals, commercial interests, and experts in legal and ethical aspects of
data exchange. The workshop will be held at the AIBS meeting in Honolulu,
Hawaii, on August 10-11, 1992. In addition to invited participants, there will
be opportunities for open participation.