* 9200051
* REU Site in Sociology
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1995
* Ivan Chase, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/1995
* USD 128,633.00

This award provides funds to the Department of Sociology at the State University
of New York at Stony Brook to establish a Research Experience for Undergraduates
SITE. The program is designed to immerse a small group (8) of undergraduates in
an active research environment spanning the areas of mass communication, gender
studies, behavioral sociology, and the sociology of business. The goal
underlying this initiative is to introduce students to on- going research in
some of the most interesting and important areas of sociology. The program is
intended to foster interest in, appreciation for, and skills in basic scientific
research, especially for students who might not otherwise have an opportunity to
participate in this type activity. Students will engage in a intensive eight-
week hands-on research experience wherein they will be afforded the opportunity
to learn, the phases of the search process, data gathering manipulation and
analyses, theory testing construction, development of historical topologies of
sociological phenomena, and relevant statistical and computer applications.
Recruitment effort will center on small and regional colleges with large
enrollments of minorities and women. Those selected to participate will reflect
the recruiting focus. Support services, informal and structured experiences are
planned to encourage graduate study and/or research-oriented careers.