* 9200053
* REU Site:  Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Nuclear Physics at the Indiana University Cyclotron Facility
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Catherine Olmer, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 07/31/1995
* USD 232,885.00

The principal goal of the Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Nuclear
Physics at the Indiana University Cyclotron Facility is to provide promising
undergraduate physics majors with a meaningful, exiting and challenging
experience in scientific research. Fifteen students per year will be involved in
experimental and theoretical research projects at IUCF and the Nuclear Theory
Center for 10-week summer terms in the 3-year period 1992-94. The students will
be recruited from colleges and institutions throughout the U.S., with preference
to institutions within the Midwest as well as small institutions where research
opportunities for undergraduates may be limited. It is expected that 90% of the
students will come from institutions other than Indiana University at
Bloomington, and that at least 25% of the students will be women. The
participants will gain direct research experience by working on projects in
nuclear physics, nuclear chemistry and accelerator physics, under the
supervision of faculty members and senior scientific staff. Special programs for
the students will be arranged, including orientation sessions, weekly seminars
on current research in physics, and a machine shop mini-course. At the end of
the summer term, the students will submit research papers based on their work,
and present the results in seminars at a closing symposium.