* 9200203
* National Museum of Natural History Research Training Program
* BIO,BIO
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1993
* W. John Kress, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

This award provides funds to the Department of Paleobiology at the National
Museum of Natural History to help support 28 undergraduate students who will
participate in both a formal curriculum and closely supervised independent
research in areas such as systematics, botany, zoology, and paleobiology.
Research in and teaching of organismal biology, systematic, and ecology has
declined at most universities over the last decade, even though these fields are
critical for evaluating and addressing loss of biodiversity and global change.
Large research museums still carry out basic research in these fields, but have
had little to do with undergraduate education. The Research Training Program at
the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History (NMNH) is
designed to address this problem by stimulating the interest of undergraduates
in natural history research through a balanced curriculum of lectures, labs, and
independent research. The 10- week long summer program emphasizes an independent
research project closely supervised by a member of the scientific staff, but
also offers a set of lectures, discussions, field trips, and laboratory and
collections demonstrations. The group activities give background material, and
also raise issues of theoretical and methodological importance in natural
history research. The greatest strengths of the Research Training Program at
NMNH are the large number of research staff (over 120 doctoral level scientists
and 250 technicians), the breadth of research projects (e.g. morphological and
molecular systematic of many groups of plants and animals, morphometrics,
paleobiology, behavior, ecology), the size of the collections (more than 119
million specimens of plants, animals, fossils, etc.), and the libraries (over 1
million volumes, and hundreds of natural history journals). The combination of
these resources with a Research Training Program that provides both a formal
curriculum and closely supervised independent research, creates an unparalleled
environment for getting undergraduates started on careers as researchers in the
natural sciences.