* 9200192
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Science of        Microfabrication
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1993
* Harold Craighead, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 05/31/1993
* USD 47,400.00

The National Nanofabrication Facility (NNF) at Cornell University is an
interdisciplinary center, the primary role of which is to provide resources and
technical expertise to researchers in microstructures science, particularly in
the areas of advanced lithographies, nanostructure physics, scanning tunneling
microscopy for fabrication and analysis, optoelectronic and electronic
applications, microfabrication applications to biology, and related areas. The
NNF REU site is a program of discrete projects for undergraduates, conducted
over a ten week period under the supervision of academic mentors at Cornell
whose research is associated with the Facility. In some cases, NNF facilities
are used for only a small, but crucial, part of the fabrication or
experimentation. In all cases, the attraction of NNF is the quality and open
access to resources, and the ability to accomplish complex or unusual
microfabrication in a routine way. The REU program takes particular advantage of
ongoing NNF educational activities as well as interaction with other REU
programs campus- wide. Several events are planned to encourage interaction with
other REU students on campus, and some NNF participants will work in teams or
collaboratively with students in other programs. All students are required to
prepare a brief final report and to present their results at a concluding Forum
of their peers and mentors.