* 9200855
* U.S.-RUSSIA WORKSHOP:  STEP Electrodynamics and Composition of the Mesosphere (March 1992; Nizhny Novgorod, Russia)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1992,05/31/1993
* Robert Holzworth, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 05/31/1993
* USD 14,550.00

This workshop on Solar Terrestrial Energy Program's (STEP) Electrodynamics and
Composition of the Mesosphere coordinated by Drs. Robert Holzman of the
University of Washington-Seattle and A. M. Feigin, Institute of Applied Physics,
Nizhny, Novgorod, Russia will be held at the Institute in Nizhny in March 1992.
The Upper Atmospheric Research Section at the NSF is committed to cooperation
with the international STEP program and through its support of scientists in
related research activities plays a central intellectual role in meeting STEP
objectives. In particular the objectives relating to the composition of the
mesosphere and the electrodynamics of the atmosphere are ones that have received
strong recent emphasis and in which very significant recent progress has been
made. The items to be discussed include preliminary results of NCL-91 compain;
relation between electrodynamics and chemistry of the D-region; polar
mesospheric clouds (PMSC), relation between NCL and PMSC, mesospheric
electrodynamics and global electricity, and electrodynamics and minor
constituents. This project fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in the United States and
Russia to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence in the field of basic scientific research on the
basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.