* 9200765
* US-Poland Research on High-Latitude Ionospheric             Scintillation (Aeronomy)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1997
* K. Yeh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 01/31/1997
* USD 22,350.00

The objective of this U.S.-Poland research project between Dr. K.C. Yeh of the
University of Illinois Champaign-Urbana and Dr. Andrzej W. Wernik of the
Radiophysics Laboratory, Space Research Center, Polish Academy of Science is to
study satellite radio beacon scintillation. These studies will provide
information about irregular structure of the ionosphere. Recent interest in
coupling process between the solar wind, magnetosphere and ionosphere has lead
to an increased activity in the high-latitude ionosphere studies. Past
cooperative projects on scintillation measurements have been at the Polish Polar
Station at Spitsbergen. Using these data, the researchers will: (1) Study more
extensively the morphology of scintillation in the auroral, polar cap and polar
cusps regions accessible from the Station; (2) Model the highlatitude
scintillation avoiding assumptions apparently not satisfied at high latitudes,
namely that fluctuations of the electron density are random with a spectrum
which has the same form along and across magnetic field, and compare with
observations; (3) Apply the approach used in the nonlinear system studies to
scintillation and in-situ electron density data. This research will obtain
fuller description of the high-latitude scintillation morphology, to improve the
scintillation theory, to gain more information about the ionospheric irregular
structure at high latitudes. This project in electrical and computer engineering
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary
talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.