* 9200326
* Honey Bee Neurobiology and Behavior Program
* BIO,BIO
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1993
* Gene Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 09/30/1993
* USD 30,590.00

This award provides funds to the Department of Entomology at the University of
Illinois at Urbana to establish a summer research program that focuses on the
behavior and neuroanatomy of honey bees. Students will have the unique
opportunity to combine compelling fieldwork with modern laboratory techniques.
Student training will be a three-fold process. First, lectures will be given on
the structure and function of the insect nervous system; the hormonal regulation
of insect metamorphosis and neural development; the hormonal regulation of
insect behavior; and experimental design. Second, students will receive
practical training in the safe handling of colonies of honey bees and in
observation of honey bee behavior, and ample opportunity to practice these new
skills. Third, students will also receive laboratory instruction in histological
techniques for the light microscopic study of the insect nervous system. Each
student will then carry out a research project in which an aspect of bee brain
morphology, cell number, neurochemistry, neurotransmitter expression, gene
expression, or hormonal responsiveness etc. is studied in bees of known age and
behavioral status. The goal of this project is to introduce students who already
have an interest in neuroscience and behavioral biology to the value of social
insects as models for the study of the neurobiology of complex behavior. This
project represents and extension of an ongoing collaboration between two
laboratories in the Department of Entomology and the Neuroscience Program at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. It will be based in the Bee Research
Facility and two other well-equipped laboratories in the Department of
Entomology.