* 9200479
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in the Scientific   Applications of Neutrons
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Fred Ross, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 07/31/1995
* USD 171,500.00

The scientific staff of the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR) will
conduct an NSF REU Program using facilities at the University's 10 megawatt
research reactor. Scientists trained in physics, chemistry and biochemistry will
supervise students working on projects in such fields as neutron optics, neutron
diffraction, inelastic neutron scattering, analysis of stress in materials,
macro-molecular structure, radiation defects, nuclear archaeology, geology,
analytic epidemiology, nutrition and radiopharmaceutical chemistry. The central
focus of the proposed program is the use of neutrons to interrogate or alter
specimens. The MURR is an active and exciting research center for hosing these
activities. It is the highest powered university research reactor in the U.S.
and operates 24 hours/day for 6-1/2 days each week. In addition to the resident
reactor staff and faculty from MU, the MURR hosts a steady stream of visitors,
collaborators and students. Neutron irradiation facilities include pneumatic
tube, in-pool and flux-trap positions. In addition there are six radial beam
lines and a thermal-column facility. The project areas previously mentioned will
be studied by a variety of nuclear techniques including: neutron interferometry,
single crystal and powder neutron diffraction, triple-axis neutron spectrometry,
small angle neutron scattering, deep level transient spectroscopy, conventional
and prompt neutron activation analysis, radionuclidic assay and radioisotope
production.