* 9200869
* Japan Long-Term Research Visit:  Basic Mechanisms and       Engineering Issues for the Fabrication of Smooth Diamond andCubic Boron Nitride Films
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1993
* Yonhua Tzeng, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 08/31/1993
* USD 46,958.00

This award will support a long-term research visit by Professor Yonhua Tzeng,
Department of Electrical Engineering, Auburn University in Alabama to Japan for
a cooperative research project with Professor Masanori Yoshikawa, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology. The researchers plan to
undertake a study on diamond film synthesis by arc discharge plasma jets and the
polishing of deposited diamond films by mechanical and chemical means. During
his visit to Japan Professor Tzeng will also be visiting Professors Masao
Murakawa and Y. Hirose in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the Nippon
Institute of Technology in Saitama. During these visits they will be performing
research on ion plating of cubic boron nitride films and flame CD of diamond
films. The research results have the potential of achieving high-rate deposition
and cost-effective polishing of diamond and cubic boron nitride films which are
crucial to practical applications of these high performance materials to
electronic, optical, thermal, and mechanical devices and systems. Professors
Yoshikawa, Murakawa and Hirose are all recognized experts and their laboratories
are world leaders in the areas of diamond and cubic boron nitride films. Their
previous experience, coupled with Professor Tzeng's expertise in the field
should provide a fruitful collaboration. It is expected that collaborations
between the researchers will continue even after the formal agreement has
terminated.