* 9200908
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Partial        Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Carlos Kenig, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1995
* USD 216,500.00

This project continues mathematical research leading to the development of
various aspects of harmonic analysis with a view toward applications to problems
in linear and nonlinear partial differntial equations. The main emphasis will be
on the study of elliptic boundary value problems on domains with rough
boundaries. More precisely, the boundaries are not required to have a
continuously turning tangent. They may have corners but not cusps. These are
effectively the minimal conditions one might impose in physical representations
where imprecise measurements always lead to a loss of smoothness. Results on
homogeneous equations in any dimension are considered well developed. Not so are
the inhomogeneous problems. In fact, in two dimensions there is a Dirichlet
problem for which the fundamental estimate comparing the gradient with the
boundary values does not hold. Work will now be done on the corresponding
inhomogeneous Neumann problem to see if the estimates can be obtained for
functions in appropriate Sobolev spaces. A second line of research, more
geometric, concerns the question of estimating a Riemannian metric in terms of
the spectrum of it s associated Laplacian. In particular, work will be done in
estimating the metric of a three-manifold in terms of its spectral data with no
restriction on the manifold's conformal class. This will be done by constructing
a function whose quadratic norm dominates the Riemannian measure. The
construction requires the solution of a specific differential inequality on the
manifold. Partial differential equations form the backbone of mathematical
modeling in the physical sciences. Phenomena which involve continuous change
such as that seen in motion, materials and energy are known to obey certain
general laws which are expressible in terms of the interactions and
relationships between partial derivatives. The key role of mathematics is not to
state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative and quantitative
meaning from them.