* 9200649
* Institutional Support for Innovations in Econometric and    Statistical Computation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Daniel McFadden, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1995
* USD 150,000.00

The last two decades have seen an explosion in computational capacity, and a
corresponding reorientation of statistics and econometrics toward making
intensive use of computation to reveal more about data and sharpen the
inferences drawn. Statistical examples are the development of robust estimation
methods, graphical interfaces for data examination, and bootstrap and other
resampling techniques to sharpen finite-sample inferences. Econometrics examples
are the development of semiparametric methods, nonlinear time series techniques,
and simulation methods for inference. Incorporation of these methods into
econometrics courses and applied econometrics software has been uneven,
particularly for methods developed primarily in statistics. This grant supports
research and teaching conferences on statistical computation and econometric
applications in order to address this problem. The activities planned under this
project promote the use of current statistical methods and UNIX workstation
software in econometrics, encourage the augmentation of statistical software
systems (such as the S language) with the procedures and modules needed for many
standard econometric procedures, familiarize statisticians with some of the
methodological and computational problems encouraged in econometrics
applications, and encourage joint developments of computational methods. Three
research conferences are planned, one in each year of the proposal. The
conferences deal with current issues in computer- intensive methods in
statistics and econometrics. Three teaching conferences will be held, again one
in each year. These conferences are designed to provide an intensive
introduction in methods and issues in statistical computation to groups of
graduate students nominated by Departments of Economics and Statistics around
the country. These activities are coordinated to achieve the objectives of (1)
providing a statistical computing environment that integrates statistical and
econometric software, with documentation and tutorials that encourage more
effective use of existing software by econometrics and statistics faculty and
graduate students, (2) identifying productive areas for research and development
on statistical algorithms, and suggesting standards for econometric software,
(3) encouraging the implementation of new algorithms in "open look" software,
and (4) providing "how to" materials to the econometric research community on
setting up and operating a statistical computing environment for research and
teaching, and on econometric software standards.