* 9200309
* IUCRC for Building Performance and Diagnostics
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/1992,08/31/1998
* Volker Hartkopf, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 937,436.00

The American building industry has undergone dramatic changes during the past
decade. The U.S. building industry is fragmented which has been the barriers to
advance the technology development in the building design. To increase the
competitiveness of the building industry, an Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center would provide a mechanism to accelerate the technology transfer
to the commercial practice. Such an effort will provide a research base to
develop the technologies needed for the innovations to occur in the building
industry. Carnegie Mellon University's Industry/University Research Center for
Building Performance and Diagnostics is addressing these needs. The Center
program will address components of advanced communications and office
technologies in relation to the building performance (acoustic, visual, thermal,
spatial, and air quality) problem. The initial research agenda of the Center
will address; 1) international building studies, 2) development of an innovative
process for building delivery, and 3) development and implementation of a state-
of-the-art Electronic Material Technology demonstration building. There are nine
company sponsors for the Center committing approximately $450,000. The Principle
Investigator/Center Director and his colleagues are internationally recognized
experts and have the knowledge and facilities to run this center. This
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center is being cost shared and
coordinated with Dr. John Scalzi, Program Director, Structures &amp; Building
System Programs. The Program Director recommends Carnegie Mellon University be
awarded $75,000 for the first year of a five-year continuing award. Near the end
of the first year the Program Director will review the progress of the Center on
a number of criteria, including the following: 1) the extent to which the
university- industry interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the
support base is developing; 3) the extent to which a robust research program is
developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program Director will recommend
support for the next period of this continuing award.