* 9200469
* Parallel Monte Carlo Calculations of Condensed Quantum      Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1996
* Geoffrey Chester, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/1996
* USD 390,688.00

This is a renewal grant for ongoing simulation studies of quantum many-body
systems. Improved techniques and computing power will enable progress to be made
on several more difficult and complex problems. Detailed studies will be made on
the structure and phases of helium films, the structure and excitation energy of
a quantized vortex, and the fluid and solid phases of helium-four very close to
the melting-freezing transition. A new Fermion algorithm will be applied to
study the fluid phase of helium-three and prior calculations on the momentum
distribution and condensate fraction of helium-four will be improved using new
sampling techniques and improved wave functions. A new study will be initiated
on the ground and excited states of a helium-three impurity in liquid helium. An
attempt will be made to construct a general approach to quantum mechanical soft
potential problems based on hard-core modeling and a suitable perturbation
approach to the remainder of the two-body potential. The formalism will be
developed for the path integral method of simulating quantum systems at finite
temperatures. %%% The ongoing research project will focus on the computational
simulation of important problems concerning helium in its liquid and solid
states. This is a difficult and very fundamental problem since quantum
mechanical effects are not small for these systems. In order to deal with these
computationally intensive problems, new computer techniques will be developed.