* 9200436
* Phytoplankton Organic Carbon and Sulfur Cycling at the      Marginal Ice Edge Zone
* O/D,OPP
* 03/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Maria Vernet, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 02/29/1996
* USD 318,713.00

Arctic phytoplankton may act as a sink for carbon dioxide (CO2) and a major
producer of dimethylsulfide (DMS). Maximum effects are expected in the marginal
ice zone where phytoplankton blooms extend from May to September as the ice
recedes northwards. These productive waters can cover more than half the area of
arctic shelf seas, such as the Barents Sea, in any one growth period. One of the
main components of the phytoplankton at the marginal ice zone is Phaeocystis
pouchetii which, in its colonial form, is a high producer of DMS. This species
is known to excrete a high proportion of newly fixed carbon as high molecular
weight polymers in order to form the colony. Later, it sinks in mass in the
latter stages of the bloom when nitrate becomes limiting. Diatoms, such as
Thalassiosira gravida, may dominate the bloom at the ice edge late in the summer
and may also precede the P. pouchetii bloom in early spring (i.e. Chaetoceros
socialis). The different patterns of dissolved organic carbon formation and cell
sedimentation between P. pouchetii and diatoms need to be included in
productivity models for an understanding of the production and sink of CO2 and
DMS in arctic shelf areas. The objectives of this field and laboratory study, in
collaboration with Norwegian scientists, are to: (1) to determine the
quantitative differences between P. pouchetii and diatoms blooms in the ice edge
with respect to primary production, proportion of carbon fixed that is
extracellular, DMS production, and sedimentation of particulate carbon and
sulfur to depth: (2) to determine which are the main environmental variables
that favor each type of bloom using a 10-year time series from the Barents Sea;
and (3) to estimate a 10-year time series of DMS production and CO2 uptake by
combining the existing time series with carbon and sulfur budgets of the ice
edge blooms. This research will provide a first approximation to the seasonal
and interannual variability of the phytoplankton contribution to the carbon and
sulfur cycle during the ice edge bloom in arctic shelf areas.