* 9200582
* FASEB Summer Conference on Phospholipases
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1993
* Edward Dennis, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1993
* USD 5,000.00

The purpose of this grant is to provide partial support of a meeting on
phospholipases sponsored by the Federation of American Societies for
Experimental Biology (FASEB). This is the second meeting on this topic sponsored
by FASEB and it will be held at the Vermont Academy in Saxons River, Vermont,
July 12-17, 1992. There is no other conference dedicated to these ubiquitous and
important esterases. All aspects of their chemistry will be covered in invited
talks, discussion sessions, and poster presentations. These include structure
and mechanism of the enzymes, intracellular phospholipase A2, phospholipase C,
signal transduction and cellular activation, function of extracellular and
secretory phospholipase A2, calcium-independent phospholipase A2, phospholipase
implications, membrane interactions, and relevant phospholipases. The meeting
will bring together a world class group of investigators. Speakers have been
chosen for their state of the art research and ability to communicate. Special
efforts and support will be made to attract young investigators, including
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. The next FASEB phospholipase
conference will probably be held two years from this one. %%% Phospholipases are
hydrolytic enzymes which cleave specific phospholipid moieties (fatty acids or
polar head groups) at specific positions on the glycerol backbone. The resulting
cleavage products have specific functions in the cell (e.g., as second
messengers for signal transduction). Thus, the control of phospholipase
activities are important for normal cellular functions. Accordingly, an
understanding of the specificity of both the enzymatic reaction and the
regulation of the enzyme activity, are critical to an understanding of cellular
regulation. This is an extremely important and intensely active field of
research, and it is crucial that scientists involved in this work get together
on a regular basis to exchange ideas and introduce junior scientists into the
research field. This meeting serves those purposes.