* 9200719
* New Numerical Methods for Quantum Field Theory and Critical Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Daniel Zwanziger, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1995
* USD 324,470.00

The objective of this project is to develop new and more efficient numerical
algorithms with applications to quantum field theory, the statistical mechanics
of critical phenomena, and related problems in applied mathematics. The research
focuses on three principal application areas: Monte Carlo simulation of lattice
spain models and field theories; solution of large linear systems of equations
with disordered coefficients; and Monte Carlo simulation of self-avoiding random
walk. The principal algorithmic strategy is to employ "collective-mode" updates,
such as multi-grid, auxiliary-variable, embedding and generalizations thereof.
Some of these algorithms are motivated by techniques used in the numerical
solution of elliptic partial differential equations, but novel adaptations are
required. The methodology involves a combination of heuristic physical
reasoning, rigorous mathematical analysis, and systematic numerical testing. One
principal project is to continue the development of the multi- grid Monte Carlo
method, with emphasis on lattice gauge theories. A second project is to develop
multi-grid algorithms for large linear systems with disordered coefficients;
examples are the lattice fermion and Faddeev-Popov propagators in a background
gauge field. In addition, the group plans to continue its investigations of
collective-mode algorithms based on auxiliary variables (Swendsen-Wang and its
generalizations), collective- mode algorithms based on embeddings (Wolff and its
generalizations), and algorithms for the self-avoiding walk. Efficient numerical
algorithms are necessary to exploit adequately new computational technologies.
This research effort will have impact both on computational mathematics and
physics. //