* 9200176
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry and    Biochemistry at California State University-Los Angeles
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1995
* Anthony Fratiello, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Karolyn K. Eisenstein
* 09/30/1995
* USD 120,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site project is in the fields
of chemistry and biochemistry. For three summers beginning in 1992, ten
undergraduate students will each spend ten weeks engaged in "hands-on" research
under the direction of one of 19 faculty members who will be matched with a
student. The unique aspect of this program is its focus on the very high
concentration of minority students enrolled in community colleges in Los Angeles
and other large metropolitan areas. The objective of the program will be to
provide a comprehensive research experience for these minority community college
students, who have little if any prior exposure to research. Preference will be
given to those minority students who have already applied for admission to
further study in 4-year colleges and universities. Each student will select
his/her own research advisor, and the nature and scope of the research project
will be arranged to suit the student's level and interests through consultation
between the advisor and student. The students will be able to select from areas
of chemistry including biological catalysis, chemical analysis, chemical
physics, chemical transformations, separations, ecology, electrochemistry,
reaction mechanisms and microbial conversions.