* 9200781
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Elliptic       Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Jill Pipher, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1994
* USD 54,474.00

This award supports mathematical research focusing on three areas of analysis
and partial differential equations. The first concerns the solvability of the
Neumann problem for general second order elliptic operators with bounded
measurable coefficients. The essential feature here is the lack of smoothness
assumed on the coefficients which brings the research closer to representations
of problems occurring in the physical world. Successful work has already been
done on such questions for the Dirichlet problem. In the present context one is
interested in specifying the boundary flux rather than the boundary values of
the solution. The second area will concentrate on the solvability of boundary
value problems for higher order elliptic equations in domains with less than
smooth boundaries. That is, boundaries with corners and nondifferentiable edges.
This problem also relates to problems arising in more concrete applications.
Progress has been made on the Dirichlet problem with constant coefficients and
on finding sharp conditions on the domain which allow for solvability of the
Neumann problem. Work remains to be done in classifying solutions of homogeneous
problems with boundary data in the Besov or Sobolev spaces. The third problem
concerns the existence of a convex lower bound for the first eigenvalue of the
Laplace Beltrami operator on the sphere minus a polar cap. Numerical estimates
have been obtained on the value of the eigenvalue as a function of the size of
the cap. Sharper, analytic estimates will provide estimates for the growth of
subharmonic functions as well as have important consequences for free boundary
problems.