* 9200794
* Reasoning About Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Thomas Henzinger, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 07/31/1996
* USD 260,083.00

A formal foundation for real-time computing will be developed. Five directions
will be pursued in the hope of increasing the scope of applicability and
reducing the cost of current methodologies for the construction and analysis of
time-critical systems. Theoretical issues associated with the analog-clock model
will be investigated. A satisfactory theory of finite-state computation has
already been developed for a digital-clock model; the use of analog clocks would
permit proofs of more precise real-time guarantees and would support
compositional proof methods. Second, investigations will be undertaken to reduce
the cost of model checking by exploiting symbolic relationships between time
delays. Success in this endeavor would allow an important class of program
verification techniques be applied to a larger class of problems than is
presently possible. Further, time-bounded temporal operators will be used to
classify timing constraints and to develop temporal proof rules for new classes
of real-time properties. Fourth, investigations will commence into the
verification of so-called hybrid systems - systems that contain both discrete
and continuous processes. Finally, freeze quantification, a byproduct of the
study of real-time logics, will be applied in time-independent domains. The
ultimate goal of this line of research is to provide the system designer with a
wide range of tools that support the production of computing systems with
predictable timing characteristics.