* 9200446
* Electron Transfer and Electronic Coupling Through Hydrogen  Bonds in Simple Ruthenium Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1996
* Jeff Curtis, University of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 10/31/1996
* USD 108,700.00

This project, funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organo- metallic
Chemistry Program, will involve studies of con- formational gating, and
electronic coupling between redox centers through hydrogen bonds, in electron
transfer reactions. The effects of second coordination sphere interactions
between ruthenium(II) ammine complexes and complexation agents on electron
transfer reactions with Ru(III) oxidants will be used as the model for
conformational effects that may be involve in electron transfers in biopolymers.
In the second case, electron transfer between Ru(II) and Co(III) through
hydrogen bonds will be examined. Stopped flow spectroscopic and rotating disk
voltammetric measurements will be used in the study of these reactions.
Detection of hydrogen bonded Ru(II)/Ru(III) mixed valence dimers will be
attempted using electronic, NMR and FTIR spectroscopies. %%% Electron transfer
is one of the most important processes in biological systems but many questions
remain concerning the mechanisms of these electron transfers. In addition to in
vitro studies of the actual biological molecules, which are frequently very
difficult to interpret, studies of model systems that are designed to simulate
one aspect of the biological process can be especially helpful in determining
what structural and electronic features of the biological system have
significant effects on reaction rates. This project, to be pursued by
undergraduate scholars, will examine two of the factors that are believed to
affect the rates of electron transfer in certain biological molecules. The first
is the ability of hydrogen bonds to serve as conduits for electron transfer
between donor and acceptor, in this case between two transition metal centers.
There is accumulating evidence that suggests that electron transfer may be
coincident with, or preceeded by, a change in the structure of a protein that
surrounds the electron donor or acceptor. A model has also been designed to
probe this concept, again based on reactions between two transition metal
complex ions. Studies such as these may ultimately result in better treatment of
certain physiological disorders and new methods solar energy conversion based on
models of biological systems.