* 9200724
* Symposium on Higher Fungal Classification:  A Contemporary  Overview; Tomales Bay, CA; August, 1992
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Don Reynolds, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1993
* USD 35,000.00

In the present classification for fungi, the Basidiomycota and Ascomycota are
classified on the basis of the "whole fungus" (i.e., the vegetative and
reproductive structures, with the latter weighted) whereas the Deuteromycota
were form taxa based on relatively few, usually artificial, characters. This
problem, which will be addressed in the workshop, "Higher Fungal
Classification," was clearly enunciated by Thomas Bruns, "If all fungi can be
compared through their nucleic acids and placed on a single phylogenetic tree,
do we need to maintain the Deuteromycetes?" Clearly from a scientific
perspective the answer is an unqualified "yes. This taxonomic solution for these
asexual forms will be most feasible and practical if the phylogeny of the
basidiomycetes and ascomycetes has been solidly based on rigorous methods of
data collection and analysis. Various laboratories in the U.S.A. have initiated
studies that incorporate detailed analyses of macro- and microcharacters of the
phenotype, molecular sequence data, and cladistic algorithms to develop those
phylogenies; however, it appears that protocol has not spread as widely as is
necessary to complete this endeavor. Therefore, this workshop could have a
secondary effect---the continued spread of molecular techniques in the study of
phylogenetic relationships within the fungal kingdom.