* 9200898
* Research in Database Foundations and Logic Programming at anUndergraduate Institution
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Jack Minker, Towson University
* Continuing Grant
* Program Director
* 01/31/1995
* USD 84,632.00

This research addresses three important topics dealing with the foundations of
knowledge bases: view updates, combining knowledge bases, and inconsistent
knowledge bases. Algorithms are developed to provide solutions to several
problems in this subject. The view update problem is concerned with the
appropriate translation of the user's request to update a particular view into
an update of the underlying relations. Algorithms that have previously been
developed for stratified disjunctive databases are refined by using specialized
data structures and extended to more general types of knowledge bases. Many
different but related knowledge bases have been constructed in recent years.
Previous research on combining knowledge bases considered primarily the case of
definite deductive databases. Those algorithms are extended to more general
types of knowledge bases using the stable and well-founded semantics. Sometimes
a knowledge base may become inconsistent. Several different semantics have
previously been proposed to define the meaning of such knowledge bases in order
to localize inconsistencies. Algorithms are produced to compute answers to
queries under these semantics using theorem-proving techniques. The research
will be useful for the development of advanced knowledge based systems; it will
also enhance the research environment at Towson State University, an
undergraduate institution.