* 9200186
* XIV International Symposium on Molecular Beams, Pacific     Grove, California, June 7-12, 1992
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1993
* Yuan-Tseh Lee, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 01/31/1993
* USD 8,200.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Yuan Lee of the University of California, Berkeley, will chair the XIV
International Symposium on Molecular Beams in Pacific Grove, California in June,
1992. This conference will bring together both established and younger
scientists and students from around the world who are working on the forefront
of molecular beam research. In the conference sessions the contribution of
molecular beams to a broad range of basic and practical applications will be
emphasized, focussing on areas such as collision dynamics, beam-photon and beam-
surface interactions, atomic and molecular clusters, applications, and molecular
beam techniques. Each of the eight sessions will have four to six speakers, with
the balance of the time being devoted to contributed oral presentations. There
will be a ninth, poster session. %%% The main purposes of this symposium are to
enhance the contribution of molecular beams to a broad range of
interdisciplinary chemical and physical phenomena as well as their practical and
other applications; to expose a larger fraction of the North American molecular
beams community to the ideas and thinking of the European community; and to
expose young North American scientists and students to the latest developments
in the subject as well as to the world-class research scientists attending
symposium.