* 9201877
* Research on Doppler Three-Dimensional Vector and Capillary  Flow Measurement
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,03/31/1997
* Vernon Newhouse, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 03/31/1997
* USD 252,968.00

This grant will fund the investigation of ultrasound Doppler techniques to
estimate blood velocity and detect blood flow related conditions. By
manipulating the aperture of an ultrasound transducer, a line type echo spectra
will be produced from which the 3-D blood velocity vector, rather than merely
the velocity components along and normal to the sound beam axis, will be
estimated. Capillary blood flow and perfusion also will be measured through the
use of ultrasound contrast materials which can be injected into the blood. These
contrast agents have a much stronger echo at the second harmonic of the incident
radiation than does tissue and therefore the ratio of the capillary blood echo
to that of the surrounding tissue will be enhanced. This research is important
since it could lead to advances in ultrasound technology, including the
improvement of the performance of current transducers and the design of
transducers with certain operating features. The research also could enable flow
measurements to be made in some locations where conventional systems are
ineffective. The contrast studies should enable more effective visualization of
the degree of perfusion. These latter studies also should enable the first
measurement of capillary flow to be made using ultrasound.