* 9201665
* Molecular Spectroscopy of Small Gas Phase Polyatomic        Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1995
* Richard Judge, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 10/31/1995
* USD 80,700.00

In this RUI project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Judge will study the gas phase absorption spectra of small
polyatomics, such as selenoformaldehyde (CH2Se) and thioformyl fluoride (HFCS),
by a combination of classical and modern techniques. The theory of a rotational
Hamiltonian suited to the specific type of angular momenta experienced by these
molecules will be developed. In particular, a computer program for band-contour
analysis using this Hamiltonian will be augmented for use on a microcomputer.
Such a program will be of use to other spectroscopists in the field. Judge and
his students will do research at their own institution during the academic year
and will continue to work in the summers in the labs of Clouthier (University of
Kentucky) and Moule (Brock University, Ontario). %%% In this research project
Prof. Judge will use a mixture of conventional spectroscopy and laser methods to
derive data about small molecules which are representative of chemically
important groups related to formaldehyde. These two complementary methods yield
well-determined spectroscopic constants for these molecules. The results of
these spectroscopic analyses will be of interest to both experimental and
theoretical chemists as well as to astrophysicists.