* 9201581
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Waves and Chaotic          Interfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1992,12/31/1995
* James Glimm, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1995
* USD 407,449.00

The main purpose of this research project is to understand the interactions in
multiple space dimensions of nonlinear fluid waves. Shock waves, turbulent
mixing zones, flame fronts, solidification fronts, and fluid and material
interfaces provide examples of the types of waves considered here. The
investigators analyze first the regular case, in which a small number of waves
meet at a point and propagate in a self-similar fashion, as a traveling wave
with definite velocity and with definite relativeangles. This problem is related
to, but more difficult than, the one-dimensional Riemann problem, with which the
investigators and coworkers have prior experience. Secondly, they consider the
case of chaotic higher dimensional wave interactions, characterized by unstable
interfaces, mixing regions, and sensitive dependence on initial conditions. In
this chaotic case, they identify elementary modes, which interact to form an
effective statistical ensemble. The study of the chaotic case depends upon the
renormalization group, and methods to reduce the number of effective degrees of
freedom. Fixed points of the renormalization group found by the investigators
and coworkers to characterize chaotic mixing regimes suggest directions for
research. One of the most difficult aspects of the study of wave propagation is
the computation of nonlinear wave interactions. This project is to study the
mathematical structure of such interactions and to use this analysis to improve
computer programs that model flows where wave interactions are important. Flows
of this type occur in a wide variety of industrial, military, and scientific
applications, including supersonic flight, sheet metal forming and die pressing,
weather prediction, fluid turbulence, projectile penetration of armor, blast
waves, and astrophysics. All of these areas are characterized by sensitive
dependence on the detailed structures produced by the nonlinear interaction of
waves, and thus share many common mathematical aspects. Knowledge gained in
studying the abstract properties of wave interactions can be applied to all of
these areas, and will lead to improved computer simulations and a better
understanding of the processes occurring during strong wave interactions.