* 9201921
* PRF:  Assessing the Nestmate Relatedness and Sperm          Precedence in a Communal Bee, Perdita portalis, Using DNA   Fingerprnting
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Bryan Danforth, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1994
* USD 69,600.00

This research will involve two interrelated projects, (1) calculating nestmate
relatedness and (2) assessing the extent of sperm precedence in a communal,
ground-nesting bee, Perdita portalis. These two goals can be achieved most
effectively using methods of DNA fingerprinting. Estimating average relatedness
among nestmates is of interest because female P. portalis nest communally, with
from 3 to 29 adult females per nest. Communal nesting, the sharing of a single
nest by more than one reproductively active female, is an evolutionary stable
form of social interaction which is widespread in bees, but which has received
little attention by students of social evolution. While many relatedness
estimates exist for eusocial species, few data exist for communal species. All
behavioral evidence suggests that nestmates in P. portalis are closely related,
both because nests are re-used for generations and because flightless males mate
with their female nestmates. In order to understand the role of kin selection,
and other factors, in shaping communal societies, it is essential to accurately
assess within nest relatedness. Part two of the project focuses on the selective
factors underlying the origin of maintenance of dimorphic males in P. portalis.
Males in this species occur in two non- overlapping morphs: a large-headed,
flightless morph and a small- headed, flight capable morph. Large-headed males
mate with their female nestmates immediately prior to oviposition and engage in
male-male battles which often lead to death of one combatant. These observations
suggest that the large-headed morph has arisen as a result of sperm precedence
that confers a last male mating advantage. In order to test this hypotheses it
will be necessary to assess paternity of eggs produced in observation nests. The
two projects are related in that the female social behavior establishes
selective pressures on male mating behavior, and intra-nest mating should lead
to elevated levels to nestmate relatedness.