* 9201350
* Ultrafast Processes & Optoelectronic Properties of          Ultrafast Processes & Optf                                  Semiconductor Microstructures, Award in Indian Curre
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1991,12/31/1995
* B. Arora, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1995
* USD 0.00

Technical Narrative: The research project "Ultrafast Processes and
Optoelectronic Properties of Semiconductor Microstructures" will be a
collaboration between Dr. Arora of the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Bombay, India and Dr. Jagdeep Shah at the AT&T Bell Laboratories, Holmdel, N.J.
The specific aims of this proposal are: (1) to facilitate cooperation between
TIFR scientists and Dr. Shah and his group at the AT&T Bell Laboratories in
setting up material and device structure preparation systems and time resolved
measurement laboratory required for the study of the ultrafast phenomena in
novel semiconductor heterostructure and superlattice systems, and (2) to
collaborate in the research programs related to the optoelectronic properties of
the above materials. Scope: This proposal is for funds to cover the travel and
the per diem expenses of the Principal Investigator and other U.S. scientists
participating in this collaboration. The investigation is of great importance
from the basic science point of view as the studies will provide fundamental
understanding of nonequilibrium carrier dynamics and new optoelectronic
phenomena in the above structures. Furthermore, the study is of great practical
relevance in understanding the operation of novel devices which have been made
from very special thin film heterostructures. This proposal meets the objectives
of the U.S. -India Cooperative Science Program. ***