* 9201971
* PRF: The Interaction of Hormones and Behavior in Sexual     Selection and Mate Choice in the Northern Pintail and       White-cheeked Pintail
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Lisa Guminski Sorenson, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* John A. Byers
* 01/31/1995
* USD 69,600.00

The objectives of this project are to 1) allow the principal investigator to
learn and become proficient in avian endocrine research techniques, and 2) apply
these techniques to address new questions about the hormonal basis of sexually-
selected behaviors in dabbling ducks. The study will include four experiments
with captive northern pintails (Anas acuta) and white-cheeked pintails (A.
bahamensis) that are designed to 1) test the hypothesis that the stimuli
associated with pair formation induce hormonal changes that alter male behavior
and dominance relationships, 2) test the effect of experimental manipulations of
sexually-selected morphological traits on male behavior, hormonal dynamics and
pairing success, 3) examine the hormonal correlates and energetic costs of
aggressiveness in polygynous, monogamous, and unpaired males, and 4) compare
hormonal responses to a social challenge in northern pintails, a monogamous and
non-territorial species , and white-cheeked pintails, which are occasionally
polygynous and highly territorial. Blood samples taken during these experiments
will be analyzed for 5 hormones using celite chromatography and
radioimmunoassay. This cross-disciplinary project will address not only the
effect of hormones on behavior but also the feedback of behavior and social
interactions on hormones. Few studies of mate choice have considered the
implications of endocrine mechanisms in the evolution of sexually-selected
behavior.