* 9201749
* SGER:  Miocene Fossil DNA:  The Potential and Limitations of Molecular Paleobotany
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1991,05/31/1993
* Pamela Soltis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1993
* USD 49,761.00

This research is to explore the feasibility of extracting, amplifying, and
sequencing phylogenetically informative nuclear and chloroplast DNA from a broad
array of Miocene plant fossils, amplified and sequenced. Sequence analysis of
chloroplast DNA and nuclear ribosomal DNA has provided the most powerful tool
for rigorous analysis of the phylogeny of green plants. However, the evidence
for inferring phylogenetic pattern is indirect---i.e., cpDNA and rDNA has been
compared only for living members of the Chlorophyta. If successful, this
research would permit the direct incorporation of fossil materials into
phylogenetic analyses. The ability to isolate and analyze DNA from fossil
specimens would therefore provide: (1) a control for phylogenetic inferences
based on modern taxa; (2) an opportunity to calibrate the phylogenetic
trajectories that have been hypothesized; and (3) the chance that precursors
could be fit into the phylogenetic framework. It is unclear if extraction of
fossil DNA can be accomplished routinely, and there is some skepticism based on
structural and theoretical grounds that it is not feasible to expect good
returns of fossil DNA. Also, it is unclear whether chloroplast and nuclear DNAs
will be equally extractable (there is a possibility that cpDNA is less labile
since it is borne within the chlorplast membrane). This research will focus on a
rich and diverse fossil bed in Idaho.