* 9201166
* Statistical Mechanics of Ordered Fluids and Almost-ideal    Solids
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1995
* William Gelbart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 03/31/1995
* USD 276,000.00

William Gelbart is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to continue his work in statistical mechanical treatment of
amphiphiles. He is studying the self-organizing properties and phase transitions
of amphiphiles in water as a function of concentration. Three areas of new study
are identified: a) coupling between micellar size/shape and long range order in
concentrated surfactant in water systems; b) structures and flow properties of
solutions of flexible micelles; and c) statistical mechanics of almost ideal
solids under stress. Gelbart is using a whole host of analytical methodologies
including density functional theory, mean field approximation, renormalization
group approaches, and spin- vector-like Hamiltonian approaches supplemented in a
few cases with Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations. %%% Amphiphiles
are long chainlike molecules which have water soluble polar groups at one end
and oily hydrocarbon groups at the other end. Amphiphiles find widespread use as
surfactants and detergents. These molecules tend to aggregate together in
solution and self-organize into layers or micelles which are enclosed surfaces
having the polar groups on the outside, and the long chain oily portions on the
inside. Amphiphiles have widespread industrial and commercial use. Gelbart's
theoretical research will help us to better understand the physical chemistry of
this important class of chemical compounds, and to design even better materials
of this type.