* 9201886
* SGER:  Initiation of Planning for the Documentation of an   IMET System for UNOLS Ships
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1992
* David Hosom, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 12/31/1992
* USD 49,988.00

Drs. Weller and Hosom request funding for initial development of documentation
for Improved Meteorological (IMET) sensors. More accurate meteorological data is
required for many of the research efforts planned as part of the World Ocean
Circulation Experiment (WOCE), which will begin field experiments in 1992.
Although many sensors are available commercially, their accuracy and calibration
for ships and buoys had not been tested until recently. Work completed in an
initial grant to the PI's (OCE- 87-09614) quantified the performance
characteristics of some of the buoy and ship sensors, and cooperation between
the PI's and manufacturers resulted in improvements to the sensors. Development
of a data logging system that is applicable to any sensor was also completed and
licensed to a commercial manufacturer. Although the IMET sensors are now
available commercially, they will not function at specified WOCE standards
without proper calibration and installation, which will be unique for each UNOLS
vessel. As stated in the proposal, "Since the development of IMET was carried
out at WHOI, the expertise to document the system and carry out initial system
installation on several ships currently resides only at WHOI." This proposal
requests funds to begin the documentation of the expertise that has been
developed at WHOI so that the information will be available for all UNOLS
operators. This information in needed to provide accurate meteorological data to
researchers as soon as possible.