* 9201596
* Main Memory Database Recovery Issues
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Le Gruenwald, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Y. T. Chien
* 08/31/1996
* USD 199,000.00

This is the first of a three year continuing award. The increasing size and
decreasing cost of semiconductor memory has prompted research into databases
which are memory resident. These Main Memory DataBase (MMDB) systems are aimed
at high throughput applications such as airline reservation systems, phone
switching databases, and other real time systems where the availability of the
memory resident data is crucial. To achieve this high availability with volatile
RAM requires a backup archive database on disk as well as efficient algorithms
to checkpoint the database to the archive and to recover it from the archive to
main memory after a system failure. It has been shown that MMDB systems often
perform better with deferred update techniques where data to be updated is first
placed in a special nonvolatile shadow area and only at transaction commit time
is placed in main memory. The authors are investigating both checkpointing and
reloading of MMDB databases with the use of more conventional immediate update
(IU) techniques as well as deferred update (DU) strategies. The best
checkpointing approaches are to be determined as are partial reloading
strategies. A partial reload allows the database to be brought online after a
system failure faster because not all of the MMDB is reloaded prior to bringing
the system up. This research represents the first examination of techniques for
partial reloading of MMDB systems. Due to the volatility of RAM, the high
throughput needs of MMDB applications, and the potential for partial reloading
to dramatically increase the uptime of database systems, the results and impact
of this research are both widespread and significant.