* 9201138
* Workshop on Uncertainty Management in Information Systems:  From Needs to Solutions
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Amihai Motro, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/1994
* USD 39,750.00

Uncertainty pervades real world scenarios, and must therefore be incorporated
into every information system that attempts to provide a complete and accurate
model of the real world. Yet, present generation information systems have very
limited capabilities in this regard. On the other hand, many theoretical models
have been proposed for the management of uncertainty, but often without thorough
understanding of the actual problems faced by researchers, developers, designers
and users of information systems. This project concentrates on a planning
workshop that will bring together leading researchers in the scientific
communities of information systems (e.g., database systems, information
retrieval systems, expert systems, office information systems) and uncertainty
modeling (often working within frameworks such as mathematical logic,
probability theory, fuzzy set theory, possibility theory, and evidential models)
to study the needs of the information systems community and to tap the expertise
of the uncertainty modeling community, for solutions that respond to these
needs. This workshop will promote true dialogue between these two scientific
communities; it will establish the state of the art in this field, and will set
the course for future research. The project, which is co-sponsored by the
European Esprit program, will foster collaborations between researchers in the
United States and Western Europe.