* 9201842
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Information-Based Approachesto Learning Relational Concepts
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1992,09/30/1993
* Michael Pazzani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/1993
* USD 9,550.00

This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of
Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three
to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.
The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of
unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a three-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr.
Michael Pazzani of the University of California, Irvine to work with Dr. J. Ross
Quinlan of the University of Sydney. Dr. Pazzani will collaborate with Dr.
Quinlan on the following topics involving information-based approaches to
relational concept learning: A. Investigating approaches to dealing with noise
in training data. He will investigate refinements of a Minimum Description
Length approach, as well as alternative approaches to dealing with noisy
training data. One alternative that will be explored is the technique of
averaging multiple models. B. Applying relational concept learning to larger
problems on naturally occurring data sets, identifying additional research
issues, and examining how well the complexity analysis in Pazzani &amp; Kibler
(in press) predicts how the learning methods will scale to larger problems. The
award recommendation provides funds to cover international travel and a stipend
for three months.