* 9201951
* Mathematical Sciences: Computational Algorithms in Chaotic  Dynamical Systems and Homoclinic Phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Kenneth Palmer, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 02/28/1997
* USD 75,000.00

The investigators introduce new mathematically rigorous experiments to compute
dynamical entities of chaotic systems, and they consider the rigorous
reliability of commonly used algorithms. In particular, they construct suitable
algorithms to compute orbits of chaotic ordinary differential equations, such as
the Lorenz equations, and derive rigorous estimates of the shadowing error in
such numerically computed orbits; determine general conditions under which an
attractor of a differential equation is well-approximated by an attractor of the
discretized system resulting from a one-step method; and devise a rigorous
numerical algorithm to test for hyperbolicity in specific dynamical systems.
They also study homoclinic phenomena, which play an essential role in the
analysis of chaotic behavior. More specifically, they estimate the intervals of
the parameter on a dense subset of which a one-parameter family of dissipative
planar diffeomorphisms has homoclinic tangencies, and establish the presence of
transversal homoclinic points in slowly varying systems. Some of the more
noteworthy discoveries in dynamical systems have largely been based on numerical
experiments. It is important to devise such experiments whose reliability can be
rigorously verified. Most of this project is concerned with chaotic systems. In
recent years it has been realized that much of nature behaves chaotically. For
example, small changes on a given day in weather parameters such as temperature
and barometric pressure can lead to large fluctuations in weather patterns a few
days later. A mathematical model that describes a chaotic system in nature will
almost inevitably behave chaotically also. Because these mathematical models can
rarely be solved exactly, knowledge of their behavior relies greatly on computer
simulations. The main object of this project is to develop tests that will tell
how close a computer simulation of a chaotic system is to a true behavior of the
system.