* 9201051
* Bimetallic Cooperativity in Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1997
* George Stanley, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 10/31/1997
* USD 508,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program provides
continued support for research on catalysis by Dr. George G. Stanley of the
Chemistry Department, Louisiana State University at Baton Rouge. Bimetallic
rhodium complexes of binucleating linear tetra(tertiaryphosphine) ligands have
been prepared and used as selective catalysts for hydroformylation reactions.
The catalysts become inactive if the rhodium centers are separated by long
ligand chains, suggesting that bimetallic cooperativity is an important factor
in their activity. Stanley will study the mechanism and kinetics of this
reaction in order to understand the exact nature of the bimetallic cooperativity
step. In addition, the effectiveness of complexes containing other metals and
mixed metals will be tested and the suitability of the system for asymmetric
catalytic reactions will be explored. &amp;&amp;Hydroformylation is the chemical
process of converting alkenes into aldehydes, using hydrogen gas and carbon
monoxide as the other reactants. The process is widely used commercially to
produce aldehydes as well as alcohols. Stanley will study the reactions of new
catalyts for this reaction with the goals of understanding the details of the
reaction mechanism and of testing catalysts which can favor the production of
specific products.