* 9201191
* Acoustic Local Area Network
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Josko Catipovic, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 08/31/1995
* USD 581,126.00

The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) will design and construct a
prototype underwater Acoustic Local Area Network (ALAN) for real-time
communication with remote ocean-bottom scientific instruments. The ALAN will
rely on a newly developed underwater acoustic modem that was designed to
interface to a wide variety of oceanographic data acquisition systems, ranging
from relatively low data-rate thermistor or current meter arrays, to high-rate
sensors such as acoustic Doppler current meters and video imaging systems. The
ALAN is conceptually similar to land-based cellular telephone networks. It will
enable real-time, interactive, long-term, offshore monitoring, as well as
adaptive sampling and experimental control. Data throughput of 10 kilobits/sec
is anticipated. The operational range will extend 5-10 kilometers from a central
controller in deep water and up to 100 instruments may be eventually
accommodated. The initial test deployment in Monterey Canyon will consist of a
dozen two-way sensors transmitting to a surface receiver that will have a HF
radio link to shore. The capability to receive oceanographic data in real time
and communicate with remotely deployed data gathering instruments has long been
desired by ocean scientists. Having this new capability will open new research
opportunities as well. Investigators from Northeastern University and the
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute are collaborating on this project.