* 9201161
* Dissertation Research: Tracing Hohokam Ceramic Exchange in  the Lower Salt River Valley, Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1993
* NONE NONE, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1993
* USD 4,658.00

Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, Mr. David Abbott will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze a series of ceramic sherds collected
from a number of Hohokan archaeological sites located in the Lower Salt River
Valley of Arizona. These materials will be examined by electron microprobe
analysis to analyze the nature of the clay and temper material. Previous work by
Mr. Abbott has shown that Hohokam manufactured pottery from raw materials which
were available in the immediate vicinity of production sites. It has also
demonstrated that substantial variation of both clay and sand used for temper
occurs across this region and therefore it is possible to determine the general
location in which individual ceramics were manufactured. Given these data it is
then possible to use archaeological materials to reconstruct prehistoric Hohokam
trade patterns and, in a more indirect fashion, determine exchange networks and
spheres of social interaction. The Hohokam are typical of many Southwestern U.S.
prehistoric groups because they developed a complex, highly organized society
which both emerged and declined well before the arrival of Europeans in the New
World. Because they lived in an arid desert environment, the Hohokam constructed
complex irrigation systems and archaeologists have speculated that the need to
distribute water and maintain control over these systems led to the rise of this
complex society. However, it is unclear how villages related to each other or
how different sections or compounds within single settlements interacted. Given
changing settlement patterns over time, archaeologists have also speculated on
how social organization concomitantly varied. Through an examination of ceramic
exchange, Mr. Abbott hopes to gain insight into this process. This research is
important for several reasons. It will provide new data on the Hohokam which
will interest a number of archaeologists. It will help to pioneer the
development of new analytic techniques and assist in the training of an
extremely promising young scientist.