* 9201586
* Mathematical Sciences: Matrix Inequalities and Matrix       Perturbation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Roy Mathias, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/29/1996
* USD 54,275.00

The investigator continues research in matrix inequalities and their
applications. The objectives of this project are to (a) extend the perturbation
theory for functions of matrices, and develop efficient algorithms to compute
the condition number for these functions, (b) derive good perturbation bounds
for matrix factorizations, (c) extend the theory of matrix norms, in particular
unitary similarity invariant norms, and the induced norms of Hadamard
multipliers. Projects (a) and (b) have applications in numerical linear algebra.
The problems of (c) are of interest in their own right and are relevant to
obtaining the results in (a) and (b). There are some unavoidable errors in
numerical calculations. For example, whenever calculations are done by computer
there is the possibility that small roundoff errors will be incurred -- for
example, 1/3 = 0.333333... may approximated by 0.3333. Another source of errors
is that the input data may be the result of measurements that are not exact. It
is possible that these small errors can cause a large error in the final answer
-- so large that it is useless. The investigator studies the effects of small
errors in numerical linear algebraic calculations. This will help one to decide
whether a particular method of calculation produces reliable results, and to
know in advance what accuracy is needed in measurements to ensure a given
accuracy in the final answer.