* 9201003
* Functionalized Rigid Polymers
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* T. K. Kwei, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/1996
* USD 308,000.00

The sparing solubility of a rigid aromatic polyamide, poly(p- phenylene
terephthalamide), PPTA, can be improved by introducing functional groups to the
polymer, for example through the attachment of the sulfonic acid group (or its
alkaline salt) to the aromatic ring, or by N-substitution with aligo
(oxyethylene). The lithium or sodium salt of the sulfonic acid substituted
polyamide, PPTS, form dilute aqueous gels which are birefringent and exhibit
morphologies characteristic of nematic liquid crystalline structures. The order-
disorder transition in these rigid polyelectrolyte gels will be studied by
monitoring the evolution of the aggregated structures by light-scattering
measurements and by microscopy using digital image analysis. These
investigations will be supplemented by NMR experiments to detect changes in the
relaxation rates of the polymer as the solution is cooled (or the gel is Heated)
through the transition region. The enthalpy change associated with the
transition will also be determined. The response of the rigid polyelectrolyte
gels to electric stimulation is the second topic of this study, because the
mechanochemical and chemical valve actions produced by electric stimulus find
analogies in biological responses. It is also planned to study the miscibility
of PPTS or its salts with flexible polymers. Poly(oxyethylene) PEO is a
particularly interesting candidate because the Li-PPTS/PEO/LiClO4 system shows
sufficiently high ion conductivity to warrant a systematic study. PPTA grafted
at the N-position with oligo (oxyethylene) will be blended with PEO, poly(methyl
methacrylate) or poly(acrylic acid). Since it is known that PEO is miscible with
PMMA and forms complexes with PAA, it is likely that the PPTA-g-PEO polymer can
be dispersed on a molecular level in PEO, PPMA, or PAA. Aside from using the
graft copolymer to demonstrate the feasibility of this approach to molecular
composites, the copolymer-PEO system will be evaluated as a potential ion
conducting material. This research involves the study of novel solutions, gels,
and polymer mixtures of potential interest as biomolecular materials and ionic
conductors.