* 9201787
* Structural Control for Earthquakes and Wind Storms          Using Active Structural Members
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1996
* Robert Hanson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* J. Eleonora Sabadell
* 12/31/1996
* USD 329,980.00

The main objective of this project is to develop a hybrid control system that
requires almost no external energy to control the dynamic response of buildings
and bridges during earthquakes and/or strong wind storms. This will be
accomplished through two concurrent research activities. The first is directed
toward the development of an active structural member which uses electro-
rheological materials to control member stiffness and damping properties. The
advantage of electro-rheological materials is that their mechanical properties
can be changed by over a hundred- fold by a low amperage electrical field and
that these changes can occur in milliseconds. Thus the development of active
structural members whose dynamic properties can significantly change almost
instantaneously on command provides a new opportunity for structural control.
The second research task is to establish a new structural control approach which
would utilize the unique properties of active structural members. This requires
a new philosophy for development of control system algorithms, based on directly
controlling variable structural properties. In addition to the research tasks
described above the principal investigator will also undertake the technical
coordination responsibility involving all projects awarded under the Structural
Control Initiative NSF 91-62.