* 9201699
* Task-Level Planning and Task-Directed Sensing for Robots in Uncertain Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1997
* Bruce Donald, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Howard Moraff
* 03/31/1997
* USD 237,000.00

This is the first year of a three-year continuing award. This research
investigates task-level planning for autonomous agents, such as mobile robots,
that function in an uncertain environment. These robots typically have very
approximate, inaccurate, or minimal models ofthe environment. For example,
although the geometry of its environment is crucial to determining its
performance, a mobile robot might only have a partial, or local "map" of the
world. The research will investigate an approach whereby the robot attempts to
acquire the necessary information about the world by planning a series of
experiments using the robot's sensors and actuators, and building data
structures based on the robot's observations of these experiments. A key feature
of this approach is that the experiments the robot performs should be driven by
the information demands of the task. This research develops (1) a theory of
sensor interpretation and task-directed planning using perceptual equivalence
classes, intended to be applicable in highly uncertain or unmodelled
environments, such as for a mobile robot; (2) algorithmic techniques for
modeling geometric constraints on recognizability, and the building of internal
representations (such as maps) using these constraints; (3) explicit encoding of
the information requirements of a task using a lattice (information hierarchy)
of recognizable sets, which allows the robot to perform experiments to recognize
a situation or a landmark; and (4) synthesis of robust mobot programs using the
geometric constraints, constructive recognizability experiments, and uncertainty
models imposed by the task. This research will also implement the theory and
test it on mobile robots in the laboratory.