* 9201094
* Conformations and Mobilities of Polymer Chains in Narrow    Channels of Their Crystalline Inclusion Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Alan Tonelli, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/1996
* USD 209,800.00

Among solid polymer phases, the crystalline inclusion compounds (IC) formed
between guest polymer chains and small-molecule host clathrates are unique. In
inclusion compounds guest polymer chains are confined to narrow channels whose
walls are formed by the host clathrate matrix, and, as a consequence, are
isolated from all neighboring polymer chains. The net result is a solid
crystalline phase where polymer chains are well-separated from their neighbors.
This environment affords the opportunity to study isolated, yet solid, polymer
chains as they conform and move in their IC channels, where they are free from
the influences of neighboring polymer chains, which in bulk polymer phases are
often highly cooperative and complex. Differential thermal analysis, X-ray,
Fourier transform infrared, and especially solid-state Nuclear magnetic
resonance observations of polymers in inclusion compounds and their comparison
to bulk polymer observations should permit an assessment of the inherent
mobilities and conformations of solid polymers and help us to evaluate the
effects of constraining environments (narrow channels) on the same. Ultimately,
an attempt will be made to spin and draw fibers from their inclusion compounds
with the hope that the highly extended and isolated polymer chains will produce
fibers with improved strengths because of their high extensions and the absence
of a chain folded morphology when they are coalesced.