* 9201727
* Mathematical Sciences: The Numerical Analysis of Evolution  Equations Over Long Time Intervals
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Andrew Stuart, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/1996
* USD 98,918.00

The investigator will analyse and design numerical methods for initial value
problems whose solutions are required over long time intervals. Two classes of
equations will be studied: those possessing an absorbing set, where the long-
time dynamics may be extremely complex (chaotic) but remain in a bounded set;
and with those a gradient structure, so that solutions approach the set of
(typically multiple) steady states for large time. For fixed time-stepping
strategies, the proposed area of research is a generalisation of the classical
theories of A, B and G stability. These classical theories apply to classes of
problems with simple dynamics and it is of interest to determine how the
theories can be used and modified to cope with more complicated dynamical
problems. For variable time-stepping strategies some existing work on linear
problems will be generalised to nonlinear problems. Work will also be directed
towards the approximation of homoclinic and heteroclinic orbits, which play an
important role in the long-time dynamics of the two classes of equation under
consideration. Many phenomena of interest in the physical sciences and
engineering require the understanding of dynamical phenomena that evolve over
very long time scales. Examples include turbulence in fluids, phase separation
in solids, and planetary motions. Often these phenomena are modelled by
differential equations and it is necessary to approximate these equations by
computational techniques to obtain information about the underlying problem
being modelled. A question of fundamental importance is to ascertain the
validity of the computer-generated output and, in particular, it is important to
understand fully the relationship between the computer-generated approximations
of the model and the behavior of the model itself. The study of this problem is
well understood in many simple situations but these do not include situations
where long time scales are present. The object of the research is to study this
problem, using the underlying theory of the differential equation models to
guide the study of the computer-generated approximations.