* 9201944
* Control of Occupant-Induced Floor Motion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1999
* Daniel Schneck, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ashland O. Brown
* 01/31/1999
* USD 170,000.00

Modern construction materials often result in lightweight floor systems
susceptible to transient motion imparted by the input forcing function of human
locomotion. Technologies intended to control this phenomena must quantify the
forcing function and efficient vibration damping methods. The research will
quantify the input forcing function of locomotion as a truncated Fourier Series
whose coefficients are related to human physical characteristics. Extrapolation
using ergonomic indices will then create a statistically based description of
population locomotive trends suitable for rational structural design
recommendations. The second phase of research will investigate the properties of
the human body which make it an efficient damper. Experimental data will be
collected from floors using humans as passive or active second mass dampers.
Existing mathematical simulations will be used to analytically explain the
body's damping potential. Finally, a mechanical device will be developed which
emulates human body properties to control unwanted floor motion through
artificially increased damping. The research will permit lightweight floor
systems to operate at their true design potential, unhampered by vibration
serviceability considerations. It will also ascertain analytical methods of
design based on input forcing functions which are in turn based on ergonomic
population means.