* 9201925
* PRF:  Comparative Method/Phylogenetic Analysis Techniques   and Methods for Estimating Expected Amounts of Phenotypic   Change
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Emilia Martins, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* None
* 12/31/1994
* USD 69,600.00

Recently, several issues have been raised concerning the use of comparative or
interspecific data with standard statistical analyses. Trait values measured in
phylogenetically related groups of organisms are not statistically independent
of each other, and must be corrected for degree of relatedness. In addition,
there is still much debate concerning which type of evolutionary relationships
(and thus, evolutionary statistics) are of greatest interest to comparative
biologists. Although several solutions to these problems have been proposed,
little is known about how the proposed solutions relate to one another. All of
the proposed methods require that the phylogeny of the organisms and an estimate
of the expected amount of change for each trait be available. As it is often
difficult to obtain accurate estimates of expected amounts of character change,
several techniques have been proposed to infer this information using
independent estimates of time or by using the comparative data themselves.
Again, little is known about the relative abilities of the various techniques.
During this study the P.I. will use a combination of mathematical and computer
simulation techniques to compare the available methods for both analyzing
comparative data and estimating expected amounts of change in terms of both
their biological and statistical properties.