* 9201815
* An Invariant Manifold Approach to Modal Analysis of         Nonlinear Structural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Christophe Pierre, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 02/28/1995
* USD 184,957.00

The basic objective of this research is the development of a modal analysis
methodology for nonlinear structures, which utilizes a newly introduced
formulation of nonlinear normal modes of vibration. The importance of the
subject stems from the fact that a modal analysis of a nonlinear structure that
relies on the modes of the associated linearized system may require an
unpractical number of such terms in order to yield satisfactory modal
convergence. This is because, even through for the linearized structure the
linear models yield uncoupled modal dynamics and hence optimal modal
convergence, in the nonlinear case these linear modes become coupled by the
nonlinear terms, resulting in deterioration of the modal convergence. The
proposed nonlinear modal analysis is based upon a definition and formulation of
nonlinear normal modes of motion in terms of invariant manifolds. This approach
is general and is not restricted to linear systems, nor to conservative systems,
nor to finite-dimensional systems. In addition, the formulation is constructive
for weakly nonlinear systems and provides the physical nature of the nonlinear
modes, the associated modal dynamics, and the way in which the nonlinear modal
coordinates are related to the physical coordinates. The proposed methodology
will allow for many important research problems to be addressed, including the
outstanding questions of how to choose optimal mode shapes for modal analysis of
nonlinear dynamical systems. In order to attach these problems, and integrated
strategy is chosen which involves analytical, computational, and experimental
components.***