* 9201292
* Regulation of the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex in         Photosynthetic and Developing Plant Tissue
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Jan Miernyk, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 01/31/1996
* USD 160,000.00

A major control point for the interaction among photosynthesis, photorespiration
and mitochondrial respiration is the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC). The
objectives of this research are to characterize events, mechanisms and
modulators of PDC activity during development and photosynthesis in C3, C4, and
CAM plants; extend biochemical characterization of PDC; establish in vitro and
in situ regulatory mechanisms; examine the long term regulation of PDC; and
study the expression of PDC's component enzymes, their import and complex
assembly. We seek to establish conditions and metabolites that affect reversible
phosphorylation of the mitochondrial PDC using purified, functional mitochondria
coupled with inhibitors, altered metabolite levels and physiological
environments. Antibodies, isotope labeling and enzyme activity measurements will
be used to quantitate enzyme forms. Standard techniques will be used to clone to
PDH components of PDC. Import and assembly studies will utilize our knowledge of
a model protein and an Hsc70 chaperone system. This project will facilitate
evaluation of the following concepts: 1) that reversible phosphorylation of PDC
is a primary control mechanism for carbon entry into the Krebs cycle; 2) that
PDC regulatory mechanisms differ during development and between photosynthetic
and nonphotosynthetic tissues; 3) that the in vitro and in situ regulatory
mechanisms function in vivo; 4) that import and assembly of PDC requires
chaperones.