* 9201536
* Coevolution in Complex Adaptive Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1992,06/30/1993
* Stuart Kauffman, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Peter Arzberger
* 06/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will support an investigation that
will pursue the underpinnings and implications of the coevolution to the edge of
chaos, based on entirely novel models of molecules or goods as symbol strings
which act on one another to produce new symbol strings according to a "random
grammar". The principal investigator seeks new insights into how complex
adaptive systems collaborate, compete, and coevolve. In particular, the
investigator expects to find new models of economic take-off based on achieving
a sufficient diversity of goods and services in an economy. Similar concepts
will apply to ecosystem structure. Most broadly, it is hoped that investigation
of random grammars will yield insight into the self organized behaviors of far
from equilibrium systems. Among the fundamental phenomena in biology and beyond,
in economic and cultural systems, is the coevolution of complex adaptive
systems. In the past few years, work carried out on diverse fronts by a small
number of physicists, biologists, mathematicians, and economists, has begun to
suggest a broad new conceptual framework and candidate universal features of
such coevolution: Complex coevolving systems may evolve the the edge of chaos.
The new theory is built upon the recognition that such coevolving systems,
whether symbionts or interlocked firms, mutually build the world they jointly
inhabit. Such coevolutionary systems can behave in three regimes. The first is a
chaotic regime, where each adaptive agent struggles to improve on multipeaked
"fitness landscapes" which deform so rapidly due to moves of other agents that
no agent comes to rest. This regime is called the Arms Race in evolutionary
biology. The ordered regime occurs when all agents climb to local fitness peaks
that are mutually consistent. Adaptive chance ceases. The third regime is the
boundary between order and chaos. Two new facts have emerged: 1) Mean fitness,
or "payoff" is low in both the chaotic regime and in the ordered regime and is
optimal at the edge of chaos. 2) A kind of "invisible hand" can act such that
each agent tunes the structure of its own landscape and couplings to other
landscapes to its own advantage, and by doing so the entire system coevolves to
the phase transition between order and chaos. If generally true, the
implications are broad. We must consider that adaptive agents mutually alter the
games we play with one another, in evolution, in economies, and perhaps
elsewhere, to a characteristic poised state between order and disorder.
Signatures of this poised state include a power law distribution of avalanches
of change initiated by small perturbations. Just such a distribution of sizes of
extinction events in the evolutionary Record are known. Similar avalanches may
occur in technological evolution.