* 9201856
* Atomically Controlled Processing and Micromorphological     Characterization of Multilayer Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Max Lagally, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/1996
* USD 268,300.00

Experimental and theoretical investigations of the morphological and chemical
roughness of interfaces in multilayer structures, and the evolution of such
roughness with growth and processing conditions, will be conducted. The
evolution of roughness and the effect of interruption by the introduction of a
new layer will be investigated, as will be the influence of strain on growth
front roughness. X-ray diffraction measurements of buried interfaces will be
compared to STM measurements of growth front correlation functions. Statistical
mechanical methods will be used to develop models for growth of multilayer
structures in which kinetic processes change periodically. Luminescence and
electrical measurements will be correlated where possible. Studies will
initially focus on Si/SiGe and III-V compound superlattices. %%% Interfaces
between chemically or structurally distinguishable layers are critically
important in the performance of a host of devices, including photonic,
electronic, or optical, whose unique properties depend on the multiple layering
of thin films. In such structures, interfaces play a decisive role in
performance. This research will enhance our understanding of the influence of
interface quality on device performance by providing quantitative measures of
interface morphology and correlation to electrical and optical properties. In
particular, the connection with growth and processing condition will be
explored, with the prospect of improved technology for the fabrication of
multilayer-film devices.