* 9201075
* Amino-Carboxy Type Captodative Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1996
* Tad Koch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 03/31/1996
* USD 254,000.00

An investigation of the chemical and physical consequences of captodative
radical stabilization will be conducted for a series of 2-oxomorpholinyl-3-yl
radical species. The extent of radical stabilization by captodative effects will
be determined by photoacoustic calorimetry and photovoltammetry. In addition to
the characterization of the reductive properties of captodative radicals, their
ultimate use as centers for high spin polymers will be assessed by synthesis of
amide coupled oligomers and polymers. Dihydropyrazines derived from the
oxomorpholine structures will be employed to make conductive CT complexes with a
variety of strong electron acceptors. %%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics
Program suppports the continuing investigation by Professor T. A. Koch at the
University of Colorado. A study of radical species stabilized in a unique manner
by groups attached to the molecule which are able to push and pull electrons by
virtue of the electronic nature will be conducted. A particular interesting part
of the research will focus on the ability of specially designed molecules of
this variety to form complexes with electron acceptor compounds which are
capable of conducting electricity. In addition, it is proposed to utilize these
radical species in polymers to generate materials which have unique magnetic
properties. Such materials have potential applications in fabrication of
electrical devices.