* 9201652
* End-User Programming for Scientific Databases
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1998
* Mary Berlyn, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 06/30/1998
* USD 351,800.00

This project will develop an end-user oriented tool for constructing scientific
databases. The purpose of the tool is to radically reduce the time and expense
of designing, implementing and maintaining complex scientific databases by
generating database and user-interface software automatically from declarative,
easily understood high-level specifications. Specifically, the tool will
generate SYBASE databases with X-Window interfaces written in C++ code. The tool
will be developed in two stages: an initial kernel and an advanced stage. The
kernel will support the development and maintenance of database designs and the
automatic generation of implementations from them. This phase will focus on
automating the development of a generic type of database application with a
number of features specifically oriented towards scientific needs, including the
ability to annotate facts with references or authorities, facilities for
handling synonyms and technical thesauri, and self-documenting data models. The
kernel will be adapted and generalized from software developed previously by the
authors of this proposal for scientific database applications, including a
prototype application generator of the type proposed. In the second phase we
will use the kernel as a framework in which to investigate more advanced
problems, specifically, how to expand the scope of the applications which can
easily be generated using the tool. In this phase we will identify specific
classes of functionality not currently supported and develop extensions to
support them. We expect that these extensions will involve the incorporation of
restricted languages for specifying fragments of functionality, such as rules
for constructing names or default values. Finally we will attempt to circulate
the tool among those segments of the biological community involved in database
development, and incorporate their feedback into the design.