* 9201980
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Partial Differential     Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1992,04/30/1996
* Francois Treves, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/1996
* USD 145,000.00

This project continues mathematical research on the existence and smoothness of
solutions of overdetermined systems of first-order partial differential
equations, both linear and nonlinear. It is striking that, in contrast to
ordinary differential equations, there are simple linear partial differential
equations possessing no solution. The analysis of this, and related basic
questions, lies at the heart of this research. The work, phrased in terms of
transformed equations known as pseudodifferential operators, seeks to obtain
information about local solvability of systems of equations. Related work is
going forward on the microlocal solvability of first order nonlinear equations
through study of the singularities of the equations known as the analytic wave-
front set. What has been discovered so far is that the singularities propagate
exactly as in the linear case. A new line of investigation has also begun. This
considers studies of systems of complex vector fields on a manifold. It mixes
classical ideas of differential operators with cohomology theory on the manifold
which can be used to define generalized characteristic classes. The first
objective will be to examine the implications of the nonvanishing of those
classes. Also to be considered are the geometrical properties absence of due to
this nonvanishing. Partial differential equations form the backbone of
mathematical modeling in the physical sciences. Phenomena which involve
continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials and energy are known to
obey certain general laws which are expressible in terms of the interactions and
relationships between partial derivatives. The key role of mathematics is not to
state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative and quantitative
meaning from them.