* 9201934
* Mathematical Sciences: Block Travel Grant for Conference on the State of Matter
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1993
* Mary Beth Ruskai, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1993
* USD 12,250.00

During the past two decades there has been considerable progress in the
understanding of the nature of matter through the rigorous mathematical analysis
of models which describe different states of matter. The more notable
developments include (1) a thorough analysis of Thomas-Fermi and related semi-
classical models for atomic and molecular systems, (2) analysis of the stability
of matter, (3) verification of the correct asymptotes of the ground state of
energy of atoms up to certain orders, (4) proof of the finiteness of the maximum
excess charge of atomic and molecular systems, estimates on the maximum excess
charge, and proofs of asymptotic neutrality, (5) proofs of the existence of the
thermodynamic limit for Coulomb systems, (6) analysis of models in quantum and
statistical mechanics, (7) analysis of such quantum phenomena as the quantum
Hall effect and the formation of Cooper pairs, and (8) proof of the existence of
the hydrodynamic limit of Boltzmann's equation for interacting particle systems.
This project will support a block travel grant to the Conference on the State of
Matter to be held in Copenhagen, Denmark from July 30 to August 1, 1992. The
conference will provide an opportunity for newer mathematicians and scientists
to learn about developments at the leading edge of this branch of mathematical
physics.