* 9201281
* NSF/AID:  Moss Flora of Colombia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Steven Churchill, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez
* 02/28/1997
* USD 317,600.00

This proposal represents the highest ideal in biodiversity research in a
developing country. Relatively few scientists work with the bryophytes, yet the
group has a significant function in tropical ecosystems. The PI has already
devoted considerable time and expertise in the development of moss herbaria
throughout the country. In addition, he regularly teaches courses on the mosses
at those institutions, and has inspired Colombian scientists and students to
work with and publish on the mosses of the country. Churchill deposits the first
set of each accession in the largest moss herbarium in Columbia, to which he
already has given personal collections. Although funds were not requested for
development of a database in the proposal, he has initiated such a project and
has already begun to enter data. The materials are collected so that nucleic
acids can be extracted at a later date. If A.I.D. funds become available then
this aspect of his work will also be supported. The moss flora of Colombia is
exceptionally rich and diverse primarily because of the diverse topography and
climate. The PI is making excellent progress toward the treatment of the mosses
of Colombia ıin Spanish! for Flora de Colombia, for which he is cooperating with
Colombian botanists, and an English manual of the mosses. Thus, this proposal
fully satisfies, and exceeds, all the criteria for the Biotic Survey &amp;
Inventory competition.