* 9201615
* Investigation of the Mechanism of Nucleosome Removal from   the PH05 Promoter
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1993
* John Svaren, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/1993
* USD 41,464.00

Long & Medium-Term Research: Investigation of the Mechanism of Nucleosome
Removal from the PHO5 Promoter This award is under the Long and Medium-Term
Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists
and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research
centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for
joint research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month
postdoctoral research visit by Dr. John P. Svaren to go to the University of
Munich to work with Dr. Wolfram Horz. Their project is designed to explore the
ability of eukaryotic trans-activators to modulate chromatin structure. Numerous
in vitro studies have shown that nucleosomes can block binding of critical
transcription factors to a DNA template. In addition, the promoters of most
actively transcribing genes appear to be at least partially nucleosome-free.
Therefore, since virtually all eukaryotic DNA is normally packaged into
nucleosomes, there must be some mechanism to keep nucleosomes from occupying
critical promoter elements of active genes. Study of the PHO5 gene in the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae should give more insight into this process. Upon
induction of PHO5 transcription (by phosphate starvation), four nucleosomes are
removed from the promoter region. Several experiments by Dr. Wolfram Horz's lab
suggest that the trans-activator, PHO4, is responsible for triggering the
nucleosome loss. Drs. Svaren and Horz's project is designed to map the protein
domain of PHO4 that is involved in nucleosome dissolution. In particular, the
acidic domain of PHO4 will be investigated to see whether it is necessary or
sufficient for this transformation. These experiments could potentially reveal
another mechanism whereby trans-acting factors regulate transcription. The award
recommendation provides funds to cover international travel, a stipend for
twelve months and a dependents' allowance.