* 9201940
* Mathematical Sciences: Topology and Geometry of Algebraic   Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Richard Hain, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 01/31/1996
* USD 207,900.00

Pardon will study the topological and geometric properties of an algebraic
variety (the set of solutions of some polynomial equations), particularly when
the variety is singular (not smooth). On the geometric side, he will study the
spectrum of the Laplace operator on such spaces in order to obtain information
about their singularities. Of particular interest are spectral invariants which
turn out to be rational, since they are most likely to be topological
invariants. Hain, with the help of his students, plans to continue his study of
the topology of spaces that parameterize compact riemann surfaces and
configurations of points on them. The main objectives of the project are to
compute and/or gain qualitative information about the cohomology of these moduli
and configuration spaces, both with trivial and twisted coefficients. These
results should yield geometric results in algebraic geometry, and may have
applications to particle physics via conformal field theory. The main tools to
be used are Hodge theory and representation theory combined with traditional
geometric methods. The topology and geometry of spaces defined as solution sets
of systems of polynomial equations is a surprisingly rich subject, having
applications in many diverse areas of mathematics and mathematical physics. The
investigators and their graduate students are bringing to bear a marvelously
varied arsenal of techniques. Of particular interest are constructions that
depend explicitly upon features of the geometry of a space, area, distance,
curvature, and so forth, and yet combine them in such a way as to be provably
dependent only on the topology of the space, that is on features of the space so
basic as to be unaffected by stretching and distorting its shape, short of
cutting or tearing.