* 9201904
* Japan Long-Term Research Visit:  Techniques for Evaluating  the Impact of Demand Side Management in the Japanese        Electric Utility Industry
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,05/31/1994
* Saifur Rahman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 05/31/1994
* USD 118,169.00

This award will support a ten month long-term visit by Professor Saifur Rahman,
Department of Electrical Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, to Japan
for a cooperative research project with researchers at the Tokyo Electric Power
Company, (TEPCO). His co-hosts will be Mr. Toshiaki Ohashi, AI Technology
Department, Computer and Communication Research Center and Mr. Akira Maeda,
Technology Research Group, Research and Development Planning Department. The
research will include a study of the techniques for evaluating the impact of
demand side management (DSM) in the Japanese Electric Utility Industry. They
will be dealing with the modeling of uncertainty related to demand side
management activities. These uncertainties originate from the unknown customer
response to the DSM programs, and their willingness or unwillingness to maintain
interest in the program under less than ideal conditions. An attempt will be
made to model such uncertainty using the "pairwise comparison" technique that
Professor Rahman has applied in other fields of electric power engineering. Once
such quantitative measures of uncertainty are available, they will be applied to
a generation expansion model to examine the impacts of DSM on capacity needs. A
new technique to model the load duration curve will be investigated which will
facilitate the representation of DSM impacts on peak load, load factor and
energy consumption. This will provide an analytical method to study the impact
of DSM on capacity requirements. In the past, iterative methods have been
applied to study these impacts. An analytical method would result in faster
solutions with higher accuracy. The research has a comparative value and should
also provide a potential methodology with which to evaluate DSM programs prior
to their initiation. The research may also result in useful analytical
techniques that are fundamentally different from presently used demand
management evaluation methods. Professor Rahman is knowledgeable in a wide-
range of topics related to power systems engineering. He is well-published in
the area of power systems planning and is familiar with the power industry in
Japan. TEPCO is the largest electric utility in Japan, and it is the largest
privately owned power company in the world. It serves 22 million customers with
a peak demand of approximately 50,000 MW making it an ideal utility in which to
carry out direct load control studies. A successful development of the proposed
methodology could be used to evaluate the impact of some new DSM programs in the
U.S. electric utility industry. It is expected that this collaborative effort
between the researchers will continue even after the formal agreement has
terminated. It is also expected that a number of publications will result from
the project.