* 9201242
* Biochemical Control of Larval Settlement and Metamorphosis in the Coral, Agaricia humilis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Daniel Morse, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1996
* USD 269,979.00

This project is a renewal of prior supported work and it will work on the
structural characterization of the complex (polymeric) natural inducer of larval
settlement of the common Caribbean coral, Agaricia humilis on the surfaces of
the crustose coralline red alga, Hydrolithon boergesenii . The extent to which
larval recognition of this purified natural inducer (when attached to artificial
substrata and deployed in the ocean) contributes to the substratum-specific
settlement and metamorphosis of A.humilis larvae in the natural coral reef
environment will be determined. Antibodies to the purified inducer will be used,
in high-resolution immunocytochemical studies, to determine whether the inducer
is produced by the crustose coralline red algal itself, or by its associated
microbial epibionts. The significance of this project lies in the fact that it
will provide the first complete structural elucidation of a complex, polymeric
natural inducer of larval settlement and metamorphosis; the first experimental
test of the hypothesis that larval recognition of a defined natural inducing
molecule is responsible, in part, for substratum-specific settlement and larval
metamorphosis in the natural environment; and the first definitive resolution of
the source of such a natural inducer. This study thus will provide the necessary
information for later ecological investigations of the hypothesis that changes
in larval substratum (chemical) recognition may provide an important axis for
the rapid evolution of niche diversification mechanisms and, ultimately,
speciation in coral reef and other benthic marine organisms.