* 9201558
* Electrical and Optical Characterization of Epitaxial Gallium-Arsenide and Related Materials Containing Controlled       Concentrations of Oxygen and Boron
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,10/31/1996
* Kevin Bray, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 10/31/1996
* USD 240,300.00

Fundamental research on the effects of oxygen-related impurities in epitaxial
InP and related systems will be conducted. Primary objectives include
understanding the mechanism of deep level impurity incorporation, the
microscopic nature of defect centers and deep levels produced by oxygen-related
impurities, and the effects of oxygen-related impurities on electronic
properties. The research emphasizes systematic studies of epitaxial samples
containing a controlled deep level concentration. Targeted deep level
concentrations ranging over several orders of magnitude will be incorporated
into epitaxial InP and related systems via an MOVPE growth process.
Characterization studies will emphasize high pressure electrical and optical
measurements designed to elucidate the relationship of oxygen-related states to
band structure, the magnitude of lattice relaxation effects associated with deep
level introduction, and the stability of deep level charge states. %%% This
research focuses on obtaining a fundamental understanding of the electrical and
optical properties of InP based materials containing controlled amounts of
selected impurities. The chemical identity and concentration of these impurities
impart unique characteristics to InP based materials and will be used to produce
materials possessing novel electrical and optical properties. Technologies based
on computers, lasers, imaging, and communications systems will benefit from this
research.