* 9201718
* Some Bayesian Methods for Sequences of Discrete Observationsand for Finite Population Sampling
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Stephen Vardeman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 01/31/1995
* USD 80,000.00

This proposal considers two essentially unrelated problems in Bayesian
statistics. In the first, a problem of long standing, finding tractable non-
Gaussian analogs of the Kalman model and filtering algorithm, is studied. Here a
promising probability structure is introduced that seems to produce sensible
recursive filtering algorithms for discrete data. The proposed work involves the
development and implementation of this model. In the second, the problem of
finding improved interval estimates of a finite population mean or median is
considered. It is well-known that under simple random sampling without
replacement with a moderate sample from a skewed population, the usual interval
estimates perform poorly. The same can be true in stratified random sampling
when the sample sizes within the strata are small. Here a noninformative
Bayesian approach, which is based on a generalization of the 'Polya posterior',
is suggested as a method for generating improved interval estimates. The
principal investigator is an expert in the theory of finite sampling. His
continued use of the Bayesian approach to problems in this area and in the
development of filtering algorithms for discrete data is well worth pursuing.
The theoretical concepts have great potential for extension to other estimation
problems in finite sampling and the results should receive considerable
attention.