* 9201546
* Fast System Identification Using Building Seismic Records   and Site Response Study for Microzonation (US-Taiwan/IDNDR)
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Sheng-Taur Mau, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1996
* USD 167,373.00

This is a collaborative research project centered around a strong- motion
instrumentation project currently undertaken by Taiwan's Central Weather Bureau
(CWB) to install 1,000 digital strong-motion stations on the island
(approximately 60% free-field and 40% structural installations). This recent
development opens up new possibilities to fundamentally change the way building
strong- motion data are collected, analyzed, and disseminated and offers new
opportunity for site response study for seismic microzonation using the free-
field and down-hole strong-motion data. To fully exploit the potential of the
new systems, a three-way cooperative research program is proposed that involves
the University of Houston, the University of Southern California, and the
National Taiwan University. The objectives are (1) to develop a real-time
strong-motion building data processing and analysis methodology to be
implemented on the new PC-based system, (2) to develop a methodology for fast
system identification to be implemented on the PC-based system to generate
engineering data not routinely available at present, and (3) to improve methods
of site response prediction for microzonation using existing array data and the
data expected from the CWB free-field and down-hole arrays in Taiwan. This
project focuses on structural issues as identified in items (1) and (2) above.
Special attention is placed on developing system identification and damage
assessment techniques which are made more automatic based on advanced software
and expanded data base. This cooperative research program uses the already
funded seismic instrumentation systems as a testing ground to develop new ways
of strong-motion data utilization, thus expanding the usefulness of strong-
motion free-field and structural response data. The results of research can be
readily applied to the U.S. and the cooperation will also provide the larger
U.S. research and engineering community with tiUVa. cEVeeV &//