* 9201234
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Studies of the Effect       of Polymer/Solvent Self-Diffusion and Thermodynamics        Coupling on Mutual-Diffusion
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1992,08/31/1994
* John Zielinski, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1994
* USD 16,200.00

This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of
Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three
to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.
The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of
unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. John M. Zielinski of Pennsylvania State University to work with Professor
Doctor Hans Sillescu at the Institut fur Physikalische Chemie der Universitat
Mainz. Knowledge of the diffusion rate is essential in designing adequate
products for numerous applications including: (1) devolatilization, (2)
medicinal time-controlled release, (3) drying of paints and coatings, (4)
packaging or barrier membranes and (5) separation processes. Despite the
importance of polymer/solvent diffusion coefficients, however, proportionately
little data of this type are available in the literature, particularly at
varying solvent concentrations. Due to the escalating emphasis on reducing
emissions from commercial processes, diffusion studies of penetrant molecules in
polymer systems at this time are warranted if not essential. Mutual-diffusion
processes are inherently coupled to polymer and solvent self-diffusion and their
thermodynamic interaction. The Pulsed Gradient Spin Echo (PGSE) nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) technique and holographic grating have previously been employed
to measure solvent self-diffusion coefficients. Only recently, however, have
advances in instrumentation rendered these techniques viable for addressing
polymer self-diffusion as well. Although acquiring data directly is extremely
important, complementary theoretical studies are also required so that
diffusional characteristics for polymer/solvent systems can be predicted a
priori. The coupling of the self-and mutual coefficients is the weakest link in
existing diffusion theories. Consequently, an indepth experimental and
theoretical study of the relationship between the individual self-diffusion
coefficients and the polymer/solvent mutual-diffusion coefficient is proposed.
This award recommendation provides funds for a stipend for twelve months.