* 9201285
* Symbiotic Association of Aphids:  Biochemical Role of the   Procaryotic Endosymbiont
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Paul Baumann, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 11/30/1994
* USD 150,000.00

Aphids are small syringe-like insects which penetrate plants and suck up plant
juices for nutrients. Acting like unsterilized needles these insects transmit a
variety of agriculturally important plant diseases. Within the body cavity of
aphids are specialized cells which contain gram-negative bacteria
(endosymbionts) which cannot be cultured outside the host cells. The aphid is
dependent on the endosymbionts, their elimination by treatment with antibiotics
results in sterility or death of the host. Plant sap is deficient in a variety
of amino acids which insects cannot synthesize and evidence suggests that the
endosymbionts supply these amino acids for the aphid host. Perhaps the best
available evidence is for the overproduction of tryptophan by the endosymbiont;
there is also evidence that some endosymbionts may overproduce cysteine. Our
study involves the cloning and sequencing of genes coding for enzymes of
tryptophan and cysteine biosynthesis, the overproduction of selected key enzymes
and a study of their kinetic properties. These results may indicate that the two
key amino acids, tryptophan and cysteine are overproduced by the endosymbiont
and utilized by the aphid host. This information will establish a function for
the endosymbiont and may suggest approaches for the controlling of aphid pests
by the elimination of their endosymbionts.