* 9201189
* Direct Mass Spectrometric Profiling of Water Column         Particulate Organic Matter Composition
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1994
* Timothy Eglinton, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/1994
* USD 247,075.00

This research involves the application of novel "in -source" mass spectrometric
(MS) techniques for the molecular-level characterization of (sub)-microgram
quantities of particulate organic matter (POM). The overall objective is to
relate changes in POM composition to water column-based biogeochemical processes
and to assess the importance of these processes in determining the chemical
characteristics of sedimentary organic matter. Observed variations in POM
composition will be interpreted in the context of current concepts for organic
matter preservation. This objective will be pursued by investigating the
composition of organic matter in samples of phytoplankton populations,
particulate matter and surface sediments from high productivity (Peru Upwelling
region) and oligotrophic (Sargasso Sea) Oceanic environments. The analytical
approach adopted seeks to overcome several limitations which currently prevent
the application of molecular markers as routine tools in marine geochemistry.
Specifically, in- source MS offers advantages as a rapid, high sensitivity
method which can be used to study compositional features of complex mixtures
over a wide range of molecular sizes and polarities. The major focus is placed
upon structural aspects of macromolecular constituents of POM, however, an
assessment of lipid composition will also be made in an attempt to provide a
more holistic perspective of POM transformation. The inherent sensitivity of in-
source MS will be exploited by studying compositional variations in sub-factions
of POM separated by flow cytometry. In this way, chemical variations can be
related to well-defined particle characteristics (size, shape, chlorophyll
content), enabling systematic relationships to be established between the
composition of phytoplankton and POM.