* 9201408
* FASEB Conference:  Viral Assembly July 26-32, 1992,         Saxtons River, VT
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1993
* Roger Burnett, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 09/30/1993
* USD 9,000.00

A conference entitled "Virus Assembly" will be held under the auspices of the
Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) from July 26 to
July 31, 1992, at the Vermont Academy, Saxtons River, Vermont. This will be the
second such conference, the first being held in 1990. Although considerable
progress has been made in defining the mature structure of animal and plant
virions, much less is known of the intracellular processes directing the
assembly of newly synthesized macromolecules into infectious highly organized
virion particles. These processes are likely to be virus specific and so targets
for therapeutic intervention. Some recent findings have included the role of
chaperonins in structural protein maturation, phosphorylation of viral
structural subunits, non-conservation of symmetry in polyoma, and interference
of the products of cloned genes with virus infection. Such results led to the
organization of the first FASEB conference on "Viral Assembly" in 1990 as it was
realized there was and urgent need to examine and integrate the current
knowledge of intracellular assembly of infectious virions. The urgency arose
from the fact that the last relevant conference was held over seven years
previously (EMBL, 1982). The 1992 FASEB conference will be build on the success
of the 1990 conference in bringing together leading investigators in the fields
of assembly and maturation of animal, plant and bacterial viruses. A
particularly important and well-received feature of the 1990 conference was its
organizations of sessions around specific processes and problems in virus
assembly, rather than around particular viruses. This led to an interchange and
merging of knowledge from research workers in the fields of animal viruses and
bacteriophages. Until the advent of the FASEB meetings, these communities had
grown apart and so had no common forum. Poster sessions, in addition to the oral
sessions, will ensure an even wider communication of results among attendees and
guarantee that late-breaking or newly-developing investigations will be
adequately covered. A new feature, suggested by many 1990 participants, will be
the availability of abstracts for the posters.