* 9201612
* Numerical Solution of Eigenvalue Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Jesse Barlow, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1996
* USD 196,755.00

This research concerns the improvement of the accuracy of methods to solve two
particular eignenvalue problems. The first is the classical symmetric eigenvalue
problem. Recent results have shown that there is a large class of symmetric
eigenvalue problems for which small structured perturbations result in small
changes in the eigenvalues in the relative sense. This class of matrices is
called "well- behaved". The problem of finding a neccessary and sufficent
condition for a matrix to be "well-behaved" will be investigated. Another
concern is that only a few algorithms have been shown to achieve relative
accuracy on a subset of the set of "well- behaved" matrices. The investigation
will try to discover if that set of algorithms can be expanded. The divide and
conquer approaches of Cuppen, Dongarra, Jessup, Sorensen, and Tang are
considered. Good absolute error bounds on these algorithms have already been
established and it remains to show tighter relative error bounds for diagonal
dominant problems and for the singular value decomposition. The other large
problem area concerns the eigenvector problem for non-symmetric matrices. The
problem arises in the numerical solution of Markov modeling problems. Accurate
general bounds on Gaussian elimination have been proven. These allow for the
straighforward application of standard sparse matrix techniques to this problem.
However, better structured perturbation bounds need to be proved for the nearly
uncoupled case.