* 9201723
* Mathematical Sciences: Topology of Foliations and Foliated  Knot Complements
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Lawrence Conlon, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1995
* USD 121,200.00

This project concerns a long-standing collaboration with John Cantwell into the
structure of foliations of codimension-1, especially on closed 3-manifolds. It
grows directly out of their theory of levels (1978), which has influenced not
only their own work, but that of the French and Japanese schools as well. The
main direction will be to explore the deep relations between the topology of
knot complements and taut, finite depth foliations. A major tool in this
investigation will be the "generalized Poincare- Bendixson" theory developed by
the investigator and Cantwell as part of the theory of levels. The lowest level
of complexity is that of a fibered knot, here called a "depth-zero knot." These
knots are relatively rare, have been studied classically, and are relatively
well understood. The next level of complexity is exhibited by the depth-one
knots, which are very numerous (as shown in David Gabai's thesis) and present
many interesting questions. Depth-one knots are currently the focus of this
project, and results already obtained confirm their interest. Other questions to
be studied relate the degree of smoothability of taut foliations to topology.
Although smoothness questions have not particularly concerned 3-manifold
topologists, a strong case can be made that their relevance to topology is deep.
In a rather different direction, the proposer remains interested in the ergodic
theory of foliations, especially of exceptional minimal sets, and the related
question of whether the Godbillon-Vey invariant detects such minimal sets
(almost certainly not). A foliation of a manifold is a way of filling the
manifold with lower dimensional pieces. In the case of a codimension-one
foliation, these pieces are of dimension one less than that of the given
manifold. Think of an onion or an artichoke. The topology of a manifold is
strongly related to the kind of foliation which it will support, and in skillful
hands this relation has been forged into a powerful tool for investigating the
topology of manifolds. It is an unintuitive fact that the major algebraic tools
for investigating the topology of manifolds work best in the case of high
dimensional manifolds. The geometric tool afforded by foliations is thus
particularly welcome in the case of low dimensional manifolds. A major instance
of this is the investigation of the complement of a knot in the three-
dimensional sphere, which turns out to be an important way to gain information
about the knot itself.