* 9201831
* Materials Synthesis and Processing:  Modeling and Control ofMacro-Phenomena and Micro-Structure in Steel Rolling
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1996
* Ampere Tseng, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1996
* USD 174,080.00

A combined numerical and experimental research program will be developed to
study the hot rolling process with emphasis on the understanding of the
thermomechanical behavior and its associated microstructure development. In the
numerical approach, macro-heat transfer and mechanical models will be integrated
into a metallurgical- or micro-model to simulate the process considered. With
this integrated model, the relationship between the process parameters and
microstructure of the workpiece can be established. In the experimental
approach, the thermomechanical characteristics of the rolling process will be
simulated by a hot deformation tester. The temperature and time dependent
changes of microstructure during and after deformation will be examined. The
testing data will be utilized to determine the flow behavior for macro-modeling
and the material parameters needed in the micro- modeling. The kinetic theories
associated with statistical techniques will be adopted to form the governing
equations for the researched micro-models. As a result, the needed boundary
conditions for solving these equations will be provided by the experimental
data. The experimental study will also be used to verify the modeling
predictions to further refine the micro- and macro-models developed. Then the
strategy to have better control of the microstructure and mechanical properties
can be developed. Further understanding of the thermomechanical and
metallurgical phenomena should certainly make for operating the process more
effectively cost-wise. The research may also serve as a catalyst to the
development of a new rolling technology for new applications. The study may
allow the production of steel shapes of improved quality at higher speeds.