* 9201882
* Optimum Configurations of Three-Dimensional Mechanical      Components with Behavior and Geometry Constraints
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Alejandro Diaz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 03/31/1995
* USD 97,350.00

The goal of this research is to develop formulations and solution strategies to
generate the shape and topology of mechanical components that are optimal with
respect to measures of performance that include functional as well as geometric
criteria. The research will emphasize the following: mathematically rigorous
formulations, which are posed formally as optimization problems in which the
design space includes different topological descriptions of the structure, as
well as different structural idealizations of two and three dimensional
components; optimization problems that incorporate geometry and topology
constraints; formulations that include local functional constraints on the
mechanical behavior of the structure, such as measures of stress, deformation,
and buckling; and the development of computational procedures suitable for the
solution of problems cast in the form outlined above. The investigation seeks to
facilitate a systematic search in a space of design configurations that includes
shape and topology. The goal of such exploration is not only the generation of
improved, optimal or near optimal designs, but also the generation of
understanding of this complex design space and of the effect that a meaningful
class of design restrictions has on admissible solutions to the design problem.
The investigation will produce tools for design capable of suggesting near-
optimal configurations for a reasonably large class of mechanical design
problems. There are many possible applications of these ideas in industries such
as automotive or aerospace. These tools will, if successful, provide one of only
a handful of methods that are applicable in the early stages of design.