* 9201890
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR: Mid-Latitude Studies of the Middle Atmosphere Using Rayleigh and Raman Lidar
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1994
* Thomas Wilkerson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard A. Behnke
* 01/31/1994
* USD 35,000.00

A lidar system developed at the University of Maryland is being restored to
operation at Utah State University, as part of the Bear Lake Observatory (BLO)
facilities - a mid-latitude CEDAR observatory. Lidar observations will be made
initially in the altitude range 30-70 km, as done previously at College Park,
covering the upper stratosphere and lower mesosphere. The altitude coverage will
be extended with the addition of a more powerful laser by Clemson University
upward to 80 km. At higher altitudes, near the mesopause, these lidar
observations will be complemented by the passive optical instruments at BLO.
Vertical profiles of molecular density and temperature will be derived from
clear-air portions of the atmosphere above 30 km, using Rayleigh scattering at
532 nm. The downward extension of these profiles into regions were Mie
(particulate) scattering significantly adds to the lidar return will employ
Raman scattering from atmospheric molecules. These profiles will be used to
examine the occurrence, structure, interaction, and variability of planetary
waves, tides, and gravity waves in the middle atmosphere above an extended
mountainous region. This award provides funds for the PI to help make the system
operational at BLO, and begin measurements.