* 9201753
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Red Tide Phytoplankton of The South and East China Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 07/31/1995
* USD 80,000.00

The general objective of this cooperative project between Donald Anderson, Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution, and Qi Yuzao, Jinan University, Guangzhou,
China, is to identify, isolate, culture, and characterize selected Chinese red
tide phytoplankton species with respect to their toxicity, physiology,
geographic distribution, and linkage to specific toxic events. During the last
decade, the number, magnitude, and economic impacts of harmful algal blooms
(commonly called "red tides") have increased dramatically in Chinese coastal
waters. A newly established national red tide research program in China includes
plans to characterize the taxonomy, physiology, and toxicology of species
indigenous to Chinese coastal waters, yet so far only one of the ten important
harmful phytoplankton species is in culture, and some of the necessary equipment
and expertise for toxicological and physiological characterization is not
available in China. This project represents one step toward the goal of
establishing a Chinese culture collection of harmful phytoplankton species and
documenting their taxonomy, physiology, toxicology, spatial distribution, and
ecology. This work will contribute to more general understanding of the field
behavior and characteristics of a toxic bloom species isolated by geography from
populations in US coastal waters.