* 9201225
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* J. Peter May, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1995
* USD 760,000.00

This project deals with a wide range of topics in topology and related areas of
algebra, algebraic K-thoery and algebraic geometry. Weinberger studies the
surgery theory of stratified spaces, using analytic as well as topological
techniques. Rothenberg studies equivariant surgery theory and other aspects of
discrete group actions on manifolds. The visitor, Madsen, is collaborating on
this project. May studies various areas of equivariant algebraic topology and,
with Kriz, has begun work on motives in algebraic geometry. Swan works on
problems connected with K-thoery and the study of algebraic and topological
vector bundles, Kriz has moved from the general areas of combinatorics and is
now studying various problems in algebraic topology, including an algebraic
approach to mod p homotopy theory. The details of these various projects vary,
but all are concerned in one way or another with reducing geometric information
to a subject for calculation. The nature of the geometric information involved
is the crux of the problem. While questions about lengths, areas, angles,
volumes, and so forth virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations, it is far
different with what are known as topological properties of geometric objects.
These are properties such as connectedness (being all in one piece),
knottedness, having no holes, and so forth. All systematic study of such
properties, for example, how to tell whether two geometric objects really differ
in respect to one of these properties or are only superficially different, or
how to classify the variety of differences that can occur, all these have only
truly been comprehended and mastered when they have been reduced to matters of
calculation. Modern algebra furnishes many of the tools and the attitudes toward
the tools that are needed, but the interplay between the algebra and the
topology remains a fascinating subject. It has in turn shed light on subtle
problems in modern physics, and this has recently been repaid when physics
provided a novel and fruitful way to look at the topology.