* 9201747
* Mathematical Sciences: Conformal Mapping, Riemann Surfaces, and Circle Packings
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Burton Rodin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 07/31/1994
* USD 40,000.00

This project combines the mathematics of classical geometric function theory
with newly discovered applications of circle packing. The source of this
connection lies in a conjecture of W. Thurston in 1985 that one should be able
to obtain good approximations to the Riemann map of a simply connection planar
domain through a circle packing of the domain following by a mapping of the
circles by a prescribed algorithm. This turned out to be the case and is now
known as the Finite Riemann Mapping Theorem. The proof spawned a new line of
investigation within the field of complex analysis: what type of theorems can be
proved by circle packing and, more importantly, what new discoveries are opened
up by means of this new technique? Work now continues as the breadth of
possibilities broadens. Topics to be investigated include hexagonal packing and
the asymptotics and the ratios of maximum and minimum radii, the classical
problem of canonical conformal maps of multiply connected regions - whether
arbitrary domains are conformally equivalent to domains with boundary components
of circles or line. Work will also be done in extending results on osculating
Mobius transformations of a circle packing which are known to converge and give
the first and second derivatives of the Riemann map. The question of whether
higher order derivatives can also be approximated will be examined. Complex
function theory encompasses the study of differentiable functions of a complex
variable and related classes of functions such as harmonic functions and
quasiconformal mappings. The subject is highly geometric; many of the problems
concern the properties of various sets under transform by functions from one of
the above classes. Applications to potential theory and fluid dynamics is now
standard in engineering circles.