* 9201662
* Numerical Studies of Magnetospheric Dynamics and Related    Space Plasma Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* John Dawson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 01/31/1996
* USD 539,717.00

This proposal is for numerical studies of the magnetosphere with a focus on the
properties of intermediate shock waves, the dynamics of the magnetosheath and
magnetopause, reconnection and convection in the geomagnetic tail, and auroral
electron acceleration by lower-hybrid wave turbulence. Scaling behavior of
intermediate shocks will be handled through magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) followed
by hybrid simulations extended to the high ion beta case (beta is the ratio of
plasma to field energy density). MHD studies of the magnetopause will be pursued
along with hybrid models to study magnetopause structure. 3D global simulations
will be done including all the large-scale dynamics of the magnetosphere to test
the effects of magnetosheath and magnetopause boundary conditions. Response of
the magnetosphere to these inputs will be analyzed through studies of
collisionless reconnection in the near- Earth plasma sheet, extended to cover
more general aspects of convection and to consider the structure and stability
of more distant parts of the tail current sheet. A new high beta drift- kinetic
simulation code will be developed including some kinetic effects for the
electrons as well as ions. This code will be used to test the hypothesis that
chaotization of electron orbits can restore the universal ion tearing mode - a
fundamental question for the reconnection process in space plasmas. Resonant
electron acceleration by ion wave turbulence will be studied and the results
compared with observations of auroral electron spectra and the structure of
auroral arcs.