* 9202846
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Population Ecology of       Marine Specialist Herbivores on New Zealand Rocky Shores
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Cynthia Trowbridge, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/1994
* USD 43,300.00

Long & Medium-Term Research: Population Ecology of Marine Specialist Herbivores
on New Zealand Rocky Shores This award is under the Long and Medium-Term
Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists
and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research
centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for
joint research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month
postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Cynthia D. Trowbridge to visit Dr. Robert
Creese at the University of Auckland, Leigh Marine Laboratory. Dr. Trowbridge
proposed to study the population ecology of oligophagous ascoglossan sea slugs
(Mollusca: Gastropoda: Opisthobranchia). She has already documented the
population ecology of several species of intertidal ascoglossans in the N.E.
Pacific. She now proposes to collect complementary information for three
ecologically similar species in the Hauraki Gulf region of the North Island of
New Zealand to address the following three questions. First, do ascoglossans
seasonally reduce algal host abundances? Second, does interspecific competition
among generalist and specialist herbivores reduce the effect of ascoglossan
herbivory? Third, do fish and crab predators significantly reduce ascoglossan
densities in the field? This study will provide valuable information about the
role of marine specialists on temperate rocky shores. The award recommendation
provides funds to cover international travel, a stipend for twelve months, and a
dependent allowance.