* 9202176
* Novel Low Temperature Approaches to Epitaxial Silicon       Overgrowth on Silicides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Steven Yalisove, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

The ability to grow metastable epitaxial heterostructures has driven efforts to
fabricate many novel electronic devices. Recent breakthroughs in the
heteroepitaxial growth of silicides such as CoSi2 on the Si(100) surface have
revitalized the search for a metal base transistor; however, many problems
remain. One of the most critical problems at this time is the inability to grow
high quality epitaxial Si back on top of these films. This proposal addresses
this goal by taking a scientifically aggressive approach in an attempt to use
"kinetic engineering" to overcome the growth problems associated with
heteroepitaxy on silicide surfaces. "Kinetic engineering" is intended here to
describe attempts to alter the kinetics of a nucleating film by modification of
the surface geometric and/or electronic structure. This will be accomplished by
using adsorbates, such as As, as surfactants and controllably altering the
surface topography of the substrate. %%% This research will result in a better
fundamental understanding of the influence adsorbates have on the kinetics and
energetics of evolving films in determining the resulting growth mode. This
understanding will provide a foundation for low temperature processing of thin
film structures with a desired morphology. This research will provide tools
needed for the pursuit of advanced devices such as the metal base transistor and
the three dimensional integration of silicon devices.