* 9202425
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Velocity and Concentration  Measurements in the Turbulent Jet and the Jet in            Counterflow
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1995
* Minami Yoda, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1995
* USD 39,950.00

Long and Medium-Term Research: Velocity and Concentration Measurements in the
Turbulent Jet and the Jet in Counterflow This award is under the Long and
Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables
U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of research
abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Minami Yoda of
Stanford to work with Dr. Heinrich Fiedler at the Technical University of
Berlin. Their research project involves development of techniques for the
simultaneous acquisition of two-dimensional concentration and velocity fields
for application in turbulent water flows. This technique will initially be
developed in a fundamental flow, the axisymmetric jet, to evaluate its accuracy
and applicability. They will then use their technique to investigate the jet in
counterflow, a new flow which is of interest because it displays transition from
convective to absolute instability. In both cases their approach will involve
marking the flows first with flueorescent dye to measure the two-dimensional
(passive scalar) concentration field, then with neutrally buoyant particles to
measure the velocity field, and finally with a combination of the two to acquire
both fields at once. The results from this new technique will clarify the role
of convective mixing in turbulent free shear flows. The award recommendation
provides funds to cover international travel and a stipend for twelve months.