* 9202389
* Long and Medium-Term Research: Factors Affecting the        Adaptation Period Preceding Aerobic Degradation of          Chlorinated Benzenes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Robert Arnold, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1994
* USD 38,980.00

Long and Medium-Term Research: Factors Affecting the Adaptation Period
Preceding Aerobic Degradation of Chlorinated Benzenes This award is under the
Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards
provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support an eleven-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Flynn W. Picardal of
the University of Arizona to work with Dr. Alexander J. B. Zehnder of the Swiss
Institute for Water Resources and Water Pollution Control (EAWAG). Their
research project will study the effect of environmental factors on the
acclimation period which precedes the biodegradation of mono-, di- and
trichlorobenzenes by a microbial population. The factors to be examined include
choice of substrate, substrate concentration, presence or absence of co-
substrate, and temperature. Experiments will utilize microcosms containing soil,
water and/or sediments to examine the interspecies or interstrain movement of
genes encoding known degradation pathways. Chlorobenzenes are being used as
model compounds in these studies because the biochemistry and genetics of
chlorobenzene degradation have already been elucidated. Pseudomonas sp. Strain
P51 will be used as a donor organism to provide a source of genetic sequences
capable of chlorobenzene degradation. This recently isolated organism (van der
Meer et al, 1991) has been shown to have chlorobenzene biodegradation genes
grouped into two clusters. The chlorobenzene dioxygenase gene for this organism
has been shown to be located on a transposable element. Mutations and genetic
rearrangements in the population will be stimulated through the use of known
chemical and physical mutagens and other methods. DNA hybridization and
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques are among those that will be used to
study genetic movement and acquisition of new genetic material. The frequency
and extent of such movement will be examined as a function of the varied
environmental factors. The award recommendation provides funds to cover
international travel and a stipend for eleven months.