* 9202209
* New Photonic Materials from Genetically Engineered          Bacteriorhodopsins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Richard Needleman, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1996
* USD 550,000.00

New Photonic Material from Genetically Engineered Bacteriorhodopsin. There
exists a need for photonic materials that have superior photochromic,
photovoltaic, or nonlinear optical (NLO) characteristics. This research will
develop a new family of materials based on the protein bacteriorhodopsin (BR), a
unique biological material which has promising photochromic, photooltaic, and
nonlinear optical properties needed for device application (e.g. holographic
recording films, associative holographic memories, spatial light modulators,
etc.). To fully realize the potential of devices based on BR one must produce
mutant BRs at a scale suitable for rapid analysis and fabrication and be able to
screen these mutant Brs rapidly for important photochromic properties (second
harmonic generation). Mutants construction from the gene coding for BR (bop)
will use an expression system which has recently been developed. In this system
mutant BR's are synthesized in their natural host and not in E. coli as is
currently the custom. This method allows the rapid and facile production of
large quantities of mutant proteins derived by site-directed mutagenesis. The
photochromic properties, the photovoltaic properties, and the nonlinear optical
properties of the BR variants will be assessed. This effort involves the close
collaboration of investigators with expertise in three different areas: genetics
(Richard Needleman). photochemistry (Janos Lanyi) and physics (George Rayfield).
A strong industrial collaboration (Bend Research Inc, Bend Oregon) is also part
of this program. %%% There exists a need for materials that have superior
responses to light than man-made products currently in existence. This research
will develop a new family of materials based on the protein bacteriorhodopsin
(BR), a unique biological material which has promising light sensitive and
photoelectric properties needed for device application (e.g. holographic
recording films, associative holographic memories, spatial light modulators,
etc.). To fully realize the potential of devices based on BR one must produce
mutant Brs at a scale suitable for rapid analysis and fabrication to screen
these mutant Brs for important photochromic properties. Mutants proteins will be
obtained from the gene coding for BR inserted into a bacterial expression system
involving the natural host; this method allows the rapid and facile production
of large quantities of mutant proteins derived by site-directed mutagenesis. The
photoelectronic properties of these light sensitive proteins will be assessed by
investigators with expertise in three different areas: genetics, photochemistry,
and physics. A strong industrial collaboration is also part of this program.