* 9202270
* Derivation, Modeling, and Analysis of Access Control        Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Paul Ammann, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 11/30/1995
* USD 231,178.00

This project will develop models and analysis algorithms for access control
systems. Architectures for implementing these systems will also be investigated.
Access control systems mediate (i) operations on data objects (e.g., user A
reads file F), as well as (ii) control operations which alter access permissions
(e.g., user A authorizes user B to read file F). In current systems all, but the
most rudimentary, control operations are typically centralized in a single
authority (viz., the system administrator). This project will investigate
systems where such authorization is decentralized and itself subject to change.
Harrison, Ruzzo and Ullman (HRU) proposed a general model for this purpose.
Unfortunately, their model has extremely weak safety properties (i.e., it is
undecidable or computationally infeasible to determine whether a given user can
ever acquire a particular privilege). Subsequently a number of models with
varying expressiveness and analyzability were published. Recent results by
Ammann and Sandhu for their Extended Schematic Protection Model strongly
indicate that the pessimistic results of HRU can be circumvented. This project
will build on previous work by the principal investigators. It will develop and
analyze new access control models with the objective of analyzing their safety
properties, expressive power, fundamental constructs and implementation issues.