* 9202973
* Deposition of AlN Films from Organoaluminum-Nitrogen        Compounds:  A Paradigm for CVD from Single-Source           Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* John Hudson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 02/29/1996
* USD 335,000.00

This award is made in the Special Projects Office of the Chemistry Division
under the Materials Synthesis and Processing Initiative. The research will
address the problem of formation of thin films of compound materials by chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) from organometallic precursors. The intent is to
correlate the basic gas phase and surface chemical behavior of the precursors
with the structure and purity of the resulting films, and with the efficiency of
precursor conversion to final product. The system to be investigated is the
production of AlN films from organoaluminum-ammonia or -amide precursors
containing aluminum and nitrogen in the correct stoichiometric ratio. The gas
phase and surface chemistry of these precursors will be studied using a
combination of mass spectrometry with time-of-flight measurements of product
species, and pulsed beam Fourier transform microwave spectroscopy. Thin film
deposition will be carried out in a cold-wall, hot-stage CVD system. Films
formed in this system and in the course of the surface chemistry studies will be
characterized by a range of surface and analytical techniques to determine their
composition, structure and orientational relationships. %%% This study will
provide a comprehensive picture of the steps leading from precursor to film in
AlN deposition, and in the process identify the critical reaction steps
controlling composition and structure. This information can also be used in the
design of improved precursor systems for AlN as well as serving as a paradigm
for the CVD of other electronic and ceramic systems.