* 9202598
* Mathematical Sciences: Upstate New York Topology Seminar
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1997
* Douglas Anderson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 10/31/1997
* USD 21,000.00

Douglas R. Anderson will work on several problems in the areas of boundedly
controlled topology and its applications. Some of the problems are designed to
expand the uses of the methods of boundedly controlled topology by applying them
to problems in other areas, while others lie entirely within the domain of
boundedly controlled topology itself. Attempts to expand the scope of the
methods are intended to demonstrate their relevance and clarify their
limitations and may expose additional questions within the subject which need to
be addressed. The problems within the area itself represent extensions of
research already done by Anderson and H. J. Munkholm of Odense, Denmark. The
objectives are to understand more clearly the exact relationship between this
part of topology and the versions of controlled topology introduced by such
other researchers as T. A. Chapman, S. C. Ferry, and F. S. Quinn, and, if
necessary, to enlarge the body of foundational results within boundedly
controlled topology. Topology is the study of properties of geometric objects
which are not destroyed by continuous transformations, such properties as
connectedness, knottedness, and so forth. Topological properties are as basic
and ubiquitous as the more familiar geometric properties of length and area, but
they call for entirely different techniques to deal with them. By now the
topology of high dimensions has been intensively developed, and the array of
techniques available is quite extensive. From time to time in the development of
a subject, it becomes necessary to organize its methods to make them more
readily available to others and easier to pass on to future generations which
will wish to use them without having been directly involved in their invention.
Such a time has arisen in high dimensional topology, and the boundedly
controlled approach is a natural codifying principle that is proving useful in
making order in the toolbox, so to speak.