* 9202608
* Theoretical and Experimental Studies of Disordered Metallic Systems and Tin-Based Small Gap Semiconductors
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,10/31/1994
* Donald Ellis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 10/31/1994
* USD 15,600.00

This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science award supports the collaboration of Donald
Ellis and J.B. Ketterson of Northwestern University and Elisa Baggio Saitovitch
of the Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The
project aims to conduct theoretical and experimental studies of materials with
novel properties synthesized under controlled conditions on molecular beam
epitaxy, e-beam, or sputter deposition on crystalline substrates. The
researchers will measure properties of binary disordered metallic systems to
determine the degree of ordering, magnetic structure, and transport parameters
as a function of composition, growth conditions, layer thickness, and thermal
treatment. They will also study heteropitaxially stabilized films to develop
stable small gap semiconductors. Using self-consistent-field models based on
Local Density theory in the embedded cluster framework, they will probe the
electronic structure of these materials at the atomic level. Cluster
calculations will be used to interpret Mossbauer, NMR, Perturbed Angular
Correlation, and X-ray absorption spectroscopic data. The Brazilian side will
produce specimens, characterize materials, and make spectroscopic measurements.
The U.S. side will contribute expertise in hyperfine interactions and
preparation of films.