* 9202131
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Cellular Analysis of Cell   Cycle Regulatory Phosphoproteins and Cytoskeletal Proteins  in Developmental Mutants of Nicotiana and Arabidopsis
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1992,10/31/1993
* Thomas Jacobs, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/1993
* USD 10,500.00

Long and Medium-Term Research: Cellular Analysis of Cell Cycle Regulatory
Phosphoproteins and Cytoskeletal Proteins in Developmental Mutants of Nicotiana
and Arabidopsis This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign
Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Heidi S. Feiler to work with Dr. Jan A. Traas at the Institut
National de la Recherche Agronomique in Versailles, France. Dr. Feiler plans to
characterize several Nicotiana and Arabidopsis developmental mutants, which are
perturbed in cell cycle regulation and division plane alignment. Using in situ
cell biology techniques, she will study the expression and subcellular
localization of a set of highly conserved phosphoproteins and cytoskeletal
proteins implicated in cell cycle control. It is presumed that a subset of these
proteins will act as markers delineating between normal and aberrant cell cycle
control and that comparisons such as these will help identify the contribution
of cell cycle regulation to plant development. The analysis of cellular and
subcellular localization patterns of the cdc2 and MPM-2 phosphoprotein
regulators and potential cytoskeletal targets in situ will better define their
interactive, in vivo functions. Experiments such as these will be required to
ultimately understand cell cycle regulation as it occurs within the plant. The
award recommendation provides funds to cover international travel and a stipend
for twelve months.