* 9202948
* The Synergistic Effects of Ceramic Materials Synthesis UsingVapor-Enhanced Reactive Sintering
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Dennis Readey, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* George P. Peterson
* 02/29/1996
* USD 449,500.00

In this program, materials processing and synthesis capabilities of two
techniques (enhanced vapor transport and self-propagating high-temperature
synthesis or reactive sintering) will be combined to produce ceramics and
ceramic- ceramic composites with unique microstructures and properties,
including porous ceramics, foamed or expanded ceramics, fine ceramic powders,
and ceramic whiskers. The research is aimed at attacking a major limitation of
current combustion processing, namely lack of control over and uniformity of
microstructures produced. Enhanced vapor transport, which can stem from either
the ambient gas permeating the packed powder preform or the presence of vapor
production within the powder compact during processing, has been shown to be a
good way to control microstructure during conventional sintering. The general
approach to be followed in this program will be centered around development of
understanding of the microstructure development during reactive sintering/SHS
processing in the presence of such enhanced vapor transport. Two model systems,
a simple one-component TiB2 ceramic system, and a more complex TiB2-Al2O3
ceramic composite system, will be studied, with combustion synthesis of these
materials being carried out both in argon and in a reactive gas (e.g., HCl);
effects of gas composition, particle size, "green" density, and degrees of
dilution of the reactants on product morphology will be examined. Complementary
modeling studies will be included to help develop a better understanding of the
underlying mechanisms controlling the resulting microstructure. Combustion
synthesis has been demonstrated to be an effective process for producing a wide
variety of both oxide and nonoxide ceramics. Under controlled conditions,
ceramic- ceramic and metal-ceramic composites can be fabricated in- situ, with
considerable energy savings and decrease in process complexity relative to
alternate procedures for producing materials with desired properties. (In some
cases, combustion synthesis actually offers the only route to certain desired
products.) As indicated above, a current major limitation of combustion
synthesis is the lack of control and uniformity of the microstructures produced;
gaining understanding and control of the microstructure development will
represent a major advance in this materials production technology.