* 9202182
* Biomolecular Sol-Gel Glasses Containing Encapsulated Enzymesand Other Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Bruce Dunn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/1995
* USD 414,030.00

This research program is at the interface between materials science and
chemistry/biochemistry. The collaborative research effort is aimed at developing
a new type of biomolecular material in which enzymes and other proteins are
encapsulated in inorganic glass matrices synthesized by the sol-gel method at
room temperature. Biochemistry is largely a solution-based discipline, but the
application of the sol-gel technique enables us to prepare novel solid-state
materials which exhibit the electrical, optical, chemical and biological
properties of the biomolecule as well as the stability and integrity of the
inorganic oxide matrix. The primary objectives of this project are (1) to
develop methods of synthesis for this new class of solid-state biomolecular
materials, (2) to elucidate the nature of the interactions between the glasses
and the biomolecules and (3) to explore applications of these materials as
optically-based biosensors. The research results are expected to provide a
fundamental understanding of the role of synthesis conditions in retaining the
properties of the biomolecule dopant in the solid-state environment. The optical
transparency of the matrix enables us to use spectroscopic methods to
characterize the structure, chemical function and activity of the biomolecule
dopant. The work on biosensors is designed to exploit the specificity of enzymes
and other proteins in combination with the transparent, porous and chemically
stable matrix of the inorganic oxide. This Materials Synthesis and Processing
project is jointly funded by the NSF Divisions: The Division of Materials
Research; Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences; Division of Chemistry.