* 9202419
* Biological Synthesis and Materials Properties of Bacterial Polyesters
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* R. Clinton Fuller, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 02/29/1996
* USD 480,000.00

The proposed research program would elucidate the molecular and supermolecular
processes involved in the intracellular synthesis of reserve polyesters by
bacteria and their intracellular and exocellular depolymerization by enzymes.
Specific goals of the program include: (1) an understanding of the cellular
transport processes and biochemical reactions involved in the utilization of:
(a) good-growth good-polymer producing substrates, (b) good-growth non-producing
substrates, and (c) non-growth substrates, especially in the cometabolism of
mixtures of (a)+(b) and of (a)+(c) by which the coploymers from the non-
productive substrates, (b) and (c), are produced; (2) an understanding of the
enzymatic processes involved in polymer formation within the granule, especially
the number, activity and location of the polymerase enzymes and the ability of
isolated granules to participate in extracellular polymerization reactions; (3)
an understanding of the interaction between depolymerase enzymes and individual
polymer molecules, especially on solid surfaces. Additional goals of the program
include the following: (i) to prepare entirely new, non-natural polyesters and
evaluate their materials properties (including biodegradability) as plastics or
elastomers; (ii) to contribute to the basic understanding of the biochemistry of
cometabolism by using polymer production as a model system; and (iii) to isolate
and characterize the intracellular polymerase and depolymerase enzymes excreted
by bacteria and fungi that can utilize these polyesters as growth substrates in
their biodegradation in natural environments. %%% Polyesters have proven to be
extremely versatile thermoplastics in wide use in many industrial products. They
can be fabricated into films, fibers and molded products. Polyester can also be
used for packaging as well as in pure form, or when blended with wool, cotton,
etc., for clothing material. These products produced chemically from petroleum
provide many useful and indeed necessary items for industrial and medical uses.
However, because they are synthetic organic chemicals from petroleum
distallates, they are not biodegradable in any known current process and waste
disposal of these products is an increasing problem world wide. Polyesters of
identical chemical makeup and properties can be made by a large number of
bacteria. Because they are made by enzymes in cells as opposed to chemical
synthesis, they produce stereoregular polymers which are fully biodegradable.
Essentially, these bacteria use biosynthetic polyesters as food. Theoretically
these polyesters can be treated for disposal like any organic waste. We will be
undertaking a study of the enzymatic mechanisms of degradation of these new
biomaterials. In addition we have shown that these bacterial or "natural"
polyesters have many new and potential properties that cannot be duplicated by
chemical synthesis. For instance we have discovered a bacterium that can
synthesize a polyester that is an elastomer, i.e. it behaves like rubber. The
use of such a product in the production of many items-- surgical gloves for
example that are biodegradable or diapers with biodegradable plastics liners
would be a big advance in solving the plastic waste disposal problem.