* 9202052
* Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Topology and Its           Interactions With Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Matthew Ando, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1996
* USD 102,300.00

Although historically distinct, algebraic topology, group theory, and
representation theory have increasingly interacted. Algebraic K-theory and work
on classifying spaces of finite groups are good examples of this. Professor Kuhn
has long been interested in such overlaps, most recently in his work relating
Steenrod algebra technology to group representation theory. Here he will study
various topics in this spirit. One project consists of using his representation
theoretic tools to study some very classical types of topological realization
questions. Another consists of using these same tools to study state-of-the-art
questions in algebraic K-theory. A third involves applying algebraic K-
theoretic methods to the group ring isomorphism problem. The details of these
three parts vary, but all are concerned either with reducing geometric
information to a subject for calculation or to perfecting one of the principal
algebraic tools used for this purpose. The nature of the geometric information
involved is the crux of the difficulty. While questions about lengths, areas,
angles, volumes, and so forth virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations,
it is far different with what are known as topological properties of geometric
objects. These are properties such as connectedness (being all in one piece),
knottedness, having no holes, and so forth. All systematic study of such
properties, for example, how to tell whether two geometric objects really differ
in respect to one of these properties or are only superficially different, or
how to classify the variety of differences that can occur, all these have only
truly been comprehended and mastered when they have been reduced to matters of
calculation. Algebraic K-theory has been developed into a major tool for this
purpose, and the interplay between the algebra and the topology involved remains
a fascinating subject.