* 9202633
* Ion Induced Microprocessing
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1996
* Herbert Sawin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/1996
* USD 450,000.00

The goal of this research is to understnd the fundamental features of ion
induced surface reactions in focused ion beam microfabrication, and of the
materials and surfaces that are produced by the resulting deposition or etching.
This will be accomplished by bringing to bear expertise from chemical
engineering, materials science, and microfabrication technology. In the case of
the deposition, understanding of the basic process is expected to point to ways
of eliminating unwanted carbon impurities, for example, by the addition of a
second, appropriately reactive, precursor gas or an atomic beam. Eliminating or
significantly reducing the impurities in the deposited material would be a major
breakthrough. The reduced resistivity and increased density would immediately
make focused ion beam device and circuit repair processes more effective and
open the door to new applications of maskless, resistless, patterned conductor
deposition by projection ion techniques and to in situ processing. %%% Ion
induced deposition and ion assisted etching are new processes for material
addition and removal. Since ion beams can be focused to extremely small
dimensions (0.05 microns and below), this permits material manipulation with
unprecedented resolution and flexibility and has spawned commercial applications
in micro- repair of integrated circuits and in microsectioning for fault
diagnosis. By developing a better understanding of the mechanisms of these new
processes, and by extending them to new materials, the proposed research work
aims to broaden the applications to the deposition of the original wiring of
future ultrafast integrated circuits.