* 9202464
* Support for Research of U.S. Scientists Working in India,   Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies.
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Joseph Elder, American Institute of Indian Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1995
* USD 330,718.00

Description: This project partially supports the American Institute of Indian
Studies (AIIS) for management and funding of research activities in the
behavioral and natural sciences conducted by U.S. scientists in India.
Candidates with background in India who apply to AIIS are screened, and those
nominated are referred to NSF for final selection. The AIIS manages the required
clearances for the research, and the logistics involved in the travel, local
arrangement and conduct of research in India. They therefore meet NSF and
Government of India requirements as well as the scientists' needs. Areas of
research typically include anthropology, linguistics, sociology, economics,
political sciences as well as biology, mathematics and engineering. The
U.S.-India program supports U.S. scientific research in India in areas of
interest to NSF and where the research could lead to better understanding
between the two countries through science. This project meets program criteria.
Scope: The AIIS is a very well organized institute with membership of over 42 of
the major U.S. universities and colleges with South Asian or Indian Studies
programs. The AIIS reviews their applicants through selection panels made of
eminent scientists in various broad scientific disciplines. The AIIS offices in
New Delhi and other major cities in India have well-established contacts with
Government of India departments and are capable of facilitating U.S.
researchers' collaboration with host institutes. The areas of research
considered are broad, and funds from this project are used only for those
normally supportable by NSF science divisions. The candidates and awardees are
carefully screened both by the AIIS and by NSF. This program clearly strengthens
the scientific collaboration and understanding between India and the U.S.