* 9202886
* Analytical/Numerical Procecdures for Investigation of       Rotor Systems with Strong Local Nonlinearities
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1992,04/30/1995
* Sherif Noah, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 04/30/1995
* USD 145,028.00

This focuses on the development of procedures which integrate modern dynamical
systems theory and analytical/numerical techniques to characterize the dynamical
behavior of systems with strong local nonlinearities. The emphasis will be
placed on nonlinearly coupled rotor/structural systems such as high speed
aircraft engines. Strong local nonlinearities in rotor systems are manifested in
dampers, clearances, fluid interactions, rubs, and others. The systems may be
subjected to single or multi frequency excitation due to rotating imbalance in
single, or multiple shaft and/or geared systems, respectively. General
procedures will be developed for determining the system's multiple, periodic and
quasi-periodic responses, their detailed bifurcations and routes to chaos. Low
order rotor models will be constructed to study the nonlinear mechanisms by
which the regular and chaotic behavior of the systems influence their
performance. Of particular interest is the effect of internal resonances on that
behavior. The research will yield reliable methods and procedures which will
contribute to the fundamental understanding of nonlinear phenomena in systems
with strong nonlinearities. The methods will be generalized to efficiently treat
large order rotor systems to aid in their simulation, design, testing and
monitoring; and for future developments in experimental and analytical
studies.*** //