* 9202106
* Molecular Basis of Nitrogen Fixation and the Ecological     Success of the Marine Cyanobacterium Trichodesmium
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1993
* Jonathan Zehr, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1993
* USD 99,999.00

The ecological success of the blue-green bacterium Trichodesmium species
suggests that this cyanobacterium possesses unique characteristics that confer
an ecological advantage in the warm, nutrient-poor waters of tropical and
subtropical oceans. Furthermore, this filamentous cyanobacterium without
heterocysts dominates the free-living nitrogen (N2) fixing cyanobacterium found
in the open ocean. It is also the only nonheterocystic cyanobacterium that fixes
molecular nitrogen in the light, while evolving oxygen through photosynthesis.
Results from previous studies on the molecular biology of Trichodesmium have
provided a firm basis for studying its genetic, biochemical, and ecological
aspects. This project addresses three important issues of Trichodesmium biology
and ecology. First, what is the genetic variability among Trichodesmium
populations with different colony morphologies? Second, what mechanisms are
involved in its ability to maintain oxygen-sensitive nitrogenase activity while
evolving oxygen? And third, is the ecological success of Trichodesmium due to
its reduced susceptibility to virus infection that is related to extensive
modification of Trichodesmium DNA? These issues will be addressed from
biochemical and molecular approaches, using molecular probes and antisera
developed earlier for Trichodesmium populations.//