* 9202134
* Significance of Paste-Sand Interfaces in Micromechanical    Behavior of Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1997
* Wai-Fah Chen, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/1997
* USD 140,071.00

The objective of the proposed investigation is to introduce a new approach to
the study of the micromechanical behavior of concrete by combining its materials
science and structural engineering aspects, based on the assessment of the
qualitative and quantitative significance and role of cement paste-sand particle
interfaces in stress-strain behavior of concrete that is subjected to pure
uniaxial compressive force. In the experimental part, mortar cylinders having
sand particles of different packing characteristics are tested for their stress-
strain behavior and their micromechanical properties. Concrete cylinders will
also be tested to compare the significance of the coarse aggregate with the sand
particles. These are then correlated with the microstructural properties using
SEM with backscatter electron analysis and image analysis capabilities, mercury
intrusion porosimetry, and electrical conductivity measurement techniques. In
the analytical part, a model is developed which describes the micromechanical
behavior of concrete and defines quantitatively the role and significance of
interfacial parameters. In the model development a nonlinear fracture mechanics
approach is taken using the finite element method as a tool to analyze crack
propagation and localized deformation. The relationship between crack
propagation and sand particles packing characteristics will be studied. In this
approach, interfaces are treated as weak planes or initial flaws. Results of
this investigation can be extended to other cases including durability, creep,
and shrinkage considerations, and optimum mixture proportioning of conventional
and advanced cement-based concrete composites.