* 9202441
* Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Materials Related Research
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Patrick Gibbons, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1993
* USD 175,000.00

This project will provide a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) which will be
dedicated to support fundamental research of materials. Examples of research
studies include the investigations of quasicrystals and complex intermetallic
crystals, polymer processing for optical waveguides, composite materials,
nanophase materials, and studies of magnetic recording media. The SEM would have
a resolution of 3.5 nm at 30 Kv, an accelerating voltage range of 0.2kV to 40
Kv, and a magnification range from 10x to 300,000x. These specifications offer a
large degree of flexibility for electron microscopy studies and will
significantly help current research efforts as well as future projects. An
integral part of the SEM would be a Wavelength Dispersive Spectrometer (WDS) and
an Energy Dispersive X-ray Spoectrometer (EDS). These two subsystems give
elemental analysis with submicron resolution in the lateral direction. This
capability is important when studying multi- elemental systems such as
intermetallics and composite materials. The high lateral resolution allows
studies of composition variation within individual grains and at the grain
boundaries. %%% The Materials Science and Engineering Program at Washington
University in materials science and applied physics spans several departments
over two schools. These inlcude the departments of mechanical, electrical,
chemical and civil engineering in the School of Engineering and Applied
Sciences, and physics and chemistry in the School of Arts and Sciences. Graduate
research in the Materials Research Laboratory is active in the structure and
properties of metals, polymers, ceramics, composites, advanced metal and polymer
processing methods, polymer processing rheology, fracture mechanics of solids,
and the fabrication, chemistry, physics, and mechanical behavior of composite
materials.