* 9202051
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Partial        Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Sagun Chanillo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1994
* USD 35,000.00

Work done on this project divides into two categories, problems arising from
oscillatory integral theory and those arising from the theory of weights. Both
are tied to the analysis of partial differential equations in various guises.
The oscillatory integrals reflect the propagation of singularities of linear
partial differential equations. Using the FBI-transformation, work will be done
in determining regularity of complex vector fields, extending earlier results of
Hormander. Other work will focus on Lebesgue and Sobolev estimates for Airy-type
integrals applicable to boundary problems for wave equations. Further refinement
of research on weighted integrals will be used to obtain estimates on nodal sets
and eigenfunctions along lines initiated by Fefferman and Donnelly. It is
expected that one can use Carleman-type inequalities to improve estimates on the
eigenfunctions. Additional work will done on inverse boundary value problems to
seek an existence counterexample for the case where the potential has a large
weak type norm. Partial differential equations form the backbone of mathematical
modeling in the physical sciences. Phenomena which involve continuous change
such as that seen in motion, materials and energy are known to obey certain
general laws which are expressible in terms of the interactions and
relationships between partial derivatives. The key role of mathematics is not to
state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative and quantitative
meaning from them and validate methods for expressing solutions.