* 9202413
* Solvent Permeation, Swelling Profiles and Mechanical        Properties of Thin Polymer Films
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Maria Santore, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* VIJAY T JOHN
* 07/31/1997
* USD 145,000.00

This research will study thin siloxane and epoxy polymeric films which will be
spin cast as linear chains onto a variety of substrates (sapphire, BK7 glass,
and silica) to thicknesses of 50 nm to several microns, and then crosslinked to
form a rigid structure. The study focuses specifically on the mechanisms by
which these films uptake solvent, and how solvent permeation and swelling
affects the adhesion of the film to the substrate, and the membrane mechanics.
Solvent permeation will be studied using total internal reflectance fluorescence
(TIRF), a technique in which the substrate onto which the film is adhered is
placed on an optical prism, and a laser beam impinges at a grazing angle to the
substrate /polymer film surface producing an exponentially decaying evanescent
wave which penetrates through the film. By varying the angle of incidence,
different penetration depths can be achieved. Using TIRF, two types of
experiments will be undertaken. In the first, diffusion of a free dye into an
equilibrium swollen film or a partially swollen film will be followed by placing
a chromophore on the dye. The radiation due to the evanescent wave causes the
chromophore to fluoresce, and by detection of the total fluorescence of the film
as a function of the penetration depth (by changing the grazing angle), the dye
concentration can be computed by deconvolution (cf. eq. 3). By repeating the
TIRF angling as a function of time, the time dependent concentration profile of
the dye can be constructed. In the second type of experiment, the polymer
network of an unswollen film will be tagged. The face of the film will then be
exposed to a permeating solvent, and as the film swells due to the solvent
uptake, the polymer chains will deform and the concentration of the tag will
vary. Again, by using time resolved TIRF angling, the time dependent
concentration profile of the labels can be computed, and from these, insight
into the spatial distribution of the labels during swelling can be obtained. The
dynamical mechanical response of the membrane will be measured, and a
microhardness tester will be used to determine the bond between the polymer film
and the substrate.