* 9202562
* Scientific Workstations for Research in Computationally-    Intensive Econometric Methods
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Daniel McFadden, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 06/30/1994
* USD 137,470.00

The explosion in computer capacity in the past decade has been accompanied by a
reorientation of econometrics toward using computer-intensive methods to reveal
more about data and sharpen the inferences drawn. Innovations have been
particularly intense in the areas of semiparametric and nonparametric
estimation, use of resampling methods and cross-validation in parametric and
nonparametric models, simulation methods for inference, estimation of dynamic
stochastic programming models, and Bayesian methods. Translation of these
methods into applications software and empirical econometrics has been uneven,
partly because computational capacity has not been generally available. The
primary objective of this project is to accelerate research on computationally
intensive methods and applications, and to encourage more rapid testing ,
documentation, and dissemination of algorithms. It plans to provide UNIX
workstations for a consortium of researchers working on computationally
intensive econometrics, and a common file server to facilitate access to
software and data. In addition to the facilities at Berkeley, described in this
core proposal, there are subproposals from scholars at several other
institutions who are working in the same area. The Berkeley file server will
provide access not only for these scholars, but also for others not included in
this proposal, to specialized software and data sets. The technology which is
planned for both the Berkeley research programs and the consortium computing
facility is well suited to the computing demands. It offers the promise of
significant advances in theoretical econometric modelling methods.