* 9202639
* Materials Synthesis and Processing:  Computer Aided         Microelectronics Manufacturing Technology for Excimer Laser Based Lithography
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1996
* Frank Tittel, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Warren DeVries
* 09/30/1996
* USD 330,000.00

Continued improvements in integrated circuit (IC) performance, circuit density,
and production costs are possible as a result of significant advances in VLSI
and optical lithography. The research program, will capitalize on these
developments and develop innovative and timely technology used in manufacturing
semiconductor components, in particular the next generation of 16 Mbit and 64
Mbit DRAM chips. This will be accomplished by utilizing new, deep UV excimer
laser steppers and taking advantage of powerful and cost effective advanced
computer-aided design (CAD) tools for simulation in the overall microelectronics
product-developed process. In the first phase of this project, the manufacturing
yield will be improved by modifying mask information based upon simulation and
fabrication of structures using I-line wavelength verification. Such a feedback
process will allow "dynamic" modification of the layout "design rules" in a VLSI
system design, resulting in improved manufacturing yield when compared with
presently available "static" design rules. A second, concurrent phase of the
project seeks to implement and test simulation models based on advanced KrF
excimer laser sources needed for the development of prototype 64 Mbit DRAM
products. Interactive engineering tests will be performed at the university and
in industry to define the optimum operating range and control methodology for
excimer laser-based photolithographic light sources. The work will allow the
production of integrated circuits of increased density, complexity and
reliability.