* 9202159
* Active Control of Structure Instrumented with Optical       Fiber Sensors Under Earthquake Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Jackson C.S. Yang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/1996
* USD 229,425.00

This project attempts to study the following key problems in active control: 1)
the standard optimal control technique requires the knowledge of the entire time
history of the structural response to compute the necessary control force by
solving the Riccati equation. In the mean time, instantaneous optimal control
algorithm was developed for on-line control. It lacks the analytical argument to
prove its convergence and controllability in the global sense, and 2) the
validity of the assumption that the control force is proportional to the
displacement, velocity and acceleration of the structure subjected to earthquake
loading. This assumption is acceptable if and only if the excitation force to
the structure is ignored in the determination of the control force from
minimizing the objective function. To answer the above questions, two types of
control schemes are studied in this project: the pole placement controller and
the neural network controller. These two schemes will be investigated both
analytically and experimentally. In addition, optical fiber sensors will be
applied to the scaled model structures. Through comparison of test signals
between the optical fiber sensors and classical sensors, suggestions for
improvements of the sensor system for use in civil engineering structures will
be made possible. Overall, this project will be undertaken through the following
three major research tasks: (1) control methodology; (2) scaled structural model
experimental test on shake table; and (3) improvement of sensor systems.