* 9202223
* Theoretical and Experimental Studies of Failure in          Anisotropic Curved Layered Structure
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1996
* Fuh-Gwo Yuan, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 10/31/1996
* USD 134,843.00

The primary objective of this work is to establish and ambitious analytical and
experimental program to understand and then to predict the failure mechanics and
mechanisms of curved layered composites. Analytical studies will be directed
towards (a) determining analytical elasticity solutions for the stress response
of uncracked curved composites under general loadings, (b) predicting initial
failure modes (interface of matrix cracking), failure locations based on proper
failure criteria under specific critical loads, (c) determining stress
singularities of curved interface crack between dissimilar cylindrically
orthotopic or anisotropic media and of matrix cracking impinging on the curved
interface. Finite element studies will then emphasize on (a) developing singular
finite elements to investigate the stress fields near the crack tip
corresponding to each failure mode for test specimens of practical dimensions.
The element formulation will incorporate proper singular terms obtained from
analytical study, (b) investigating the essential features of failure process in
curved composites with emphasis on the role of shell curvature, (c) determining
the mixed-mode fracture parameters K1, K11, and K111 in terms of various
geometry parameters and loading conditions, (b) predicting fracture models and
stable, unstable crack growth or crack arrest. Experimental data will be also
used to develop and validate failure criteria as part of the proposed work. The
analytical predictions, finite element results and experimental data will be
collated and critically compared to provide a full understanding of both the
failure behavior of curved composites and the predictive capability of various
models.*** //