* 9202641
* Fabrication and Properties of Gallium Arsenide (Group IV)   Alloy Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Richard Matyi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/1996
* USD 375,000.00

A systematic study of the synthesis by molecular beam epitaxy and properties of
the alloys of GaAs with the group IV semiconductors, Si and Ge, will be
performed. These alloys are predicted to have direct bandgaps over part of their
composition range, and their successful fabrication would open up new avenues
for bandgap engineering in electronic and photonic devices. The PIs will pool
their expertise in molecular beam epitaxy, reflection high-energy electron
diffraction, x-ray diffraction, and other characterization methods to correlate
growth conditions with structural, electrical and optical properties of
(GaAs)(Group IV) alloys and heterostructures. The work will also address
fundamental properties of interfaces between GaAs and Si and/or Ge. %%% This
research will develop a new system of semiconductor materials, formed by
alloying gallium arsenide with silicon and/or germanium. Crystal growth
conditions for the alloys will be established and optimized using structural,
electrical, and optical characterization of the grown semiconductor layers.
These alloys will allow new flexibility for variation of the wavelength of light
produced by photonic devices, and offer the potential for fabrication of lasers
on gallium arsenide substrates which operate at the technologically important
wavelengths of 1.3 and 1.5 microns.