* 9202344
* Mathematical Sciences: Scattering Theory for Linear and     Non-linear Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Maciej Zworski, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* James Glazebrook
* 06/30/1995
* USD 74,564.00

This research concerns scattering theory and, in particular, the study of
scattering poles or resonances and nonlinear diffraction. The resonances which
in a wide range of situations appear as the poles of the meromorphic
continuation of the resolvent of the operator constitute, in some sense, are the
replacement of the discrete spectral data for problems on noncompact domains. As
in the case of eigenvalues, the link between the distribution of these poles and
the dynamical properties of the scatterer is of great interest. Also, this
project supports the study of the regularity of nonlinear waves on domains with
diffractive boundaries which represents a natural continuation of the well
understood linear theory. The main concern is an accurate description of the
location of the 'anomalous' singularities due to nonlinear interaction. Finally,
this project will involve a study of operators arising in solid state physics.
This topic is concerned with the spectral theory rather than the scattering
theory but it shares the microlocal aspects of the scattering theory. This
research, in the general area of geometry, involves the behavior of waves and
wave fronts together with the spectral problems motivated by solid-state physics
and noncommutative geometry.