* 9202699
* Chemical Sensors for CVD Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,05/31/1996
* Arthur Ellis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 05/31/1996
* USD 482,000.00

The photoluminesence of II-VI or III-V semiconductor is used to identify
reversible adsorption of molecules on semiconductor surfaces. These interactions
are interpreted in terms of the steric and electronic landscape of the
semiconductor surface. The studies are extended to the fabrication and
development of robust, real-time, in-situ monitors of the gas-phase composition
in chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process streams. These sensors are based on
photoluminescence, photoconductivity, or ungated field-effect transitor (FET)
design, take advantage of the changes in the work function of the semiconductor
on reversible adsorption. Using multisensor arrays, a complement of CVD
precursors is monitored simultaneously. Optimization and testing of sensors is
done in collaboration with Sandia National Laboratory. Improves quality control
in the production by CVD of complex electronic materials is the key to an
improved competitive position in these key materials. Achievement of this is
hampered by a lack of monitoring devices that give a picture of what is
happening in the CVD process. This project attacks this issue directly, aiming
at real-time sensors that are suitable for use in automated or manual control
systems. This award is part of the Materials Synthesis and Processing
Initiative.