* 9202082
* Expanding the Role of Carbon Isotopes in Marine and Organic Geochemical Research
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1993
* Katherine Freeman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/1993
* USD 40,000.00

Pathways of carbon-flow in depositional environments can be identified using
biomarker identities and distributions in conjunction with compound-specific
isotope analyses. The factors influencing the isotopic composition of individual
compounds can be interpreted in terms of known processes affecting bulk organic
matter. However, this approach is limited and there is a lack of data for
individual compounds in modern environments. This work aims to characterize
isotopic consequences of biogeochemical processes at the molecular level,
specifically for those processes associated with the production and degradation
of organic matter in the water column. The ultimate goal is to expand the role
of carbon isotopes in marine and organic geochemical research. Three efforts
towards this goal are proposed. 1) The first is to establish a facility for the
isotopic analyses of organic compounds at Pennsylvania State University. 2) This
facility will be used to continue research started during the P.I.'s graduate
studies, specifically, to characterize processes that control the isotopic
compositions and distributions of individual compounds. 3) The facility at PSU
will be used to foster workshops and iterlaboratory comparisons of irm-GCMS
operations and performance. In addition, it will enable further analytical
developments if urn-GCMS and related methods.