* 9202961
* MS&P:  Optical Fiber Sensors for In-Situ Temperature and    Strain Measurements in Composite
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Kyung-Suk Kim, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 02/29/1996
* USD 430,000.00

Optical fiber sensors will be developed for applications in composite materials
that are processed at high-temperatures (>1000oC). Specifically, novel optical
fibers will be used for two types of in-situ measurements: temperature and
stain. Temperature sensors will be synthesized with rare-earth dopants that will
permit spatially resolved temperature measurements in the range of 500- 1200oC.
Strain sensors based on Fabry-Perot gratings and using optical time domain
reflectometry will both be investigated. The temperature and strain sensors that
are developed will be incorporated in fiber-reinforced, ceramic and
intermetallic matrix composites that will be produced by chemical vapor
infiltration (CVI). Because these materials already contain fibers, the
incorporation of additional optical fiber sensors will not significantly perturb
the microstructure. A variety of advanced, thermal gradient CVI processes are
currently being developed, and the optical fiber sensors that will be developed
as part of this program will make it possible to monitor temperature gradients
during processing. A relatively simple thermal gradient CVI system will be used
to make in- situ optical fiber temperature measurements during composite
fabrication. The microstructure of these materials will also be characterized
quantitatively, and a numerical model of the infiltration process will be
developed to analyze both the temperature gradients and the microstructure
evolution. Comparisons between the modeling calculations and the experimental
measurements will provide insight into the infiltration process, and demonstrate
the potential for using optical fiber temperature sensors. The strain sensors
will provide measurements during processing, and more importantly, they will
make it possible to measure strain when the composite is in use. These in-situ
strain measurements offer a novel method to study the stress-strain behavior of
the material. In brittle matrix composites, the matrix phase typically begins to
microcrack long before the material fails, thus these in-situ strain
measurements are particularly important because it will be possible to monitor
the degradation of these materials before macroscopic failure actually occurs.