* 9202255
* Properties of Correlated and Multilayer Two-Dimensional     Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Herbert Fertig, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1996
* USD 114,000.00

Theoretical investigations will be carried out on two-dimensional quantum
semiconductor systems studying effects of disorder, finite temperatures and
unique device structures with and without a magnetic field. The behavior of
edges in the Wigner crystal regime in a strong magnetic field will be considered
and a method for calculating relaxation, reconstruction and melting of the edge
electrons under various circumstances will be studied. The consequences of
transport and electromagnetic absorption of such effects will be considered. A
detailed study of defects in the Wigner crystal will be undertaken using a
variational wavefunction approach which should help determine the importance of
quantum fluctuations and will be a first step in understanding both the melting
transition and finite temperature transport. Edge states in the quantum Hall
regime will be studied with emphasis on the effects disorder may have on the
low-lying excitations of such systems. Finally, a careful study of the influence
of potential inhomogeneities in a two-layer system on interplane tunneling will
be undertaken. %%% This theoretical study will focus on the properties of a new
state of matter associated with a gas of strongly interacting electrons confined
to two-dimensions. Usually this state of matter is found at the semiconductor
interface in a strong magnetic field. One possible outcome of this electron gas
is to condense into a crystalline state, the Wigner crystal. The research will
study the behavior of this Wigner crystal. Besides being of fundamental physical
interest, there may be ramifications of this research on microelectronics.