* 9202342
* MCF: Implications of time-dependent foraging behaviors for  population dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,04/30/1994
* Peter Abrams, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* John A. Byers
* 04/30/1994
* USD 83,300.00

This proposal seeks support for the principal investigator to learn
mathematical techniques and collaborate with mathematicians at the University of
British Columbia. Its scientific goal is to determine how feeding behaviors
which change adaptively with time affect the population dynamics of species
interacting in a food web. Previous work by the P.I. have shown that, when
individuals of a species adjust their foraging behavior in relation to food
availability and the risk of predation, interactions between species are changed
greatly. This situation produces indirect affects between species that have no
direct feeding relationship, and can completely reverse the effects of predator-
prey interactions. These previous models have assumed that time does not affect
the optimal feeding behavior directly. Time does not have a role in almost every
natural system to which these results apply. It is therefore essential to extend
the food web results with models with time dependent foraging strategies.
Behavioral ecologists, including two mathematicians at the University of British
Columbia have done considerable work determining the nature of time-dependent
strategies when there are discrete alternative feeding behaviors. The P. I. will
collaborate in extending these results to situations in which foraging is
defined by a continuous variable, such a percent of time spent feeding. The
continuous strategies will then be incorporated into food-web models to
determine the applicability of conclusions from previous time- dependent models.