* 9202044
* Mathematical Sciences: Critical Point Theory and            Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Abbas Bahri, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 107,000.00

The various directions of this research are bound by a common theme, the use of
variational methods in addressing problems of mathematical analysis. Areas of
concern include dynamical systems, nonlinear partial differential equations and
geometry. The methods, both analytical and topological, are rooted in previous
work; in particular on variational problems in which compactness assumptions are
not available. Among the topics to be investigated is symbolic dynamics, in
which the contribution of the periodic orbits provided by the Birkhoff-Lewis
theorem connects the framework used in dynamical systems with that used in
variational theory. A particular goal is to carry over existing work to the case
where the stable and unstable manifolds of a hyperbolic fixed point intersect
transversely. This situation arises frequently in the study of dynamical
systems, for example in the restricted three-body problem. Related work will be
carried out on collisions and existence of periodic orbits of three-body type.
It is planned to establish the existence of infinitely many generalized
solutions and to demonstrate that these solutions have good properties, i.e.
that one can attach to each of them a Morse index which describes the difference
of topology that they induce in the level sets of the variational problem.
Variational methods in science date back to the nineteenth century when the
mathematical framework of much of what we know as the physical universe was laid
out. The principles of least action and energy minimization still apply to many
of the models used in describing natural phenomena. The present work continues
investigations into the mathematical consequences and equations which arise from
variational approaches to the study of complex motions.