* 9202645
* Electrochemical Processing and Synthesis of Light Emitting  Porous Silicon Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Peter Searson, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/1995
* USD 400,000.00

It has been discovered recently that porous silicon structures exhibit strong
visible photoluminescence at room temperature. This program focuses on the
structure-property relationships of porous silicon. Porous silicon structures
are formed by a chemical etching process; however, very little is known about
how the etching parameters control the morphology of the porous structures and
the resultant light emitting characteristics. Computer simulations of the
etching process will be used to develop an understanding of the range of porous
structures attainable as a function of processing parameters. A similar range of
porous structures will be examined experimentally. The ultimate aim of the
program is the development of structural phase diagrams relating microstructure
to processing parameters and light emitting properties. %%% Light emitting
porous silicon would be an inexpensive alternative to other optical materials
and allow for integration with silicon- based electronics. This program
addresses materials processing aspects relevant to the fabrication of porous
silicon structures, and strives to characterize and understand the relationships
between structure and optical properties. The program includes the synthesis of
porous silicon structures, experimental analysis of structure/property
relationships and theoretical modeling of the growth processes.