* 9202565
* Chemical Synthesis in the Barium-Titanate System:           Controlling the Chemical to Ceramic Transition
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,03/31/1996
* Patrick Gallagher, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 03/31/1996
* USD 420,000.00

This proposal outlined a program which will introduce chemical synthesis methods
in the Ba-Ti-O system. It will use an array of characterization techniques to
provide a molecular understanding of the formation of Ba-Ti-O ceramics. It will
also correlate the microstructure and properties of sintered ceramic specimens
prepared from these powders. Effects of chemical composition, substitution,
doping and impurities on the nucleation and growth behavior of these precursors
during decomposition will be examined using thermal analysis techniques (DTA,
TG, and EGA) and hot-stage x-ray diffraction. Paralle; electron energy loss
spectroscopy (PEELS) will correlate these changes with small variations in
chemical structure. Electron diffraction will be used to identify emerging, and
possibly transient, phases. Optical spectroscopy will investigate the mechanism
of ceramic formation from the chemical matrix. Low to very high frequency
dielectric measurements will monitor the properties and microstructures of the
ceramics. %%%% This project proposes to investigate the influence of the
chemical state on final products through a novel combination of analytical
techniques situated at the interface boundaries between chemistry and ceramics.
Chemical and structural parameters will be evaluated in the compounds existing
in-between the chemical and the ceramic states. An array of techniques are used
to investigate this problem. This project can provide a molecular understanding
of the ceramic formation. The Ba-Ti-O system is selected for study. Information
from this project can reveal a great deal about the formation mechanisms. This
type of knowledge will lead directly to improvements in the processing as well
as in the new compounds.