* 9202907
* RUI:  Path-integral Simulations of Solids - Ordered and           Disordered
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* George Horton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

The effects of anharmonicity and of atomic disorder on the vibrational
properties of crystals are to be studied by means of simulation and other
computational techniques. Molecular dynamics simulations will be used to study
the structure in phonon lineshapes arising from both sources. These will be
supplemented by lattice dynamical calculations using theories such as the
coherent potential approximation for disordered crystals. Previous studies of
the thermodynamic properties of quantum anharmonic solids will be continued. The
primary technique here will be the effective-potential Monte Carlo procedure
which has recently been developed, as well as quantum Monte Carlo for
comparison. We also intend to explore the extension of the effective potential
method to deal with dynamical properties. Disordered materials to be studied
will include mixtures of the alkali halides, noble metal alloys and iron-based
alloys. The quantum solids will include the high pressure phases of helium. %%%
This award is a Research at Undergraduate Institution one to conduct
computational studies of the properties of solids which are affected by
anharmonic vibrations and disorder associated with the underlying atomic
structure. Materials to be studied include alkali halide mixtures and metal
alloys.