* 9202575
* Studies on the Chemistry and Growth of Chemical             Vapor Deposited Diamond and Related Films.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Charles Feigerle, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1997
* USD 455,000.00

Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods have become important for the
manufacture of technologically-significant thin films. Many important materials
are synthesized by this general family of techniques, including semiconducting
and insulating films, and diamond films for wear hardening and optical uses.
This project is a multidisciplinary collaborative effort designed to study
growth mechanisms of CVD of diamond and related films. Recent measurements have
demonstrated that the morphology of CVD grown diamond films is very sensitive to
activation and growth conditions. In order to rationally control the growth
process a link is necessary between the structure of the films produced and the
chemistry that is taking place in the growth reactor. To address this, three
aspects of the CVD growth process are explored: identification of the gas phase
species present in the boundary layer above the substrate, determination of the
species present on the substrate surface and surface of the grown film, and
structural determination of the film morphology. Laser ionization and secondary
ion mass spectrometries, surface vibrational spectroscopy, and electron and
optical microscopies will be used for these determinations. The results from
these studies are expected to contribute to development of a fundamental
understanding of how gas-phase and surface chemistry influence the composition,
growth rate, and structural properties of the films produced. This understanding
is important for ultimate utilization of diamond film technology in the
production of wear resistant coatings, high thermal conductivity semiconductors,
abrasives, and optical coatings.