* 9202536
* Problem Solving Environments and Methods for the Developmentof PDE Based Applications on Parallel Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* John Rice, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 02/28/1997
* USD 460,000.00

This research project has three technical thrusts: 1. The design of knowledge
based PSEs (Problem Solving Environments) for PDE (Partial Differential
Equation) based applications. 2. The development of a software engineering
framework for solving PDE problems quickly and efficiently on a network of
parallel machines with multimedia front-ends. 3. The development of an
infrastructure of scalable algorithms to support the solution of certain PDEs on
a variety of massively parallel machines. PDEs are the fundamental mathematical
tools for describing the physical behavior of many application processes in
science and engineering. Most of the existing PDE software systems deal
primarily with the solution of specific classes of PDE problems on sequential or
vector machines. This project will study the design and implementation of the
software engineering platform, ParPDElab, for generating PSEs and the related
algorithmic infrastructure for any class of PDE problems and PDE based
applications. The hardware facility assumed consists of a network of parallel
processors with different architectures and software environments. The primary
design goal in ParPDElab is to create a problem solving and programming
environment that shifts the emphasis from programming and hardware issues to the
analysis of science and engineering issues. This environment will be almost
machine independent and will attempt to unify some of the well known parallel
computational paradigms. It will be knowledge based in the sense that it will be
aware of its infrastructure and the compatibility requirements of the atomic
elements involved. Furthermore, it will be capable of making some decisions for
the user. The system will be open ended and the easy interfacing of foreign
systems will be one of the primary considerations in the design of ParPDElab. To
achieve the above design objectives, one must address the issue of integration
of numeric, symbolic, multimedia, and AI processing. This integration will be
attempted by utilizing existing technologies while developing some new
methodologies for the future.