* 9202905
* International Study of Acoustically Significant Rooms       in North America
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1992,04/30/1996
* Gary Siebein, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* John Scalzi
* 04/30/1996
* USD 150,000.00

This research will provide funding for participation by a team of experts from
the U.S. in an international study of acoustically significant rooms in North
America. Objectives of the research are: 1. The acoustical conditions in many
significant rooms in North America will be characterized in detail by the new
measures of acoustical quality. 2. Comparisons of the simultaneous measurements
made by three research teams will test the acceptability of the draft of ISO
3382 standard for the new impulse response type of acoustical measurements
regarding many specifics of the data acquisition and analysis process. 3. The
comparisons of the different measurement techniques would also allow the
extensive data base of detailed acoustical measurements for the statistical
modeling of room acoustics with the architectural properties of the rooms on an
unprecedented scale. These models based on an extremely large sample would
provide a deeper understanding of the build-up and decay of sounds in complex
rooms and the fundamental relationships among acoustical measurements and
architectural properties of rooms. 4. High quality impulse responses from
multiple source and receiver locations would be gathered in each room studied.
The results of this research will have a major and immediate impact on the state
of architectural acoustics. the scientific basis for acoustical decision-making
in the design of buildings will be greatly expanded. The active participation of
the acoustical consulting community (evidenced by their financial support of the
project) would also allow for the rapid translation of the research results into
everyday design practice.