* 9202614
* Conserved Genes and Developmental Mechanisms                in Embryos of Divergent Species, Conference to be held      December 26-30, 1992, Vancouver, Canada
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1993
* Billie Swalla, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 06/30/1993
* USD 6,000.00

The proposed symposium will be held at the annual meeting of the American
Society of Zoologists, a broad based society which includes many developmental
and evolutionary biologists. The proposed speakers are a group of developmental
biologists who are interested in development as an evolutionary process. The
program includes embryologists who study the embryos of closely related species
with different larval forms, as well as geneticists and molecular biologists who
compare genes governing the formation of the body plan during embryogenesis in
different species. There is now evidence that embryonic changes can profoundly
influence the life history of a species, especially in producing different
larval forms. As more becomes known about the genes governing embryonic
development, it may be possible to identify evolutionary constraints present in
the elaboration of an embryo. One problem in this field has been lack of
communication between evolutionary and developmental biologists. This symposium
is designed to generate discussion between scientists in different disciplines,
by exposing this group of developmental biologists to a wide ranging audience.
The interaction should generate renewed interest in how embryos develop, and in
how developmental changes may influence the evolutionary process.