* 9202290
* Novel Growth and Processing Technologies for Non-Planar     Epitaxy and Selective-Areas Strained Layer Epitaxy of       Photonic and Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,10/31/1995
* Steven DenBaars, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 10/31/1995
* USD 280,000.00

Complementary, novel growth and processing techniques for photonic and
electronic materials are being investigated. Metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition (MOCVD)-based growth on non-planar substrates can give rise to
innovative, three-dimensional device concepts. Selective layer epitaxy onto pre-
patterned substrates can be used to extend the amount of strain and lattice
mismatch possible for defect-free heterostructures. High quality regrowth
necessitates clean, defect free surfaces, which imposes constraints in the
concomitant etch processes used. This research utilizes largely ion-free, dry
chemical cleaning and etch processes. In both materials growth and etching,
laser-induced processing to extend the process control possible is being
explored. Laser-assisted atomic layer epitaxy will be used to obtain self-
limiting, monolayer control of grown layers. Laser-induced photoelectrochemical
dry etching will be studied in order to achieve highly controlled, bandgap
selective dry etching of heterostructures. %%% Modern electronic and optical
semiconductor devices impose increasingly stringent demands on the materials and
processes used to form them. The research proposed here, utilizes laser
controlled materials deposition, low-damage laser-induced etching and extensive
process monitoring, allowing greater inherent process control. Moreover, the
innovative approach of growth on previously sculpted structures allows a truly
three dimensional approach to device and circuit formation allowing higher
ultimate device density in integrated circuits.