* 9202199
* Improvement of High resolution data collection in           macromolecular electron cryo-microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1995
* Wah Chiu, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 03/31/1995
* USD 250,731.00

Electron cryo-microscopy and image analysis have become useful tools for
determining 3-dimensional structures of macromolecular assemblies at near atomic
resolution. Our laboratory is uniquely equipped with a 400 kV electron
microscope funded by the National Center for Research Resources of NIH as a
national facility. To complement our NIH support, this proposal is aimed at
improving the specimen preparation procedure,, cryo-specimen holder performance
and data collection on our 400 kV electron cryo- microscope. The first half of
this proposed technology development will be carried out in collaboration with
Gatan Inc. to build a carbon cryo-coater for vacuum deposit of a thin carbon
film onto frozen, hydrated specimens, and high resolution cryo-specimen holder
for the JEOL 400 kV electron microscope. The performance of this equipment will
be evaluated with a variety of biological specimens under investigation in our
Resources Center. The final version of this equipment will become standard
products of Gatan. The second half of this proposal is to develop software for
capture and analysis of electron diffraction patterns and images of biological
specimens with our newly acquired 1024x1024 slow scan charge-coupled device
(CCD) camera. This software will be made available to the research community.
These enchanced technologies will be used for several collaborative and user
projects in our NIH supported Resource Center.