* 9202465
* Support of American Scholars in the Natural and Social      Sciences in Collaborative Research in India, Award in IndianCurrency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Ted Tanen, Asian Cultural Council Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/1996
* USD 168,530.00

Description: This project provides funds to the Asian Cultural Council (ACC) to
support research of U.S. scholars selected under the Indo-U.S Subcommission on
Education and Culture. Awardees will come from a wide range of scientific fields
in the social and physical sciences, and will work with counterparts in India.
Funds from this grant are used for travel expenses and costs related to the
scholars' research projects, and to pay for stipends for awardees. The ACC
scientific committees select nominees for submission to NSF, which makes final
technical evaluation of the awardees. Past participants have been engaged
primarily in social and behavioral sciences, with some in geological and few in
physical sciences. Part of the award funds supports the ACC administrative work.
Scope: Collaborative work by Indian and Indian scientists is demonstrated in
this project. The ACC representative office in India obtains the necessary
clearances for the U.S. scientists to be affiliated with various Indian academic
and research institutions. They also manage the logistics of travel of each
scientist, his/her family when appropriate, shipping of research material into
and out of India, as well as language training, and assisting with research
arrangements. The project fits well with the objectives of the U.S.-India
Program.