* 9202039
* Hybrid Control of Building Seismic Response Using           Architectural Cladding
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Barry Goodno, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 03/31/1995
* USD 180,000.00

Experimental and analytical investigations of hybrid control systems designed to
combine passive damping provided by cladding- structure interaction with robust
active control systems will be conducted in this project. Experienced gained in
the study of advanced cladding connection systems designed to be employed in
buildings as passive energy dissipation and stiffness augmentation systems will
be put to advantage in this investigation. The research plan is organized into
five primary tasks: (1) Use of cladding as a passive control system; (2)
Application of classical, modern, robust and pulse control to buildings; (3)
Development of possible hybrid control systems; (4) Performance evaluation; and
(5) Model experiments (and plans for future testing). The research will be
carried out by an interdisciplinary team of researchers that combines active and
practical involvement in earthquake engineering with broad experience in the
development and application of robust control theory. Interaction among the
proposed multidisciplinary team members will be in the areas of dynamic
modelling (including modelling of uncertainties), trade- off studies related to
the relative degrees of passive versus active damping, and experimental
validation. Results of the overall research effort are expected to contribute:
(1) innovative approaches to robust control of building structures (both active
and passive), and (2) innovative methods for combining engineered passive
damping systems with modern robust controllers to achieve practice building
control systems that can be applied to earthquake and other dynamic loading
conditions.