* 9202013
* RUI: Implementation and Analysis of Inference Techniques for Classical and Multiple-Valued Logics
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1996
* Erik Rosenthal, University of New Haven
* Continuing grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 05/31/1996
* USD 104,419.00

This project is for research in computational logic. The areas of research stem
directly from prior analysis of the structure of formulas in negation normal
form. That work raised many questions and led to explorations in several
directions. Substantial experimental results at the propositional level,
preliminary experimental results at the first order level, and certain
theoretical results indicate that the most important of these may be path
dissolution, a rule of inference that is strongly complete at the ground level.
This project will continue exploration of this and related inference mechanisms,
largely through experimentation. One major thrust will be to further the
implementation of the techniques developed earlier. The current first order
system ("Dissolver") is a solid platform on which the techniques proposed below
can be tested: link selection; computing prime implicants; backtracking; theory
links and dissolution; and star chains. While abstract proof-theoretic questions
are of interest in their own right, enhancing the performance of Dissolver is an
important motivation for the theoretical work in this project. The planned
investigations into multiple-valued logics largely fit the former category; the
expectation is that the study of the following issues will contribute to the
development of Dissolver: dissolution and multiple-valued logics; dissolution,
analytic tableaux, and the distributive law; quantifier duplication, proof
length, and cycles; algorithms for computing prime implicants; and induction and
equality.