* 9203307
* Recruitment Processes of Anchovy in Chesapeake Bay:         Predation Effects, Spawning Sites and Larval Transport
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Edward Houde, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1995
* USD 391,423.00

Fluctuations in adult fish abundance are caused by variable recruitment levels,
a consequence of high and variable mortality during the early life stages.
Causes of high mortality of bay anchovy Anchoa mitchilli eggs and larvae in
Chesapeake Bay are believed to be primarily from predation by abundant
jellyfish, which are both temporally and spatially patchy. "Windows" in which
anchovy cohorts can develop under low predation pressure are hypothesized to
provide a mechanism for successful recruitment. A conceptual model predicts that
anchovy larvae will be transported up-bay and into the tidal tributaries by
estuarine hydrodynamics. This model and related hypotheses will be tested in
this investigation. Bay-wide cruises will map abundances of anchovy eggs, larvae
and predators, relating them to environmental gradients that may affect
survival, growth and distribution. Area- specific age-frequency distributions,
growth rates and mortality rates will be estimated from daily increments in
larval otoliths. Areas of origin, and probable transport trajectories of late-
stage larvae and juveniles will be determined from otolith microchemistry by
analysis of strontium:calcium ratios, which should indicate salinity zones where
larvae hatched. Direct measures of predation rates will be obtained in large
drifting mesocosms under ambient environmental conditions. Chesapeake Bay is an
appealing ecosystem within which to study recruitment processes. Abundant
cohorts of bay anchovy eggs and larvae are presented with wide ranges of
temporal and spatial variability in predator abundances, food availability and
well- described estuarine circulation patterns. The bay-wide analysis here will
provide new information of mechanisms that affect survival and recruitment
potential of fishes.