* 9203973
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Several Complex Variablesand Partial Differential Equations.
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1996
* M. Salah Baouendi, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1996
* USD 183,000.00

Work on this project continues mathematical research into problems relating
solutions of partial differential equations with mappings defined on surfaces in
spaces of several complex variables. The general Cauchy-Riemann equations which
test for analyticity are expressed as first-order differential expressions. In
studying these expressions one tries to decide whether functions defined on
surfaces and boundaries of domains can be extended as holomorphic functions to
regions adjacent to the surfaces. A fundamental tool in these studies is the
embedding of analytic discs into complex spaces of higher dimension with their
boundaries going into real hypersurfaces or more general submanifolds. The
vanishing or nonvanishing of the differential of such disc mappings has far-
reaching implications in the study of mappings of hypersurfaces as well as to
the extension problem already mentioned. Ultimately the research seeks to reveal
more about mappings between manifolds, in particular to determine new geometric
and algebraic invariants preserved under biholomorphic transformations. A second
line of investigation follows from the recent completion of a succession of
papers leading to the complete resolution of one of the fundamental
extendibility questions raised by Lewy in the mid-50's: minimality of a generic
manifold at a point is necessary and sufficient to guarantee that every Cauchy-
Riemann function near the point extends holomorphically to a wedge. A
description of the wedge of extendibility is unknown even in simple cases. Work
will be done in finding a geometric description of the wedge of extendibility.
Partial differential equations form the backbone of mathematical modeling in the
physical sciences. Phenomena which involve continuous change such as that seen
in motion, materials and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are
expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships between partial
derivatives. The key role of mathematics is not to state the relationships, but
rather, to extract qualitative and quantitative meaning from them.