* 9203291
* Applying Histogram Contrast Analysis to Texture Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Charles Chubb, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1996
* USD 224,863.00

Many brain processes operate in parallel on sensory input to draw distinctions
(boundaries, gradations, modulations, etc.) in the fabric of perceptual
space/time. For instance, there are visual processes that operate on the
spatiotemporal variations in light intensity to generate brightness
distinctions. Other processes operate on variations in the spectral content of
light over space and time to construct color distinctions. Still other processes
draw distinctions based on spatiotemporal variations in textural properties
(e.g., texture contrast, granularity and/or orientation). It is this last class
of distinction-drawing processes, or channels, that these experiments will
investigate. Histogram contrast analysis is a new branch of measurement theory
whose purpose is to (i) isolate individual perceptual channels, and (ii)
precisely characterize the computations those channels perform. No one knows
exactly how many distinct channels are devoted to drawing texture-based
perceptual distinctions, though there is general agreement that multiple
channels are involved. Nor is there any data to indicate what specific
computations are performed by any one of the putative channels used in texture
perception. Heretofore, models of texture perception have relied on arbitrary,
ad hoc guesses as to the nature of the channels used in drawing textural
distinctions. These experiments will use histogram contrast analysis (i) to
isolate individual channels used in drawing textural distinctions and (ii) to
determine their computational characteristics. These experiments will thus make
a start at the task of constructing a table of the computational "elements of
texture perception" analogous to the periodic table of physical elements. Any
theory of texture perception precise and comprehensive enough to predict
performance probabilities on actual texture discrimination tasks must have such
a table of elements as its cornerstone.