* 9203063
* Bacteriolytic Activity in the Guts of Deposit Feeders:      Distribution, Environmental Influences, and Mechanisms of   Differential Susceptibility in Ingested Microbes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Gary King, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1994
* USD 136,672.00

Invertebrates living in marine sediments and feeding on bacteria alter the
biomass, metabolism, growth, and community structure of sedimentary microbes.
This project will test and refine present models of bacterial associations
within the gut of sediment deposit feeders. Bacteria ingested into the gut and
exposed to lytic activity of gut enzymes, both in terms of space and time, will
be examined in the two deposit feeders, Arenicola marina and Amphitrite
johnsonii. Controlled experiments will be employed to clarify the influences of
temperature, enzyme concentration, exposure time, and the interactions among
these variables on the lysis of bacterial strains within the gut. Further
experiments will determine to what degree quantity, as opposed to composition,
of extra-cellular capsular layer dictates resistance to digestion. Also, lysis
of bacterial strains devoid of capsular material will be compared to ascertain
the importance of cell wall characteristics in bacterial lysis. The goals of
these experiments are to determine how environmental parameters influence lysis
of bacterial communities and to distinguish mechanisms for differential lysis,
in order to make a priori predictions of natural patterns within the guts of
deposit feeders. These predictions will then be tested in the field using
epifluorescence microscopy coupled with the relevant measurements of
environmental conditions and immunofluorescence microscopy to specifically track
three bacterial isolates through the guts of the two model deposit feeders. This
research will also determine whether deposit feeder digestion, both in terms of
total biomass or selective removal, is an important determinant of bacterial
biomass or community composition in bulk sediments.