* 9203771
* Mathematical Sciences: Spectral Problems and Inverse        Spectral Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Percy Deift, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 115,000.00

This project will focus on two fundamental areas of nonlinear mathematical
analysis involving integrable systems of differential equations. Particular
emphasis is placed on the relationship between eigenvalue algorithms and
Hamiltonian mechanics. The first concerns the asymptotics of the oscillatory
Riemann-Hilbert problems of the kind that arise in the theory of integrable
nonlinear wave equations. Work will be done exploiting a newly developed
steepest descent method to study the zero dispersion limit of the Korteweg de
Vries equation, integrable statistical models such as the transverse Ising chain
at critical magnetic field and spatially discrete problems, such as the Toda
lattice. Work will also continue on the eigenvalue algorithms in the context of
integrable systems. It was shown earlier how the basic diagonalization of finite
dimensional matrices can be realized as flows on manifolds. A framework has been
developed in which many well known systems of physical and mathematical interest
can be embedded. One focus of this investigation will be to place the recent
theory of Moser and Veselov describing a class of variational problems that can
be solved by a generalized QR factorization into the framework of Hamiltonian
flows. The principal object of this research is the analysis of systems of
differential equations arising from models of the physical world and the
application of that analysis to studies of finite dimensional matrix theory; in
particular the development of new, computationally effective means for
diagonalization of matrices. Partial differential equations form the backbone of
mathematical modeling in the physical sciences. Phenomena which involve
continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials and energy are known to
obey certain general laws which are expressible in terms of the interactions and
relationships between partial derivatives. The key role of mathematics is not to
state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative and quantitative
meaning from them and validate methods for expressing solutions.