* 9203320
* The Movement and Geographic Origin of Marine Larvae: A Molecular and Genetic Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Bert Ely, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1995
* USD 260,000.00

In order to understand the role of recruitment in the population dynamics of
marine species which have high larval dispersal it is necessary to understand
the movement of the larvae, their geographic origin and the forces that control
their local abundance. Methods for tracking larval movements have been
restricted to short time scales or within closed systems but their application
to high dispersal systems has been of limited value because of the difficulties
with larval recovery. The mussel Mytilus edulis consists of a complex of sibling
species that hybridize in discrete areas of contact between the parental forms.
Individual mussel larvae can be genetically identified as having originated from
either of the parental population, or from populations that contain hybrids.
Hybrid larvae can only have originated from populations that contained both
parent taxa or F1 hybrids. Using this system it will be possible to obtain
information on the origin of larvae at several geographic scales. New techniques
are required to genetically identify individual larvae. The methods which will
be developed in this research program will allow individual larvae to be assayed
directly, with minimal preparation and a high rate of processing. Once the
techniques have been developed it will be possible to identify the geographic
origin of dispersing or recruited larvae. Once developed this new technique will
be employed to study larval dispersal in regions of contact between Mytilus
populations.