* 9203173
* US-Czechoslovakia Research on Dynamic Light Scattering from Block Copolymer Liquids near the Order-Disorder Transition
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/1996
* USD 30,050.00

This U.S.-Czechoslovakia research project between Dr. Timothy P. Lodge of the
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities and Dr. P. Stepanek of the Czechoslovak
Academy of Sciences will be to perform extensive experimental examination of the
dynamics of block copolymer liquids. Their focus will be the weak segregation
regime, defined to incorporate order-disorder transition and the adjunct ordered
and disordered states. The researchers will use dynamic light scattering to
investigate both block copolymer melts and solutions, especially: chain length
and concentration; block copolymer composition; the segment-segment interaction
parameter; and temperature. They will pay particular attention to the number,
angular dependence, and identification of the modes which appear in the
experimental correlation functions. The large characteristic time constants
involved will pose challenges which demand various exploratory stategies. The
researchers will interpret the results in the framework of emerging theoretical
descriptions, anticipating that dynamical mean-field approximations are unlikely
to be adequate. These measurements will complement rheological, rheo-optical,
tracer diffusion, and small-angle scattering studies at the University of
Minnesota. This project in chemistry fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and
Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence.