* 9203133
* Development of an Atomic Force Microscope for Use in        Ultra-High Vacuum
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* William Unertl, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1994
* USD 61,000.00

The design and construction of an atomic force microscope (AFM) suitable for
operation in an ultra-high vacuum environment (UHV) will be carried out in this
project. The AFM will have interchangeable cantilever-tip assemblies, in situ
sample exchange, and a field ion microscope (FIM) for tip characterization. The
AFM will permit fundamental studies of adhesion, wear, and surface
microstructure. In particular, nanometer scale studies of the following will be
carried out: (a) mass transfer caused by contact between the tip and sample; (b)
nanometer scale indentation of surface and thin film mechanical properties; (c)
frictional forces between the tip and sample; (d) surface structure by imaging
in contact and non-contact modes. %%% The AFM will be incorporated into an
existing UHV surface analysis system equipped for Auger spectroscopy, ion
sputtering, and in situ polymer and metal vapor deposition of thin films.
Research will focus on the surface properties of non-conducting materials,
specifically ceramics, polymers, and their composites. Thin films of metals and
metal oxides on these materials will also be studied. The FIM will allow the
study of tip damage and mass transfer during contact under well characterized
conditions. The UHV AFM/FIM system will also be capable of scanning tunneling
microscopy studies.