* 9203447
* A Global Regulon in Escherichia coli Controlled by the      Leucine-Responsive Regulatory Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Rowena Matthews, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1995
* USD 390,000.00

The leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) is a recently discovered
transcriptional regulator from Escherichia coli that mediates extensive changes
in gene expression, and acts both positively and negatively. The first genes
assigned to the Lrp regulon were identified by their Lrp-dependent response to
leucine. We have used two-dimensional gel electrophoresis to identify over 30
polypeptides whose expression is regulated by Lrp. Expression of the majority of
genes in the regulon is, in fact, not affected by leucine. These experiments are
designed to systematically identify genes and proteins in the regulon, and to
characterize the mechanisms of action of Lrp on these target genes. We are
particularly interested in studying the regulation of leucine- independent
genes, and in determining what physiological factors govern their interaction
with Lrp. We have identified glutamate synthase (GltBD), and outer memebrane
porins OmpC and OmpF as proteins that are regulated by Lrp in a leucine-
independent manner. Our initial studies are designed to distinguish between
direct and indirect effects of Lrp on the expression of these genes, and between
transcriptional and translational regulation. We will determine N-terminal
sequences of polypeptides whose expression is regulated by Lrp, and design
oligonucleotides for cloning the relevant genes. We will also use blotting and
two-dimensional band shift assays to identify DNA sequences that bind Lrp, and
to clone the corresponding genes. %%% These studies should provide clearer
understanding of the physiological role of Lrp, the means by which it controls
its target genes, and the integration of metabolism by global regulators.