* 9203420
* IUCRC for the Enhancement of Science and Mathematics        Education (CESAME)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Michael Silevitch, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tapan K. Mukherjee
* 08/31/1994
* USD 220,000.00

This supplement provides funding for a pilot Teacher Enhancement Project at
Northeastern University. The project involves establishing the Center for the
Enhancement of Science and Mathematics Education (CESAME). This Center will be
organized within the framework of the Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center (I/UCRC) model developed by NSF. CESAME will differ in one major way from
a conventional IUC in that to date IUCs have focused upon fostering research
projects conducted by scientists and engineers working in technological areas
relevant to industry. CESAME will be concerned with fostering projects conducted
by teachers and other parties concerned with enhancing K- 12 education. By
applying the IUC approach to education, CESAME will systematically disseminate
results and nurture the development of "teacher-mentors". These leaders are
vitally needed to spark widespread positive changes in the country's educational
system. Another important facet of the proposed Center is the melding of state
resources with those of federal and industrial partners. The Bay State Skills
Corporation (BSSC) and the Massachusetts Corporation for Educational
Telecommunications (MCET) will be active participants in CESAME. This mixture of
state, federal and private sector participation is critical in an area such as
pre- college education. The Program Director recommends Northeastern University
be awarded $100,000 for the first year of this pilot Teacher Enhancement
Project. This project is being co-funded ($50,000) by the Education and Human
Resources Directorate, Teacher Enhancement Program. Near the end of the first
year the Program Director will review the progress of the Center on a number of
criteria, including the following: (1) the extent to which the university-
industry interaction is developing; (2) the extent to which the support base of
$100,000 is met and expanded; (3) the extent to which a robust educational
program is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program Director will
recommend support of the second year of this continuing award.