* 9203280
* US-USSR Workshop:  Quaternary Paleozoology; October 23-27,  1993, Springfield, Illinois
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1992,04/29/1994
* Bonnie Styles, Illinois State Museum Society
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 04/29/1994
* USD 21,685.00

A joint workshop on U.S.-Russia Quaternary Paleozoology to be held at the
Illinois State Museum in Springfield, Illinois on 23-27 October 1992 will focus
on topics in Holarctic taphonomy; vertebrate taxa, assemblages, paleoecology,
and evolution; invertebrate assemblages; human-animal interactions; and
extinctions and the modern fauna. The workshop, which will be co-organized by
Dr. Jeffrey J. Saunders and Bonnie W. Styles of the Illinois State Museum, and
by Dr. Gennadiy F. Baryshnikov of the Zoological Institute of the Russian
Academy of Sciences in St. Petersburg, is intended as the first step toward a
major collaborative U.S.-Russia research program in Quaternary Paleozoology. The
purposes of the workshop are to disseminate baseline information on current
research, methods, and concerns in Holarctica that will nurture long-term joint
research projects and proposals; establish research partnerships; and initiate
an enhanced Holarctic faunal database suitable for studies of biogeography,
human adaptations, and global warming. This project fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in
the United States and the former Soviet Union to combine complementary efforts
and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence in the field
of basic scientific research on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and
mutuality of benefit.