* 9203958
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Impact of Market-Oriented Policy Reforms on Households in Rural China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Barbara Sands, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 11/30/1994
* USD 23,760.00

The general purpose of this cooperative project is to carry out a micro-level
based investigation of the evolution and functioning of rural market
institutions in China. Questions regarding both individual and aggregate
household behavior within newly- established rural markets will be addressed
through the analysis of data gathered in a multi-purpose household-level survey
that will be modeled after the World Bank's Living Standard Measurement Study
(LSMS) survey. This household-level survey, which will be undertaken in the
provinces of Hebel and Liaoning, will be carried out in the Spring of 1993, and
will extend to between 1200-1500 households in 24 villages. This project will
contribute to our understanding of the complexities involved in economic
institutional change through providing a case study of household decision-making
amidst China's recent rural economic reforms. Intended contributions are
several: First, the project will help to identify those factors at the local
level in China that are presently impeding an expansion in the role of product
and factor markets in resource allocation, and provide estimates of the
resulting inefficiency. Second, with elasticities obtained from the construction
of an agricultural household model, the implications of alternative price and
tax policies in the agricultural sector can be investigated, and better policies
formulated. Third, drawing on the household and village level data, estimates of
the degree of inequality both in consumption and income at the local level can
obtained, and sources of the inequality diagnosed. And fourth, drawing on time-
series data dating back to the Land Reform, the implications of alternative
policies for agriculture's long-term development will be investigated. This kind
of analysis will not only help to resolve lingering questions relating to the
impact of rural reforms on productivity and growth but will be of much wider
interest now that Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union are embarking on similar
paths.