* 9203296
* Adaptive Subspace Algorithms with Biomedical and Array      Processing Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Eric Dowling, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/1995
* USD 53,165.00

This research focuses on the problem of tracking time varying subspaces to model
nonstationary vector time series. A principal objective is to characterize the
tracking properties and steady state performance of the non-iterative Spherical
Subspace (SS) tracker and associated Spherical Subspace Recursive Total Least
Squares (SS-RTLS) adaptive filter. This will be done using a statistical model
derived from the general theory of stochastic recursive algorithms. The non-
iterative spherical updating concept will be extended to develop an adaptive and
non-iterative eigenstructure tracker. Moreover, a generalized subspace tracking
method will be developed to optimally track the signal subspace in the presence
of colored noise. Additionally, a matrix pencil tracking algorithm will be
developed to reduce the computation associated with certain tracking problems.
These methods will be applied to a vast data base of multichannel biomedical
data consisting of synchronous electromyographic, kinematic, aerodynamic, and
acoustic data in order to model the speech production process. The biomedical
work will be done in collaboration with an otolarynngology medical research team
at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas. Other methods
will be used to develop vocal tract signal analysis tools that model and
discriminate between different types of speech disorders. The adaptive subspace
algorithms will also be applied to direction-of-arrival problems using data from
a recently deployed experimental array of microphones.