* 9203947
* Instrument Cluster Studies of the Mesosphere and Lower      Thermosphere at Arecibo
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* C. Russell Philbrick, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 11/30/1995
* USD 385,825.00

Instrument Cluster Studies of the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphedr at Arecibo
This award supports a three year program of continued comprehensive studies of
mesosphere and lower thermosphere aeronomy. This program builds on the
techniques and results of the 1989 AIDA (Arecibo Initiative in Dynamics of the
Atmosphere) campaign and will utilize the radar and optical facilities of
Arecibo Observatory as well as sodium and iron lidars from Penn State and/or the
University of Illinois. Of particular interest are the apparently linked
dynamical and chemical processes leading to the formation of ion, neutral
sodium, and neutral iron layers in the 80-110 km height range. Additional
interest centers on the origin of the 6-hour tide, the relationship of this tide
with sporadic intermediate ionization layers, on the occasional unexplained
occurrence of ion layers as low as 82 km altitude, and on convective processes
as observed in the sodium layer. This research program will culminate in the
proposed 1994 AIDA-LAMS (LAyers and MicroStructure) campaign which will utilize
several radars and lidars as well as other instruments to investigate these and
other phenomena. Several graduate and undergraduate students will be part of
this research effort which also involves research residencies at the
Observatory.