* 9203740
* U.S.-India Cooperative Science Program:  Binational Workshopon Galaxy Distribution Functions, Pune, India, December 1992Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1992,10/31/1993
* William Saslaw, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 10/31/1993
* USD 28,397.00

Description: This proposal is for group travel to a small binational workshop
on: "Galaxy Distribution Functions" to be held at the Inter-University Centre
for Astronomy and Astrophysics(IUCAA), Pune, December 1992. Professors S.M.
Chitre, of the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay and W. Saslaw of
the University of Virginia are the principal organizers. Galaxy distribution
functions are important for understanding the large scale structure of matter in
the Universe. Gravity is a primary influence on this distribution but despite
its long history, the mutual interaction of large numbers of gravitating objects
is a difficult problem and progress in areas relevant to galaxy clustering is
very recent. Progress has resulted from a combination of analytic physical
theory, computer N-body simulation, and astronomical observations. These
problems, along with closely related areas of physics and related statistical
descriptions, will be the main topics of the workshop. Scope: Principal
objectives of the workshop are to review recent results related to galaxy
distribution functions and to coordinate future collaborations between Indian
and Western astrophysicists studying large scale structure of the Universe.
There has been considerable research activity in this field and increasing
interest among Indian astronomers resident abroad in observing and analyzing
galaxy distributions. Exposure of the Indian scientists and students to recent
developments will be significant for the course of research on extra-galactic
physics in India. The workshop is particularly timely since it will soon be
possible to obtain observational data from the new Giant Meterwave Radio
Telescope under construction near Pune.