* 9203318
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  F2 and HF Photochemistry andSpectroscopy in Rare Gas Matrices Using Synchrotron         Radiation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1992,01/31/1993
* Vartkess Apkarian, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/1993
* USD 12,250.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: F2 and HF Photochemistry and Spectroscopy in
Rare Gas Matrices Using Synchrotron Radiation This award is under the Long and
Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables
U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of research
abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a five-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. William G. Lawrence of
the University of California, Irvine with Professor N. Schwentner of the Freie
Universitat Berlin. The researchers will focus on the study of the
photodissociation dynamics of HF and F2 in argon and neon matrices. The
photodissociation of halogens and halogen halides in rare gas solids presents
one of the simplest systems for studying molecular dynamics in condensed phase.
Using vacuum ultraviolet radiation from the Berlin Synchrotron facility BESSY,
they propose to study the photodissociation dynamics of HF and F2 in argon and
neon matrices. The synchrotron source can be used for dissociation of F2 and HF
and also for detection of H and F atoms using photo- induced charge transfer
emmision. Using this technique, the mobility of F and H atoms after
photodissociation will be measured. These studies will also include spectroscopy
of the NeF excimer in solid neon, and an evaluation of the ArF excimer in neon
as a solid sate excimer laser medium. This award recommendation provides funds
to cover international travel and a stipend for five months.