* 9203968
* Transport Phenomena and Microstructure Development in       Thermoplastic Composites Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Suresh Advani, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jay Lee
* 02/29/1996
* USD 152,428.00

In rapid and continuous manufacturing situations such as filament winding and
pultrusion, the goal is to obtain a high volume fraction of the fibers with
uniform resin impregnation and a structure that is well bonded and free from
voids and residual stresses. Hence, the mechanics of resin impregnation under
non- isothermal conditions, the mass diffusion of the polymer across the
interfaces of impregnated fiber bundles and the changing crystallinity as the
structure solidifies are key phenomena during the processing of such composite
materials. This research will develop a systematic understanding of the
mechanisms of transport of mass, momentum and energy in a continuously deforming
anisotropic porous media of aligned fibers and examine their interactions and
estimate their relative importance. This can then be integrated into process
models which will allow calculation of the fiber volume fraction, void fraction
and residual stresses as a function of the manufacturing process, material form
and processing conditions. The approach will involve model experimental studies
in carefully controlled laboratory conditions, which will serve to identify and
understand the physics of flow of shear thinning viscous fluids and will form
the basis for theoretical modeling. Simultaneously, the role of transport
equations at the microscopic level in a cell geometry representative of the
anisotropic medium will be explored. The intent being to develop a macroscopic
process model based on microscopic analysis that will relate the fiber volume
fraction, void content and residual stress distribution of different material
forms and processing conditions. To establish the validity and usefulness of the
formulated process models, experiments in actual processing environment
encompassing of filament winding and pultrusion processing techniques will be
carried out. The study will allow the production of more uniform, high strength
components from composite materials.