* 9203754
* Molecular Biology and Function of Carrier Proteins          Symposium, September 1992, Woods Hole, Massachusetts
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1994
* Michael Jennings, Society of General Physiologists
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 4,000.00

An International Symposium on Molecular Biology and Function of Carrier Proteins
will be held in September 1992 at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods
Hole, Massachusetts, under auspices of the Society of General Physiologists. The
Symposium will focus on the molecular biology and structure- function
relationships of membrane carriers, namely uniporters, symporters and
antiporters, contrasting their modes of operation with those of channels and
pumps. The overall aim of the Symposium is to integrate the physiological,
biochemical and genetic approaches to the study of this class of membrane
transport proteins, and to provide a focus for discussion of emerging strategies
to determine how carrier proteins actually work. Twenty two lectures will be
distributed in five sessions: 1) Structure and Dynamics of Membrane Proteins, 2)
Families and Superfamilies of Transport Proteins, 3) MDR, CFTR, and Related
Proteins, 4) Coupled Ion Exchangers and 5) Sodium-Coupled Cotransporters. There
will also be two poster sessions for contributed papers and one session (New
Ideas, New Faces) of talks by young investigators. %%% Carrier mediated
transport contributes to cell nutrition, regulation of the ionic composition of
the intracellular milieu, cell volume regulation, cell growth, and many other
cell functions. This conference should contribute to the understanding of this
ubiquitous process.