* 9203994
* Studies of Integration and Implementation Issues in the     Active Control of Lifeline Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Sami Masri, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/1996
* USD 270,001.00

This project concentrates on general key research issues pertaining to lifeline
earthquake engineering systems using active control techniques. A consortium
consisting of four research universities and multidisciplinary investigators
will conduct a sequence of well coordinated analytical and experimental
investigations designed not only to produce results of immediate usefulness, but
also to lay the groundwork for future needed developments in the technological
areas. The objectives of the proposed major tasks are to: 1. Develop, design,
fabricate and assemble a medium-sized laboratory model of a distributed system
representing a generic lifeline system such as a long-span bridge. 2. Design and
implement a distributed fiberoptic sensing system for monitoring the
deformations of test specimen. 3. Perform supporting analytical studies to (i)
evaluate the control energy requirements for various active control schemes,
(ii) establish performance bounds on instrumentation and actuator hardware, and
(iii) investigate the performance limits of vibration sensing techniques
utilizing fiberoptic approaches. 4. Perform a systematic series of active
control experiments to (i) correlate the experimental measurements with
predictions on the basis of suitable mathematical models, and (ii) identify
technology issues that may impede the full-scale field implementation in the
future. The multidisciplinary research team will ensure that the practical
implementation issues for future field applications are clearly identified and
addressed.