* 9203314
* Long &amp; Med.-Term Research: Studies on the Active Site of theUnique Aspartate Transcarbamoylase from the Soil Bacterium, Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* John Vickrey, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/1994
* USD 38,000.00

Long and Medium-Term Research: Studies on the Active Site of the Unique
Aspartate Transcarbamoylase from the Soil Bacterium, Pseudomonas Aeruginosa This
award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of
Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three
to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.
The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of
unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. John F. Vickrey of the University of North Texas to work with Dr. Guy Herve
at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). Aspartate
transcarbamoylase (ATcase, EC 2.1.3.2) is a pivotal enzyme in the pyrimidine
biosynthetic pathway. In Escherichia coli, this regulatory polypeptide has the
unique architecture which allows the enzyme to demonstrate allosteric response
to the end products CTP and the parallel pathway ATP. This enzyme in prokaryotes
has been divided into three classes, which are based upon regulatory response,
subunit design and molecular weight. Until recently, the Pseudomonads were
believed to contain the Class A ATCase which is the largest molecular weight
enzyme (Mr360,000) and is composed of two tentative identical subunits. This
project involves identifying the amino acid residues essential to the
constitution of the catalytic center in this unique ATCase from P. aeruginosa.
The award recommendation provides funds to cover international travel and a
stipend for twelve months.