* 9203384
* Modification of the Surface Properties of Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Eli Ruckenstein, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Charles Alexander Garris, Jr.
* 06/30/1995
* USD 92,696.00

The interfacial free energy between a polymer and water is relatively large. As
a result, proteins, platelets and cells will deposit upon its surface. By
modifying the surface properties of the polymers, one can reduce the interfacial
free between them and water, and thus reduce the thermodynamic driving force for
deposition. The following surface modification technique, which employs two
immiscible liquids in contact, will be investigated. One of the liquids is water
and contains a water soluble surfactant, while the other liquid is an organic
compound which is selected so as to be a solvent for the polymer substrate. It
is convenient for the organic phase to be more dense than water. The substrate
is introduced for a short time in the organic phase. This softens its surface
and allows the entanglement of the hydrocarbon chains of the surfactant
molecules and of the surface molecules of the polymer substrate during the
pulling out of the substrate through the water-organic solvent interface and the
water phase. The two-phase system provides an interface at which the surfactant
molecules adsorb. This highly oriented surfactant layer increases the efficiency
of the transfer of surfactant to the substrate. The interfacial free energy
between the modified polymer surface and water is thus decreased below 1
dyne/cm. This can reduce the deposition of proteins, cells and platelets on such
surfaces. The adsorption of proteins on the non-modified and surface as well as
the stability of the modified surface will be investigated to verify the
effectiveness of the procedure.