* 9203108
* Compatibilization of Polymer Blends
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Frank Bates, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/29/1996
* USD 480,000.00

New "engineered" thermoplastics are polymer-polymer blends which have a high
modulus, good toughness, and high softening temperatures. They can therefore be
used in designed structures which typically require metals. Other polymer blends
have special properties that permit them to be used for particular applications.
Most blends are made by mixing two or more immiscible polymers in the molten
state. Their multiphase structure must be stabilized to prevent coalescence when
the blend is extruded or molded by a polymer processor. The main method for
compatibilization is to use a block copolymer which can act like a polymeric
soap to stabilize the morphology. This block copolymer can be premade and
compounded into the mixture or it can be formed in situ by coupling reactions
between the two different chains. A research program is planned to understand
and control the morphology which develops during melt mixing. Two model pairs of
immiscible polymers, polystyrene (PS) and poly(2- vinylpyridine) PVP, and linear
low density polyethylene (LLPE) and poly(ethylene-co-polypropylene) PEP will be
used as test materials. The LLDPE/PEP system offers unique opportunities since
it can be made miscible at elevated temperatures. Morphologies created by
precipitation from the miscible melts will be compared by mixing immiscible
melts and by reactive coupling. New and useful morphologies should result from
this research as well as strategies and quantitative models for efficient
compatibilization of polymer blends.