* 9203733
* Random Excitation of Dynamic Systems with Multiple          Internal Resonances
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Raouf Ibrahim, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 12/31/1995
* USD 150,369.00

The purpose of this research project is to develop an approach for analyzing the
dynamic behavior of general multi-degree-of- freedom nonlinear systems
possessing multiple internal resonances under external random excitation. The
research will take the form of combined analytical, numerical and experimental
investigations. Multiple internal resonances frequently exist in both continuous
and discrete multi-degree-of-freedom systems such as cable systems, plates,
coupled beams, aerospace structures, and mechanisms. Systems with multiple
internal resonances experimentally exhibit dangerous and complex response
characteristics under harmonic excitation, as observed in the laboratory. Under
random excitation, we will develop two modes for stochastic bifurcation. These
modes will be used to examine the conditions under which catastrophic behavior
can be presented in terms of system parameters space and excitation spectral
density level. The analytical approach is based on the method of stochastic
averaging of the response energy envelope, with some innovations. The advantage
of this approach is that it provides useful information pertaining to energy
transfer among the interacting modes and their stochastic bifurcation in the
neighborhood of multiple internal resonance conditions. The validity of the
analytical approach will be verified by Monte Carlo numerical simulations and
experimental tests of random excited nonlinear models. All approaches have the
common goal of improving our understanding of the mechanisms underlying
dangerous nonlinear phenomena. The results of this research will lead to new
guidelines for engineers involved in the design of industrial machine
components, cable structures, aircraft structures, liquid propellant rockets,
and elevated water towers.