* 9203294
* Biomedical Image Processing Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1995
* Edward Egelman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 10/31/1995
* USD 56,000.00

The Biomedical Image Processing Laboratory at the University of Minnesota is a
computational resource that will provide image analysis for basic research
projects employing transmission electron microscopy, scanning electron
microscopy, and confocal and conventional light microscopy. The resource is
devoted to research and development in methods that can be used to elucidate
biological structure by means of computational analysis and reconstruction of
images of macromolecular assemblies, organelles and cells obtained by different
microscopic techniques. In addition, the center will provide hardware and
software to aid in the three-dimensional representation of the structures that
are being studied. Collaborative projects, such as the study of bacteriophage
morphogenesis and microtubule-tektin interactions, will take advantage of the
facilities and the methods being developed. Further, the center will provide
image analysis services to a large core of users at the University of Minnesota
Medical School. The center will develop a second-generation on-line image
analysis system for the transmission electron microscope, as well as a novel
image analysis system for a low-voltage field-emission scanning electron
microscope. The center will also take advantage of the fact that many different
forms of microscopy and imaging generate similar problems and similar solutions.
Thus, the research on methods within one of these areas may be easily applied to
other areas within this center.