* 9203820
* SGER:  Fluid Inclusions in Native Gold
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1993
* James O'Neil, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 06/30/1993
* USD 40,900.00

Stable isotope and chemical analyses of fluid inclusions provide important
geochemical constraints on the formation conditions of minerals in a variety of
geological environments. Hydrogen and oxygen isotope measurements have been made
of inclusions in optically transparent hydrothermal ore and gangue minerals like
quartz, adularia, fluorite, and sphalerite. No one, however, has reported stable
isotope analyses of fluid inclusions in native metals. There are a few published
papers and abstracts (all in Russian) that address inclusions in native metals.
In one abstract Petrovskaya et al. (1974) report that 0.1-1.5 mm inclusions,
containing CO2 as a major constituent, are common in some native gold. Beyond
such simple but important observations, however, the literature is to all
intents and purposes devoid of information on the subject. Native metals, while
not of widespread occurrence, should be among the best mineral repositories for
environmental fluids. Stable isotope analyses of inclusions trapped in gold will
provide valuable insights into (1) the environmental conditions of native gold
formation and related processes of ore deposition, (2) possible geochemical
differences between inclusion fluids trapped in different cogenetic hosts, (3)
past continental climates, and (4) variation of the oxygen isotope composition
of ocean water through geologic time.