* 9203299
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics in some Biological and      Chemical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/1996
* USD 123,329.00

The investigator studies several mathematical models for biological and
chemical systems. These include models for electrically excitable cells such as
pancreatic beta-cells, and models for pattern formation on isothermal catalyst
surfaces. Numerous models have been developed to test different hypothesis for
the biophysical mechanisms that underlie the electrical activity in these cells.
New analytic methods will be developed to predict and classify the variety of
different behaviors of solutions to these recent models. Systems that model
coupled beta-cells are also considered. Very complex behaviors including
standing waves, rotating spirals, and chaotic dynamics have been observed
experimentally on catalyst surfaces. Several models are studied in order to
understand the underlying mathematical mechanisms responsible for this rich
structure of pattern formation. Pancreatic beta-cells are responsible for the
secretion of insulin. This analysis will be used to determine the relative
contributions of different ion currents to the beta-cell electrical activity. It
will help in understanding which of these currents are responsible for bursting
activity in the cells, and which currents govern the duration of each burst.
Moreover, this analysis will be used to identify glucose-sensing mechanisms and
determine the role of the electrical activity in stimulating insulin release.
This work contributes to fundamental understanding of pancreatic functions.
Topics on the formation of surface patterns arise in connection with studies of
the behavior of catalysts.