* 9203229
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Evolutionary Approaches to  the Analysis and Synthesis of Artificial Life and Complex   Adaptive Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1993
* Geoffrey Miller, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/1993
* USD 37,500.00

Long and Medium-Term Research: Evolutionary Approaches to the Analysis and
Synthesis of Artificial Life and Complex Adaptive Systems This award is under
the Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence Program,
which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards
provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Geoffrey F. Miller to
work with Dr. Phil Husbands at the University of Sussex. Evolutionary psychology
and artificial life research have developed almost entirely independently,
although the failures which they sought to correct, in psychology and in
Artificial Life, respectively, stem from the same problem: lack of an
evolutionary framework for analyzing and synthesizing complex adaptive systems.
Dr. Miller's postdoc term will allow him to facilitate dialogue between these
two fields by 1) familiarizing himself with existing evolutionary theory,
ethology, psychology, and computer science in Europe, 2) allowing evolutionary
psychology principles to be disseminated throughout the research groups in
Europe, and 3) allowing the empirical test of the utility and adequacy of these
principles in real-world applications (i.e. robotics) and in his continued
experimental psychology research. Since both of these fields are at early but
promising stages of development, their intellectual cross-fertilization should
be fruitful. The award recommendation provides funds to cover international
travel and a stipend for twelve months.