* 9203997
* SGER:  COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Biogeochemistry of          Individual Proteins of Modern and Ancient Gastropods:  A    Molecular Level Approach to the Study of Diagenesis
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1993
* Lisa Robbins, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1993
* USD 24,421.00

Organic material isolated from fossils provides a potential substrate for
determining paleoecological and taxonomic relationships based on isotopic and
amino acid data. Present criteria for evaluating indigeneity has focused on a
bulk organic fraction derived from fossils and includes analysis of amino acid
abundances and enantiomers and comparison of the 13C and 15N values of the
fossil material to those of the modern organism. These criteria incorporate two
assumptions that 1) the bulk organic material is homogeneous and 2) the relative
abundance of amino acids and the isotopic compositions are comparable to a
modern analog. The difficulties with these assumptions are that the bulk
material is not homogeneous but rather composed of several different proteins
and the organic matrix of fossils may be altered. If the diagenetic product
obtained from a fossil is a consequence of differential loss or retention of
specific protein fractions then the geochemical characteristics and
interpretation of the data are entirely a function of the protein composition of
the organic matrix. Therefore, more precise and new methods are needed to assess
the effects of diagenesis and derive criteria for indigeneity. A better
understanding of changes in the organic fraction of fossil material over time
must include 1) an evaluation of variation in the relative contributions of each
of the protein fractions over time, 2) an understanding of the alterations that
occur in the biochemical characteristics of individual protein fractions during
diagenesis and 3) new molecular level approaches, such as evaluation of the 13C
of individual amino acid enantiomers (see Justification of explanation). We
anticipate that the proposed research will provide unique information on
diagenesis through molecular level analyses on individual proteins.