* 9203275
* PRF: A Developmental, Functional and Paleontological Study  of Avian Tail Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Stephen Gatesy, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 02/28/1995
* USD 69,600.00

The tail is central to the origin of avian flight. However, despite extensive
attention to the wing, the tail of birds has not been the focus of
developmental, functional or paleontological studies. Modern flying birds
possess a very short tail compared to Archaeopteryx and other theropod
ancestors. Tail reduction is the product of fewer caudal vertebrae and the
fusion of distal segments into a uniquely avian structure, the pygostyle, which
forms a base for the tail feathers. In this research project, the PI will
combine approaches from several disciplines to study the evolution of this
caudal morphology in birds. (I) The quail-chick chimera technique will be
employed for a description of normal tail ontogeny and for experiments to
elucidate mechanisms of segment number regulation and pygostyle formation. (II)
The motor control and kinematics of the tail will be quantified in a functional
study of the pigeon during eight locomotor modes. (III) Pertinent fossil birds
will be reevaluated in light of the new information obtained in (I) and (II).
Results from these studies will have significance for each individual field.
However, the unprecedented integration of information from these three
disciplines within a phylogenetic framework will provide a more global
perspective for evaluating how developmental, functional and phylogenetic
influences facilitate or constrain the evolution of form.