* 9203206
* PRF:  The Evolution of Trophic Specialization in Snakes of  the Genus Thamnophis
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Alan de Queiroz, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1995
* USD 69,600.00

The evolution of ecological specialization is a major theme in evolutionary
history. The evolutionary consequences of such specialization have received
considerable attention, but have rarely been studied using knowledge of
phylogenetic relationships of the taxa involved, a prerequisite for answering
many kinds of evolutionary questions. This research will involve an
investigation of the evolutionary consequences of trophic specialization in
garter snakes (genus Thamnophis) using an explicitly phylogenetic approach. The
first part of the study tests hypotheses that certain traits (head shapes and
visual characteristics) are adaptations for a specialized underwater foraging
mode. The investigation will provide an especially powerful examination of
adaptive hypotheses by combining within a phylogenetic context (1) comparative
tests of the evolutionary association of head shape and visual traits with
feeding mode, and (2) experimental analyses of trait function. The second part
of the study will involve rigorous phylogenetic and statistical tests of the
idea that specialist taxa are constrained in their subsequent evolution. These
tests will focus on trophic niche transitions among terrestrial specialists,
aquatic specialists, and generalist garter snakes. This examination of
constraint will complement the tests of adaptation, because contraints on niche
transitions provide the evolutionary boundaries within which the adaptive
changes occur.