* 9203166
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Cirrus Cloud Studies        With a Counterflow Virtual Impactor
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1992,11/30/1993
* Theodore Anderson, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/1993
* USD 44,680.00

Long & Medium-Term Research: Cirrus Cloud Studies with a Counterflow Virtual
Impactor This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign
Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support an twelve-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. Theodore L. Anderson to work with Professor Jost Heintzenberg of
Stockholm University. The Counterflow Virtual Impactor (CVI) is a well-
established device for collecting liquid hydrometeors. Unlike other cloud water
collectors, the CVI should perform equally well in cirrus (ice) clouds, allowing
microphysical data to be collected which could help to resolve such fundamental
questions as whether cirrus act as a positive or negative feedback in
greenhouse-gas-induced climatic warming. A key goal of this project will be to
characterize and develop a method of controlling the collection of large
hydrometeors by the CVI. Other goals include (a) improving the overall CVI
sampling and analysis system so as to lower the detection limits for both
condensed water and hydrometeor number concentration and (b) optimizing all
instruments for the low pressure cirrus environment. The award recommendation
provides funds to cover international travel, a stipend for twelve months and a
dependents' allowance.