* 9203514
* Mathematical Sciences: The Bergmann Projection, the d-bar-  Neumann Operator, and Holomorphic Mappings
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Harold Boas, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 08/31/1994
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports a continuation of mathematical research into problems
associated with holomorphic functions and mappings in the theory of several
complex variables. In addition to function theoretic methods, the work exploits
the deep connections of the subject with partial differential equations. Among
the most challenging open questions in several complex variables is that of
understanding the orthogonal projection of functions (with finite quadratic
norm) defined on a domain in the space of several complex variables onto the
subspace of holomorphic functions. This is known as the Bergman projection. The
primary goal is to determine when the projection preserves differentiability up
to the boundary. A number of solutions have been determined under various
finiteness conditions on the domain. The current work will pursue a line of
investigation involving the construction of special vector fields which has led
to a broad class of results. The ultimate goal is to use these techniques to
establish a general theory of regularity on domains of infinite type. The
continuity of the Bergman projection and the related d-bar Neumann operator in
spaces other than quadratic Sobolev spaces will also be studied. Since the
Bergman projections are not always regular, there is a need to determine
obstructions to regularity as well as conditions for its presence. It is known
that the topology of the set of points of infinite type is not sufficient to
give complete information about obstructions. Some potential- theoretic
condition on the d-bar Neumann operator must be found to combine with any
topological conditions.