* 9203203
* PRF:  Multiply-sired Fruits in Field Populations of         Lesquerella fendler:  Occurence and Mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Randall Mitchell, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1994
* USD 69,600.00

While the potential for sexual selection as an important factor in plant
evolution is now becoming recognized, there is surprisingly little direct
knowledge about how often conditions required for its actions occur. One
indication of the opportunity for sexual selection in plants is the occurrence
of multiply sired fruits. Such fruits are unambiguous evidence that pollen from
more than one mate was available to fertilize seeds, and therefore indicate that
female choice of male competition (forms of sexual selection) may act. However,
there is detailed knowledge about the frequency of multiply sired fruits for
only a single, introduced species. The P.I. will study the occurrence of and
mechanisms causing multiply sired fruits for a native plant of South Western
deserts, Lesquerella fendleri. To determine frequency, the P.I. will ascertain
paternity for seeds from plants in 3 separate populations at the Sevilleta Long-
Term Ecological Research Site. Preliminary studies indicate that Lesquerella
fruits are commonly multiply sired. To determine the mechanisms causing multiply
sired fruits two approaches will be taken. First, paternity resulting from
single and multiple pollinator visits in nature will be compared. Second,
observed pollinator visitation rates will be used to construct a realistic
schedule of hand pollinations to investigate the effects of single and multiple
visits under more controlled conditions. Knowledge of the responsible mechanisms
will not only help to predict which species are likely to produce multiply sired
fruits, but can help delimit their possible evolutionary consequences.