* 9203282
* Geometry and Timing of Upper Oligocene to Miocene           Depositional Sequences on the U.S. Middle Atlantic Margin:  Renewal
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1994
* Kenneth Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 10/31/1994
* USD 48,591.00

Global cycles of sea-level rise and fall have operated throughout much of
Earth's history. The exact timing and size of these eustatic changes, however,
are as yet comparatively poorly- constrained, particularly for Pre-Pleistocene
time. Detailed sea- level history curves are, in turn, essential to
understanding the complex interplay between astronomical forcing mechanisms, and
glacial and sea-level maxima and minima. The geologic record spanning Oligocene
to Miocene time may offer key information as to the nature and timing of sea-
level changes. This time-span was characterized by a number of sea-level cycles,
reflecting ice-sheet waxing and waning. The Oligocene-Miocene record is
particularly well-preserved in sedimentary rocks of the Mid-Atlantic coastal
plain, and continental shelf-slope-rise region. This project seeks to refine the
sea-level history curves for Oligocene-Miocene time through examination of high-
resolution seismic reflection, Sr-isotope, delta-Oxygen-18, and other
stratigraphic data from the U.S. Mid-Atlantic coast. It is a renewal; previous
work focused on the collection and preliminary analysis of the seismic
reflection and biostratigraphic data. The project will impact planning and
design of an upcoming Ocean Drilling Project Leg offshore New Jersey. The
principal investigators are an interdisciplinary team who are well-qualified to
perform this research project.