* 9203312
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Solvent Design for          Separation of Biomolecules Using Supercritical Fluids
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,10/31/1993
* Charles Eckert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/1993
* USD 39,696.00

Long and Medium-Term Research: Solvent Design for Separation of Biomolecules
Using Supercritical Fluids This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research
at Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research
centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for
joint research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad. This award will support an eleven-month
postdoctoral research visit by Dr. David Tomasko to work with Dr. Neil R. Foster
at the University of New South Wales. Separation tools suitable for use in the
food, cosmetics, and pharmaceutical industries can be developed using
supercritical fluids as a basis. The stringent toxicity and purity requirements
in these fields require highly specific designs which must be based on exact
experimental data. Solubilities of fatty acids, triglycerides, and their
mixtures will be measured in pure and cosolvent modified SCF's to aid the
separation design for this demanding application. The uniqueness of this
application demonstrates a novel separation technique applicable in an area that
is dominated by conventional technology in the United States. The award
recommendation provides funds to cover international travel and a stipend for
eleven months and a dependent allowance.