* 9203904
* Mathematical Sciences: LP Regularity for Nonelliptic        Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Hart Smith, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1994
* USD 41,359.00

This award supports mathematical research concerned with nonlinear differential
equations which are nonelliptic. The goals are to establish regularity results
about solutions belonging to classes of functions in various spaces called
Sobolev spaces. The differential operators under consideration are inverted
through integral formulas of the Fourier-Airy type. These have an oscillatory
kernel and are under intensive investigation at this time. Currently it is
possible to obtain the mapping properties of the integral operators within a
small loss of derivative; work is being done to show that one need not assume
this extra loss. Other emphasis will be placed on establishing the p-th power
regularity of solutions of the wave equation on the complement of strictly
convex obstacles. Some good results have been obtained from a model case, by
considering the problem with boundary a fixed distance from the obstacle and
then letting the distance decrease. If this technique can be validated in the
general case it will not only provide an existence proof of regularity but also
provide a convergence method for approximating boundary data. Additional work is
being carried out on the oblique derivative problem, where boundary data is
given in terms of 'flux' passing through the boundary at oblique and even
tangential directions. Two methods of solutions are known, each depending on
additional assumptions. Efforts will be made to make sharp comparisons between
them.