* 9203114
* MCF:  Molecular Analysis to Assess Genetic Change in Panicum miliaceum Resulting From Range Expansion and Introgression After Colonization
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Joseph Colosi, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* None
* 12/31/1993
* USD 47,283.00

Panicum miliaceum is a minor crop in the United States and Canada. Around 1970,
a black-grained biotype appeared as a weed of row crops in the Midwest and in
Canada. At least six other crop-like biotypes are growing as weeds in row crops
in Canada. The recent colonization of North America by the black biotype where
it is frequently sympatric with crop and crop-like weeds affords a unique
opportunity to study evolution in the early stages after colonization. DNA
molecular techniques are more sensitive to genetic variation than are either
allozyme electrophoresis or morphological characters. The Principal Investigator
will use DNA molecular techniques in Barbara Schaal's lab in Washington
University to assess genetic relationships among biotypes, measure genetic
change in the black biotype as it has expanded its range, and search for
introgression between various weed populations and crops. This study will shed
light on the role of genetic variation among populations of successful
colonizing species. After this project, DNA molecular techniques will enhance
the P.I.'s current research in population biology. Molecular biology techniques
will make the study of plant population biology more attractive to his
undergraduate students for their independent research projects.