* 9203054
* Statistical Issues in Geometric Tolerance Verification UsingCoordinate Measuring Machines
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1995
* Mary Dowling, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1995
* USD 147,318.00

There is currently little or no guidance in the tolerancing standards for
evaluating geometric variation of part feature using coordinate measuring
machines (CMMs). Practitioners are faced with many important but unanswered
questions, including the number of measurements that should be made on a part
feature, and the location of such measurements. Since the standard requires
knowledge of the entire feature while a CMM can take only a small sample in a
reasonable time period, there are no simple answers to these questions. The
objective of this research is to develop a rigorous procedure for the
verification of standard geometric tolerance specifications, developing
tradeoffs between accuracy and cost. The research will involve the following
tasks: a detailed study of parts to allow identification of common profile
variation patterns for specific processes; the development and evaluation of
estimation techniques for the measurement of geometric variation; and the study
of the relationship between the number of measurements and the resulting
sampling risks. The impact of the research will be in several areas, including
the development of a procedure to determine an appropriate number and location
of measurements to satisfy specified risk levels. Prior information will be
exploited regarding feature characteristics to reduce sample sizes while
maintaining the same estimation accuracy. Educational impact will also be
included in the form of classroom instruction, research students, seminars, and
conferences.