* 9203062
* Design, Analysis &amp; Applications of Algorithms for Solving   Systems of Polynomial Equations &amp; Related Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1992,09/01/1992
* Lakshman Yagati, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dana S. Richards
* 09/01/1992
* USD 0.00

This project will explore several basic algorithmic questions in symbolic
algebraic computation and investigate their applications to geometric modeling.
The overall goal of the project is to design, analyze and test efficient
algorithms for solving systems of polynomial equations and related problems, and
to test their applicability to geometric modeling problems. The specific problem
areas to be studied are: analysis of algorithms for solving system of polynomial
equations such as the Wu-Ritt characteristic set algorithm and Lazard's
triangular set algorithm; developing variations of these and other algorithms to
efficiently handle systems of polynomial equation of special interest; designing
efficient new algorithms based on Grobner bases and a new basis conversion
algorithm for manipulation of polynomial ideals; investigation of the properties
of the general Dixon resultant and algorithms for computing it; and exploration
of the use of these techniques in solving algorithmic problems in geometric
modeling. The design and analysis of the various algorithms will be accompanied
by experimentation with trial implementations on existing computer algebra
systems. The aim of the experimentation will be to incorporate possible
improvements suggested by the analysis and to uncover phenomena that might
possibly be missed out in the analysis. Fine tuned implementations of a few
special purpose algorithms are also planned.