* 9203131
* Efficient Transmission Techniques for Digital Mobile        Cellular and Digital Broadcast Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1996
* John Cioffi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Fuja
* 03/31/1996
* USD 300,000.00

This project has three specific areas of study: Efficient Channel-Based
Equalization, the computation of the equalizer via channel characterization
derived from embedded training data; Interference Rejection for Code-Division
Multiple Access, near-far and intersymbol interference and interference from
disparate users; and Multicarrier Methods for Broadcast Transmission, for
mitigation of time-varying fading effects. The focus of the study is on the
time-varying multipath data channel. At relatively low data rates, the time-
varying nature of wireless communication channels often leads to channel
variation over a small number of symbol intervals. In this case a significant
amount of training data can be embedded in the transmitted packets of data to
enable adjustments to be made at the receiver. An alternative, perhaps forced by
the need for higher data rates, is to increase the bandwidth of the transmitted
signal. Then the relative rate of channel variation is less compared to the
symbol rate, and the fraction of training is reduced. As wider bandwidths are
used, multipath effects become more important and more sophisticated receiver
structures need to be used. The research studies both narrow and wideband
transmission, for applications in digital cellular radio and digital broadcast
channels.