* 9204044
* Synthesis of Zeolite Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Jerry Zhang, INRAD, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/1995
* USD 254,707.00

In Phase I it was discovered that zeolite membranes can be synthesized using
silicone polymers as a silicone polymers as a silica source. Polymer chains are
incorporated into the growing zeolite crystals to give a zeolite film of
interlocked crystals. Initial work was with water insoluble solid silicones,
which gave a process involving three phases (polymer, solution and zeolite). No
successful preparation of self-supporting zeolite membranes has been reported
previously in the literature. In Phase II it is proposed to simplify the
synthetic process by using a water soluble silicone. Commercially available
silicones will be evaluated as well as synthesizing silicones to optimize
parameters, such as average molecular weight, water solubility, rate of
conversion to zeolite, and physical properties of the zeolite membranes.
Elements such as boron, aluminum and titanium will be added to the silicones so
that they will become part of the zeolite framework, giving the zeolite uniquely
valuable properties. The zeolite membranes prepared will be evaluated for
separation (N2/O2 and ethanol/water) and catalytic (xylene isomerization and
fuel cells) applications. The availability of zeolite membranes with molecular
sized pores and catalytic sites opens many more opportunities than can possibly
be studied in a single project. These include lower separations costs,
purification of polluted air and water, and new catalytic processes.