* 9204535
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Differential Geometry andTopology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* William Meeks, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1995
* USD 98,100.00

The principal investigator will study a variety of problems in differential
geometry and differential topology. The main goal of the research is to develop
a deeper understanding of global topological and geometrical properties of
surfaces in R3 that satisfy some nice geometrical or variational principle.
Particular emphasis will be placed upon: 1. The global geometry and topology of
properly embedded minimal surfaces: existence theorems, topological
obstructions, total curvature theorems, conformal structure, topological
uniqueness, computation of the index of examples, extension of isometries,
uniqueness of minimal graphs of logarithmic growth over noncompact domains, area
growth estimates for ends. 2. Global geometry of constant mean curvature in R3
and hyperbolic 3-space. 3. Computation relevant to problems in the subject. 4.
Geometry of isotopy surfaces in R3. A classical topic in geometry is the nature
of surfaces of minimal area having a specified boundary, the so-called soap film
problem, which can be illustrated by dipping a wire frame into a soap solution
and examining the film formed when it is withdrawn. Ignoring gravity, such films
are known to have Gaussian curvature zero everywhere. A slightly more general
physical situation calls for surfaces with constant but not necessarily zero
curvature. Problems about such surfaces abound, and while natural and often
simple to state, they are surprisingly difficult and have inspired the creation
of powerful methods drawing on diverse areas of mathematics. Such problems and
methods are the heart of this project.