* 9204058
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Quantum Nondemolition       Measurements in Microwave Cavities
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1994
* Steven Chu, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1994
* USD 38,450.00

Long and Medium-Term Research: Quantum Nondemolition Measurements in Microwave
Cavities This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign
Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. David Weiss of Stanford University to work with Professor Serge
Haroche at L'Ecole Normale Superieure. This project is in the field of Quantum
Optics, specifically in Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics. An apparatus is
currently under construction at L'Ecole Normale Superieure which will enable the
field in a high finesse microwave cavity to be measured using beams of atoms in
a long-lived Rydberg states. The cavity is detuned from an atomic resonance so
that while the atoms experience a measurable energy shift due to light in the
cavity, they do not absorb any of the cavity's photons. This so-called quantum
non-demolition scheme is the first that promises to allow measurements of
extremely weak fields, down to the single photon level. The likely first
experiments using this system will be the preparation of non-classical states of
the field, including pure number states, where the exact number of photons is
determined at the expense of all knowledge of the field's phase, and
"Schrodinger cat" states, which are coherent superpositions of different
classical fields. The award recommendation provides funds to cover international
travel and a stipend for twelve months.