* 9204021
* Constructing Scientific Applications as Heterogeneous       Distributed Programs
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Richard Schlichting, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Robert G. Voigt
* 01/31/1996
* USD 272,868.00

Many scientific applications are currently structured as a series of
computational steps, each of which is implemented by a separate program with
files being used to transmit data between the steps. In this project, an
alternative based on structuring applications as heterogeneous distributed
programs is proposed. Among the potential benefits of this approach are improved
access to remote high-performance machines, enhanced ability to interact with
the application, and increased flexibility for the applications designer. These
benefits can be achieved with little extra effort by using a system software
infrastructure to handle communication and heterogeneity transparently to the
user. The specific goal of this research is to develop new application
programming techniques and software support systems to facilitate this type of
structuring for scientific applications. The first part involves continuing work
into adapting existing tools for this purpose using the Schooner RPC system, as
well as investigating issues related to the construction of new application
codes that can exploit these capabilities. The second part involves determining
appropriate characteristics for a software system attuned to the needs of
scientific applications, and then constructing such a system. All of this work
builds on previous research involving heterogeneous computing.