* 9204023
* U.S.-Czechoslovakia Materials Research on Diffraction Studies of Excited Electron States and of Dynamic Processes on Crystal Surfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* M. Van Hove, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/28/1997
* USD 17,070.00

This US-Czechoslovak research project between Dr. M. A. Van Hove of Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory and Dr. I. Bartos of the Institute of Physics of the
Czechoslovakian Academy of Sciences will study diffraction of excited electron
states and of dynamic processes on crystal surfaces. The researchers will
explore the dynamic electron processes at metal surfaces, which are relevant for
understanding many- body effects that will clarify the behavior of electrons in
lower-dimensional systems. Such inelastic effects will be studied in the
diffraction of low-energy electrons, by fitting model optical potentials to
experimental data. Results may shed light on the electronic structure of
unoccupied states above the vacuum level, such as the usual inelastic mean free
path in transition metals at energies close to the vacuum level. The work also
should benefit the understanding of lifetimes in photochemistry cynamics at
surfaces with adsorbates. A further benefit would be better access to very light
elements, principally hydrogen, which can induce surface reconstruction. These
results would be important in understanding catalysis, crystal growth and
properties of nanostructures. This research project in materials science
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary
talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.