* 9204046
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Noise and Tone, A Study in  Cognitive Ethnomusicology
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Robert Port, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1994
* USD 23,045.00

This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of
Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three
to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.
The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of
unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by
Dr. Cornelia W. Fales to the Institut de Recherche et Coordination to work with
Dr. Stephen McAdams. The purpose of this study is to explore the relationship of
noise and inharmonicity as timbral components. By noise in this context, Dr.
Fales means the presence of random frequencies at sufficient energy to make a
perceptual difference in the timbral quality of the tone they surround.
Specifically, the project will have two parts, both of which will test the
ability of noise to disguise inharmonic partials of a complex tone. A third
study is included to be undertaken if time and resources allow, which tests the
potential of noise to induce perceptions desired by a performer. Auditory
processing has been described as occurring in two directions at once: from the
bottom up, which is called primitive processing, and from the top down, which is
called schema-based processing. If the cognitive heuristics which regulate
primitive processing of sound are truly innate then it is in the activity of
schema-based processing that evidence may be found for the variety of the
world's music and musical behavior. It is here that we may find evidence in
support of the contention that timbral sensitivity varies with a listener's use
of timbre - in music or in speech. The acoustic circumstances under which a tone
will fuse with the noisy components that are part of, or close to its source,
the point at which a tone immersed in noise becomes only a series of frequencies
contributing to the noise and tone - these are questions which bear on the
subject of instrumental timbre. These questions are equally valid for the study
of instrumental music in western culture. The line between noise and tone is
often contextually established: is the high-frequency hum of the dentist's drill
noise or tone? are instrumental ideophones noisy or tonal? As studies of the
continuity illusion have shown, the very perception of noise is often dependent
on its acoustic context; listeners have demonstrated the ability to hear
unbroken speech and nonspeech sounds right through an interfering gap of noise
which does indeed break the sequence of sounds that surround it. While
psychoacousticians have developed precise definitions to distinguish noise from
tone, the perceiver's categories are less clearly defined. The results of this
project will bear on all these issues.