* 9204834
* Lysosomal Proenzyme Sorting:  A New Receptor
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1992,10/31/1996
* Ann Erickson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 10/31/1996
* USD 297,466.00

A heretofore unidentified receptor which may be critical for protease targeting
to lysosomes has been identified in this laboratory. Two lysosomal proproteases,
procathepsins L and D, are membrane associated at acidic pH in microsomal
vesicles derived from mouse fibroblasts. The binding, which is specific for the
pro but not the mature enzymes, is saturable and is mediated by a factor which
can be removed from the membranes by protease treatment, suggesting that this is
a specific interaction with a receptor protein. As the association occurs at the
pH at which lysosomal enzymes are released from mannose-6-phosphate receptors,
the membrane association could be involved in protein sorting in prelysosomes.
Synthetic peptides based on the amino-terminal sequence of procathepsin L will
be used in binding assays to establish which region of the capthepsin L
propeptide associates with membranes. Specific amino acids in the receptor
binding regions will be altered by site-directed mutagenesis. These analyses
will identify specific amino acids responsible for correct subcellular
targeting. Altered recombinant protein will be expressed from an SV40 promoter
in COS cells, isolated from cell culture medium, and assayed for membrane
binding ability. Following this initial screen in which an altered protein is
identified with has lost its ability to associate with membranes in a pH-
dependent manner, an in vivo functional assay will be performed. The cDNA
plasmid will be expressed in HeLa cells which have been demonstrated to target
wild-type recombinant lysosomal enzymes correctly. These studies will establish
whether the stretch of amino acids responsible for the pH-dependent membrane
binding contains information essential for lysosomal targeting. %%% The interior
of a eukaryotic cell is highly compartmentalized, in order for the cell to carry
out its necessary functions. One set of critical functions, involving the
hydrolytic degradation of endocytosed or autophagocytosed macromolecules, is
restricted to a membrane-enclosed acidic compartment called the lysosome. These
degradations are catalyzed by proteolytic, glycosidic, and other acid hydrolytic
enzymes, which are contained within the lysosomes. This project addresses the
question of how the hydrolytic enzymes get into the lysosomes. Some years ago,
it was found that many lysosomal enzymes shared a common oligosaccharide
structure, specifically a mannosyl-6-phosphate residue, which is recognized and
bound by two membrane bound man-6-P receptors. These receptors traffic through
the endosome-lysosome system and deliver bound lysosomal enzymes to the
endosomal-lysosomal compartment. However, evidence has been accumulating in the
literature that the man-6-P receptors cannot account for all instances of
lysosomal enzyme targeting in cells. The discovery of a new lysosomal enzyme
binding membrane protein, which does not act via the man-6-P residues on
lysosomal enzymes, is therefore an important finding which will undoubtedly
broaden our view of how lysosomal enzymes get into lysosomes.