* 9204895
* Differentiation and Evolution of the Nematode Male Tail
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Scott Emmons, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 12/31/1995
* USD 310,000.00

Development and evolution of the nematode male tail fan will be studied. The
long term objective is to reconstruct the evolutionary pathway that has
historically been followed to lead to diverse nematode forms. The aim is to
identify and describe in molecular terms the genetic events that underlie the
evolution of developmental programs. Evolution of the tail fan developmental
program will be studied by comparing the cellular mechanisms of fan development
in C. elegans with that in four other free living nematode species. The fan is
chosen for these studies because its morphology varies widely among nematode
species. Cells responsible for making the fan will be identified by cell
ablation experiments in C. elegans. Development of the fan will be studied by
tracing cell lineages, defining the positions of epidermal cells by indirect
immunofluorescence staining with a monoclonal antibody to a cell junctional
antigen, and by direct light microscopic observation. Points of evolutionary
divergence will be identified in the various stages of fan differentiation. A
phylogenetic tree indicating the evolutionary relationships of the nematode
species studies will be constructed from sequences of the small ribosomal
subunit genes. In order to identify genes that may have played a role in
evolution of the fan, mutants of C. elegans with abnormal fans will be analyzed.
Existing mutations will be genetically mapped to place them into genes.
Phenotypes of the mutations will be described following the same criteria used
to compare the different species. In this way, it is hoped to identify genes
acting at the same developmental stages where evolutionary divergence has
occurred.