* 9204838
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Subglacial Till Genesis and Ice    Sheet Dynamics, Lake Michigan Lobe Area, Illinois
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* W. Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1995
* USD 81,192.00

By detailed field work and modeling, the late Quaternary sediment record in
Illinois will be investigated to determine the origin of subglacial tills that
were deposited in the marginal area of the Laurentide Ice Sheet. Massive,
homogenous diamictons that classically have been interpreted to be lodgement
till may instead have originated primarily through subglacial deformation in a
deforming bed. Reconstructions of the Lake Michigan Lobe profile in Illinois and
preliminary field study of glacigenic sediment are consistent with evidence of a
deforming bed that has been suggested on theoretical grounds. Methods will
consist of two summers of detailed sedimentological and structural study of
carefully selected sites, focusing on differentiating subglacial till that is
relatively undeformed from till that has experienced internal deformation by
pervasive subglacial shearing to large strains. Further analysis will consist
of: (1) geotechincal analyses in order to evaluate rheological parameters of the
till; (2) determining sediment transport fluxes during the maximum of the last
glaciation and comparing those data will data derived from different models of
glacial transport; and (3) numerical modeling of the Lake Michigan Lobe ice-till
system. The results of this research will have significant implications for
interpreting the origin of massive, homogenous till units in mid-latitude
regions, as well as for understanding and modeling the dynamics of the
Laurentide Ice Sheet.