* 9204037
* Mathematical Sciences: Complex Manifolds and Meromorphic    Mappings
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Bernard Shiffman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 07/31/1995
* USD 105,000.00

This project continues mathematical research into problems associated with the
geometry of several complex variables and mappings defined on regions within
such spaces. The work focuses on complex varieties, meromorphic mappings and
holomorphic vector bundles. Work on meromorphic mappings seeks generalizations
of Hartogs' theorems on separate analyticity and on holomorphic extendibility.
Also to be investigated are Hartogs-type results for analytic subvarieties with
possible application to the characterization of holomorphic chains of
codimension greater than unity. Studies of holomorphic vector bundles concerns
singular hermitian metrics on numerically effective line bundles on projective-
algebraic manifolds. A continuation of work on cohomology vanishing theorems and
sectional curvatures of indecomposable Hermitian-Einstein vector bundles on
complex projective space will be carried out. Finally, the geometry of affine
algebraic varieties and degree bounds for the division problem for special
polynomial ideals will be studied. Complex function theory encompasses the study
of differentiable functions of a several complex variables and related classes
of functions such as boundary values of holomorphic functions. The subject is
highly geometric; many of the problems concern the properties of various sets
and how they transform by mappings composed of holomorphic functions.
Applications of the theory to potential theory and fluid dynamics is now
standard in engineering circles.