* 9204982
* Defenses Against Solar Ultraviolet Radiation-induced        Photooxidative Stress in Sea Urchins: Dietary Accumulation  and Functions of Mycosporine-like Amino Acids
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1994
* J. Malcolm Shick, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 02/28/1994
* USD 25,765.00

The regulation of defenses against solar ultraviolet radiation- induced
photooxidative stress in sea urchins will be studied. Like other marine
organisms, sea urchins contain mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs), which absorb
environmentally relevant wavelengths of UV (310-360 nm). MAAs are presumably
algal, bacterial or fungal products, animals not being known to synthesize them,
so their provenance in sea urchins is uncertain. Various seaweeds are rich in
MAAs, and preliminary chromatographic analyses indicate concordance between the
MAA complements in seaweeds and in sea urchin tissues, especially ovaries.
Maintenance of sea urchins on controlled diets of seaweeds lacking or rich in
MAAs, subsequent analysis of gut contents and tissues, testing the ability of
gut tissues to absorb MAAs should confirm whether MAAs are so obtained. Dietary
fortification of sea urchin ovaries should confer a greater resistance to UV in
eggs and larvae, and UV effects on fertilization, development, and larval
survival will be assessed in MAA-rich and deficient specimens. It is also
planned to discern the particular membrane fractions. Possible radical
scavenging functions of gadusol (structurally similar to MAAs) present in eggs
will be assessed in parallel experiments, since some UV effects are mediated by
oxyradicals. The results will have implications for the mechanism of
accumulation of photooxidative defenses in marine food chains, a genuine concern
as the protective ozone layer deteriorates.