* 9204857
* Investigation of Evolutionary Processes in Planktonic       Foraminifera Using Stable Isotopic Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* James Kennett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 12/31/1994
* USD 100,000.00

This study is an investigation of processes of evolution in planktonic
foraminifera using stable isotopic analysis. In the absence of obvious barriers
to gene flow such as land masses (e.g. Isthmus of Panama) or major oceanographic
boundaries (e.g. Polar Front and Tasman Front), how does evolution proceed in
large pandemic populations in which gene flow is readily maintained over great
distances? How do chronospecies gradually evolve within one biographic province?
Most models predict that evolutionary change in the deep-dwelling planktonic
foraminifera occurs through segregation within the water column during times of
well developed depth stratification. In broader terms, the globorotalid
morphology is believed to have evolved iteratively in association with
adaptation to increasing water depths. However, almost no data have been have
been generated to test such hypotheses. We will isotopically analyze
morphometrically-defined Late Miocene to Recent species of the Globoratalia
(Globoconella) clade in sedimentary sequences that form a meridional transect in
the southwest Pacific. A time-series strategy will be employed focusing upon
those stratigraphic intervals in which there is overlap in the ranges of
ancestor and descendant species. Some of the questions we will address include:
Do ancestor and descendant species exhibit consistent differences in isotopic
values, suggesting vertical or seasonal segregation in the water column? Are
there isotopic trends within this clade, suggesting progressive habitation of
cooler or warmer waters, either vertically or seasonally? Are the isotopic
trends associated with paleoceanographic changes? Are the isotopic trends
associated with specific morphological characters? Do ancestor and descendant
species living in different water masses, some within and some peripheral to the
main biogeographic range of the clade, exhibit similar differences in isotopic
values and similar paleoceanographic and morphological associations? How do the
stable isotopic results from the Globorotalia (Globoconella) clade compare with
those from another deep-dwelling planktonic foraminiferal clade that, in part,
exhibits similar morphologic characteristics: - the Globorotalia (Truncorotalia)
clade?