* 9204893
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Ordovician and Silurian Explosive  Volcanism in the Lapetus Region:  Tectonomagmatic, Tectonic,Event-Stratigraphic & Biological Implications
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Warren Huff, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 11/30/1995
* USD 148,149.00

The study will continue and expand upon work on Ordovician and Silurian
explosively formed volcanic ashes which occur both in eastern North America and
northwestern Europe for the purpose of resolving some fundamental questions
concerning the origin and distribution of these ash beds relative to the closing
of the Iapetus Ocean, and the effect they may have had on mass extinction of
marine biota. The enormous database of geochemical, petrographic, stratigraphic
and paleontological information provides a unique opportunity to understand the
tectonomagmatic framework within which large quantities of felsic subduction-
related ash was injected into the stratosphere and widely distributed across
large portions of Baltica, Avalonia and Laurentia. It is clear that major
centers of volcanism changed along the margins of Iapetus from Ordovician to
Silurian time, but the timing and location of these centers is not well
understood. We will look particularly at what we now believe to be a single,
ultraplinian eruptive event which deposited ash on both continental margins of
Iapetus and may have been derived from the same arc source as the Ammonoosuc
Volcanics of southern New England. Resolving these questions will provide new
clarifying information about the tectonic events affecting the margin of
Iapetus. Further, we propose to evaluate the event-stratigraphic and biologic
implications of these events by selected, detailed studies of widespread
Ordovician and Silurian K-bentonites using isotopic ages, chemical
fingerprinting, and faunal studies. Recognition of one or more ash beds of both
sides of the Atlantic will be an important contribution to furthering trans-
Atlantic stratigraphic correlation of Ordovician and Silurian strata. Finally,
in an effort to provide more insight into the likelihood that dust clouds of
global proportions have deleterious and long-lasting effects on major groups of
organisms, we will examine the evidence for biological mass extinctions that may
have occurred as a results of these catastrophic eruptions.