* 9204582
* Advancing Power System Identification Methods and Robust    Control Strategies for Power System Damping
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Hashem Nehrir, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vijay Vittal
* 02/29/1996
* USD 191,300.00

In order to fully utilize the transmission capacity of transmission lines,
significant advances need to be achieved in power system control as applied to
the damping of low-frequency electro-mechanical oscillations. Power system
stability characteristics generally restrict the maximum allowable power
transfers at thermal limits of the lines. The stability characteristics of power
systems depend on damping devices and damping control strategies employed. While
there are many devices that can be used in power systems to achieve damping, the
strategies that are currently used to control these devices generally do not
provide enough stability enhancement to enable operation near thermal limits.
The development of better damping control strategies for large power systems is
the focus of this research. This research concerns two related areas: 1)
improved methods for power system identification to aid uncertainty model
description; and 2) robust control methods that include these uncertainty models
to dampen electro-mechanical power system oscillations. To improve power system
damping over a set of operating points, methods of system transfer-function
identification are needed which can account for non-zero initial conditions and
noise. Transfer-function uncertainty models also need to be generated and
included appropriately in robust controller design method. Two main goals of
this research are: 1) to develop improved methods of identifying system transfer
functions and uncertainty models under conditions where power system faults
result in significant system changes and where post-fault system transfer-
function identification must be accomplished in the presence of both power
system noise and initial conditions on lightly damped modes of oscillation; and
2) to investigate and extend recent advances in robust multivariable control
theory to obtain improved power system damping controller design method, methods
that accommodate the transfer functions and uncertainty models obtained under 1
above.