* 9204271
* Scientific Computation of Physical Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Christoph Borgers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1996
* USD 310,000.00

The research to be performed will be in the following areas: Computational and
Analytical Problems in Neutron Transport Theory (C. Borgers). Problems from
rarefied gas dynamics and neutron transport will be studied. 1) Gas film
lubrication is traditionally modeled by the Reynolds equation, derived from the
compressible Navier-Stokes equations. Here an approach based on the simplest
kinetic model, free molecular flow, is proposed. 2) Discrete analogs of this
statement will be studied, with emphasis on time discretization. Viscous Systems
of Hyperbolic Conservation Laws and Hamilton-Jacobi Equations (E. Harabetian).
This proposal concerns the analysis and development of numerical techniques for
problems in hyperbolic conservation laws and their viscous perturbation, and
Hamilton-Jacobi equations. The specific problems proposed are 1)
Multidimensional front propagation for hyperbolic conservation laws and the
modeling of viscous effects. 2) Convergence to a steady state for Hamilton-
Jacobi equations, with application to "shape for shading" problems. Vortex Sheet
Computations (R. Krasny). Various aspects of vortex sheet motion will be
studied. 1) The vortex blob method will be extended and applied to splitter
plate flow. 2) Compact cutoff functions and multipole algorithms for vortex
sheet motion will be investigated. 3) Vortex blob, Navier Stokes, and
experimental results for wake flow will be compared, to asses he effect of
neglecting physical viscosity in the vortex sheet model. 4) Axisymmetric vortex
sheet roll-up will be computed, in free space and at the edge of a round pipe.