* 9204196
* Mathematical Sciences: Singular Integrals and Fourier       Integral Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1995
* Duong Phong, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1995
* USD 145,000.00

This project seeks to analyze the mathematical theories of singular integral,
Fourier integral and pseudodifferential operators. The theories developed over
the past thirty years yielding a wide range of applications based on their
simplicity and unity. Nevertheless, operators falling outside their scope are
appearing with increased frequency in studies of Fourier-Airy operators of
diffraction theory, maximal operators and Hilbert transforms along curves of
differentiation theory, Hilbert integral operators and singular Radon transforms
of subelliptic boundary value problems, oscillatory singular integrals on
nilpotent groups, the X-ray transforms and Guillemin operators of integral
geometry and deformation theory on manifolds of geodesics. Two unifying themes
have emerged; they appear themselves to be related. The first consists of
Fourier integral operators whose Lagrangian is not a local graph but projects on
tangent spaces with folds or cusps. The second is where the densities on the
Lagrangian have singularities. The main goal of this work is to arrive at a more
complete theory of degenerate Fourier integral and singular integral operators.
Strong evidence for the existence of such a framework is provided by recent
progress in several directions: work will be done in exploring them further.
First, efforts will be made to understand the stratification of the singular
varieties of projections of degenerate operators on tangent spaces and how they
influence Sobolev bounds. This will only treat operators with constant
coefficients. Efforts at a formulation of the theory on manifolds, a new
phenomenon - not present in the classical case - occurs. Work must be done in
obtaining lower bounds for the oscillation of the phase function. Other goals
involve finding extensions to operators defined in spaces of higher dimension
and the measure of the level of stratification of the local geometry of the
Lagrangian to yield sharp bounds for singular Radon transforms.