* 9204467
* INDO/US Collaborative Research on Novel Oxide Materials,    Award in Indian and U.S. Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Jurgen Honig, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1995
* USD 46,794.00

Technical Narrative: This proposal requests renewal of a previously approved
and active research project "INDO-US Collaborative Research on Novel Oxide
Materials." The collaborators are C.N.R. Rao, Professor, Solid State and
Structural Chemistry Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, and J.M.
Honig, Materials Research Center, Purdue University. The research will continue
development of novel oxide materials with special attention to high temperature
superconductors. The research includes synthesis of interesting oxide systems
and examination of structure-property relations. Included are selected studies
of high Tc 214-oxide superconductors with the K2NiF4 structure and related
normal properties of this class of materials. Scope: The collaboration of
Professor Rao's team at Bangalore and Professor Honig's team at Purdue has been
successful and resulted in a number of significant publications. Rao is one of
India's most distinguished scientists. He has done pioneering research in
numerous areas of materials and structural chemistry. It is likely that this
project will result in significant advances in the field of new materials and
better material characterization. Dr. Honig is a participant in a newly
established Indiana Center for Innovative Superconductivity Technology, which
was provided $500,000 for the first year of operation by the State of Indiana.
His work with Dr. Rao would fit well with the objectives of that center, and
with enhancing materials science research in the U.S.