* 9204101
* A New Technology for Forecasting Intermittent Demand        in Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Charles Smart, Smart Software Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/1996
* USD 295,881.00

The problem of intermittent demand interferes with efficient production and
inventory control activities in US manufacturing firms. While the key role of
accurate and timely demand forecasting in planning production, inventories and
work force, and economic lot sizing has received considerable attention, the
vast majority of forecasting research, and nearly all commercial forecasting
software, assume that demand is "smooth" rather than intermittent. Results of
the Phase I Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) study establish the
technical basis for a new software tool that can be used to forecast
intermittent demand and that is suitable for use on a desktop computer. The
objectives of the Phase II research focus on (1) gathering and analysis of more
real-world intermittent time-series data; (2) implementation of a single-series
method of Croston's for forecasting intermittent demand, including its extension
to trending and seasonal data; (3) development of a new multi- series
forecasting approach based on stochastic process models that "borrow strength"
across the items in a product line; (4) determination of the most effective use
of sales-force judgments of intermittent demand, including their combination
with statistical forecasts' and (5) integration of the forecasting methods
developed in Phase II, culminating in their implementation in a software
prototype running on desktop computers. The project will provide a computerized
state-of-the-art solution to the intermittent demand forecasting problem. A
large percentage of US manufacturing firms stand to benefit from more efficient
production made possible by such demand forecasting.