* 9204717
* RUI:  Studies on the Pentamerization of SV40 VPL In Vitro
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Editte Gharakhanian, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/1995
* USD 87,095.00

Studies on the self assembly of viral capsid proteins have served as a model
system for intermolecular interactions. The major capsid protein of simian virus
40 (SV40) is synthesized in the cytoplasm of infected cells and is transported
to the nucleus shortly after synthesis for viral assembly. The protein forms the
pentameric capsomeres of the SV40 capsid. Vp1 pentamers are detectable both in
the cytoplasm of infected cells and in vitro. The nature of the interactions
involved in Vp1 capsomere formation, as well as the residues involved, are not
known. Cytoplasmic Vp1 pentamer formation is not only the initial stage of SV40
assembly, but may also have a role in the efficient nuclear transport of Vp1.
Here, we propose to examine the chemical nature and the amino acid residues
involved in Vp1 multimer formation in vitro. Results from the proposed
experiments will later be used to study the role of pentamer formation in the
transport of Vp1 to the nucleus. %%% Due to the relative simplicity of its gene
structure, simian virus 40 has been used as a model system for studies of virus
assembly, structure, and function. The virus assembles in the nucleus of the
host cell, and thus it is also an ideal model system for study of nuclear
localization and nuclear localization signals. This project will take advantage
of these features of SV40 to increase our understanding of viral assembly and
nucleocytoplasmic trafficking. In addition, the project will provide an
opportunity and a vehicle for undergraduate student involvement in biological
research.