* 9204487
* Mathematical Sciences: Classical Analysis, Number Theory,   and Supercomputers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1997
* Dennis Hejhal, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 01/31/1997
* USD 120,000.00

This underlying theme of this project is an attempt to understand the roots of
classes of functions which arise in complex analysis and number theory called
zeta functions. There are several important sets of zeta functions to be
analyzed: (i) linear combinations of Euler products; (ii) Epstein zeta functions
(of both the rational and irrational type); (iii) Selberg zeta functions
associated with cofinite Fuchsian groups; (iv) L- functions associated with
eigenfunctions of the Laplace operator taken over fundamental domains or Riemann
surfaces. Several methods will be employed. One involves the variation of
parameters in the definition of functions. As the parameters move about, the
roots trace paths which are studied from a statistical/dynamical point of view.
Supercomputer analysis is also used to unravel complex relationships in cases
where functions form finite dimensional vector spaces. Two particular goals are
to give growth rates of the roots and to determine whether or not all roots lie
on simple subsets such as lines. This work has important application to
fundamental and long- standing questions in number theory. It also leads to new
uses of supercomputing in the more theoretical areas of mathematical analysis,
both as an experimental tools and one which can give sharp probability estimates
in situations where precise information is too difficult to extract from the
functional definitions.