* 9204778
* Heme Biosynthesis in the Bradyrhizobium japonicum/Soybean   Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Mark O'Brian, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 07/31/1995
* USD 170,000.00

Bradyrhizobium japonicum is the bacterial endosymbiont of soybean (Glycine max)
that functions as a nitrogen-fixing organelle within cells of a specialized
plant organ called a root nodule. Many interactions occur between the two
symbionts for the initiation, development and maintenance of nodules. The broad
objective of the proposed work is to understand how leguminous plants
communicate with their bacterial partners to regulate metabolic processes
essential for symbiosis. In particular, we are elucidating the interactive
events between B. japonicum and soybean that control heme synthesis in root
nodules. Some data support the hypothesis that the heme prosthetic group of the
plant nodule protein leghemoglobin is bacterial in origin, and work from my
laboratory indicates that formation of the bacterial heme moeity itself requires
the coordinated effort of both symbionts. Three objectives are proposed which
address the two aforesaid hypotheses. i) Determine whether the B. japonicum heme
synthesis enzyme ferrochelatase is essential for soybean hemoglobin heme
formation using a temperature-sensitive mutant. ii) Characterize the B.
japonicum uptake mechanism of the heme precursor delta- aminolevulinic acid
(ALA), and ascertain its role in nodule heme synthesis. Data indicate that
bacterial uptake of plant-derived ALA is a key feature of an inter-organismic
heme pathway in nodules. iii) Construct and characterize a B. japonicum mutant
in ALA dehydratase, the second step of the heme synthetic pathway, and study the
regulation of the ALA dehydratase gene. The mutant will allow us to determine
exactly which heme synthesis steps in the inter-organismic pathway must be
bacterial.