* 9204891
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of a Drosophila Homolog      of MyoD
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Susan Abmayr, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 07/31/1996
* USD 320,000.00

The decision of multipotential cells to adopt a myogenic program of development
is controlled by a family of related proteins. This family has been greatly
conserved in evolution, and Drosophila has a gene (nautilus) with extensive
homology to these myogenic regulatory factors. nautilus is expressed is a
temporal and spatial pattern consistent with a role in early myogenesis, and
examination of its pattern of expression in a variety of mutant backgrounds has
provided insight into the myogenic process. The proposed experiments are
designed to utilize the unique features that Drosophila provides in an effort to
better understand the role of this protein in muscle development. These will
include 1) generation and characterization of a nautilus mutation, 2) molecular
analysis of sequences necessary for rescue of the mutant phenotype, and 3)
identification of nautilus targets. Dr. Abmayr has recently generated a genetic
deficiency that removes the nautilus gene, which will be used to generate a null
allele of nautilus. The mutant phenotype of this deficiency is characterized by
dramatic deformities in the development of the musculature, consistent with the
possibility that nautilus plays a critical role in this process. Dr. Abmayr will
utilize P- element mediated transformation of Drosophila to examine the
sequences required to rescue the mutant phenotype. To identify the in vivo
targets of nautilus, she will use an approach involving immunoprecipitation of
nautilus bound in chromatin, and the subsequent characterization of the bound
sequences.