* 9204515
* A Frequency Domain Fluorescence Lifetime Instrument for the Aladdin Synchrotron Light Source
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1994,12/31/1996
* Catherine Royer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 12/31/1996
* USD 397,400.00

This proposal describes the construction of a research resource at the Aladdin
Synchrotron, University of Wisconsin- Madison, dedicated to time-resolved
fluorescence spectroscopy of biological systems. The specific aims are to (1)
build a frequency domain fluorometer that exploits the time structure of the
Aladdin Synchrotron light source especially its picosecond resolution and broad
excitation wavelength capabilities; (2) establish a preparative biological
sample laboratory in conjunction with the fluorescence facility; (3) train
students in the principles of frequency domain methods using synchrotron
radiation, and to operate the facility; and (4) conduct core research on the
dynamics of biological systems. To accomplish these goals, we will draw upon our
prior experiences (1) establishment of a synchrotron radiation facility at
Frascati (Italy), (2) development of frequency domain fluorescence
instrumentation exploiting the harmonic content of pulsed sources, (3) design
and construction of a microwave superheterodyning fluorometer and (4)
establishment and operation of an international luminescence center (Laboratory
for Fluorescence Dynamics), which provides biological scientists with a state-
of-the-art fluorescence laboratory coupled with a functional biochemistry
laboratory. Fluorescence time-resolved experiments are invaluable in exploring
the dynamics of biological systems such as protein and nucleic acid biopolymers,
or cellular organelles.. The uniqueness of the Aladdin Synchrotron source in
terms of time resolution, brightness, continuous excitation wavelengths
(ultraviolet and visible), phase stability, and pulse-to-pulse amplitude
stability, makes it the best choice in the United State for a synchrotron
radiation laboratory. After the initial construction period, the Fluorescence
Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory will become a research resource for the life
sciences community. Preliminary experiments at Aladdin have fully demonstrated
the feas ibility of frequency domain measurements in the multibunch mode and
have confirmed our predictions in terms of signal stability and signal intensity
which are crucial characteristics for the study of complex biological systems.