* 9204384
* Mathematical Sciences: Analytic Discs in Several Complex    Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Alexander Tumanov, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1994
* USD 40,842.00

This award supports mathematical research on problems concerned primarily with
the extension of functions and mappings defined on boundaries of domains in
several complex variables. The boundaries are generalizations of surfaces, known
as (real) manifolds. The idea of extending a function from the manifold to a
holomorphic function on the domain is actually a boundary value problem in
partial differential equations. Functions which can be extended must satisfy
certain (Cauchy-Riemann) conditions on the manifold. It has recently been shown
that all CR functions on a generic manifold extend over a wedge in a
neighborhood of some point of the manifold. Work will now be done adapting newly
developed techniques to establish the location of the wedge. Another research
direction will be that of determining geometric conditions for extending CR
functions over a neighborhood of the manifold. Analyticity or wedge-
extendibility of a CR function on a CR manifold propagates along complex curves
in the manifold. A natural consideration is also the propagation of CR
extendibility. Work will be done in showing that CR extendibility is transported
in parallel with respect to some connection on M. A basic tool in all the work
is that of using analytic discs to localize the analysis. Work on mappings
between CR manifolds will focus on continuous maps between analytic manifolds to
determine the extent to which continuity actually implies that the mappings are
holomorphic. Some initial smoothness assumptions will be made coupled with the
use of the reflection principle on attached analytic discs.