* 9204980
* The Origin of Badwater in the Edwards Aquifer, Texas:  An   Integrated Approach to Regional Flow Systems in a Carbonate Aquifer
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1994
* Jay Banner, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1994
* USD 94,095.00

This research seeks to evaluate the processes responsible for natural saline
groundwaters in a regional carbonate aquifer--the Edwards aquifer of Texas.
These waters are present in what is locally referred to as the badwater zone
(salinities of greater than 1000 mg/1). Despite the environmental importance of
this aquifer and many previous studies here, hypotheses for the origin and
evolution of the badwater zone hydrochemical facies remain numerous and
speculative. This research will integrate a range of conventional and newly
developed analytical techniques in a hydrological and geochemical study of the
Edwards aquifer both along and normal to the boundary between the badwater and
freshwater zones. The data base will include potentiometric and major-element
(rare-earth elements), and stable (H, O, B, S) and radiogenic (Sr, Nd, U and Ra)
isotope data that will be acquired on new samples. This study will also include
petrologic and geochemical analyses of lower Cretaceous carbonate rocks that
constitute the aquifer. These data will be used in quantitative models that
simulate fluid flow, fluid-rock interaction, and fluid mixing within aquifers.
The elemental and isotopic parameters to be studied have a wide range of
geochemical behavior, which will be critical for the application of theoretical
models to constraining the processes involved in the origin of each of five
distinct hydrochemical facies. This study will bear on our understanding of
regional flow systems in the Gulf of Mexico sedimentary basin, and will have
broader implications for the chemical and structural controls on the development
of regional carbonate aquifers and the evolution of saline groundwaters.