* 9204018
* Compostional Imaging with Energy Filtered Scanning          Transmission Electron Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1997
* David Stokes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1997
* USD 430,739.00

This research group will develop methods for mapping the composition of cell
membranes and organelles at 2nm-3nm resolution, with a 200kV field emission gun
Ä±FEG!-equipped electron microscope interfaced with a parallel electron energy
loss spectrometer (parallel EELS) and an X-ray detector. Physicists and
biologists will collaborate to develop the special techniques required for
quantitative imaging of low-concentrations of elements (e.g., Ca, P, Gd) in
biological cryosections. The major obstacle to EELS, the large background due to
the thickness of cryosections, will be overcome by the use of 200kV excitation
and through theoretical and experimental development of optimal methods of
spectral collection and data analysis. EELS spectra collected at each scanned
pixel will be multiple least squares fitted with algorithms that take into
account the contributions of plural plasmon scattering and, in the higher loss
region, the carbon energy loss and its fine structure, and L-edges (e.g.
potassium)to the EELS background. Electron optical components will be designed
and added to an existing parallel EELS system to correct the gain variations
that reduce detection sensitivities. High resolution compositional mapping of
Ca-bound to membranes or sequestered in organelles and of phosphorylation sites
will have broad biological applications and will be explored.