* 9204829
* Structure/Function Relations of Threonine-Metabolizing      Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1996
* Eugene Dekker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 05/31/1996
* USD 210,000.00

Amino acid metabolism, involving unusually diverse intermediates and/or
products, is central to all cellular processes. Amino acids per se are the
building blocks of proteins, and enzymes (which are nearly all proteins) are
amazingly effective biocatalysts. The amino acid sequence of enzymes (proteins)
specifies conformation; catalytic function arises from conformation which, in
turn, relates to the binding of substrate molecules in precise orientation and
to the stabilization of transition states. Multiple techniques can now be used
to explore the molecular basis for specific enzymic function and to modify
enzymes in specific ways. The objective of the proposed of the proposed research
is to study structure/function interrelationships of 2-key enzymes involved in
L-Threonine metabolism. L-Threonine dehydrogenase and 2-amino-3- ketobutyrate
lyase, enzymes we first succeeded in purifying to homogeneity, will be the
objects of in depth structure\function studies. This dehydrogenase and lyase, in
sequences, are the first two enzymes in the primary route for threonine
utilization by both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. By the action of these two
enzymes, L- threonine is first oxidized to the unstable intermediate, 2-amino-
3-ketobutyrate, which in turn is cleaved by the lyase in a coenzyme A-dependent
reaction yielding acetyl CoA plus glycine. Threonine dehydrogenase is one of a
number of gene products whose level has been shown to be regulated by
leucine-i.e. it is a member of the so-called leucine regulon. We proposed
studying these two pure enzymes, with primary emphasis on the dehydrogenase and
secondary emphasis on the lyase, but selective chemical
modification/inactivation experiments, by isolating and sequencing peptides
containing these modified residues, and thereby establish their position in the
primary structure of the molecule. Since the genes for both of these enzymes
have recently been cloned and the primary structure of each enzyme is now known,
site-directed mutagenesis of specific amino acid residues will be carried out
and the effects of such changes on the enzyme's catalytic/regulatory properties
examined. Attempts will also be made to crystallize this dehydrogenase (primary
effort) and lyase (secondary) for subsequent 3-dimensional structure
determination by X-ray crystallographic techniques. The goal are to relate
specific enzyme catalysis/regulation with protein structure and to understand
enzymic processes in sufficient detail so that, long range, modern metabolic and
protein engineering is possible. %%% Advances made by studies such as this are
significant in that a thorough knowledge of metabolic/enzymic processes allows
for modern metabolic/protein engineering. By such engineering pathways may be
altered to remove a poisonous product, introduce a new pathway, and /or enhance
production of a commercially important material.