* 9204261
* CRB:  Collaborative Research:  Evolutionary Genetics of     Adaptive Radiation in Tetramolopium
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Richard Whitkus, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1996
* USD 142,261.00

A major concern of Conservation Biology is the measurement and preservation of
genetic diversity (degree of genetic variation) particularly where rare and
endangered species are involved. This is so because genetic diversity is
recognized as being necessary for maintenance of healthy populations and for
determining the evolutionary potential (such as the potential for new species to
evolve) of natural populations. It is proposed that island plant species that
have evolved through adaptive radiation (diversification into a variety of
habitats from a single introduction) can provide the model systems for analysis
of the amount and structure of genetic diversity for rare plants in general. The
genus Tetramolopium in the Sunflower family presents a unique opportunity to
analyze genetic diversity in rare species. The genus occurs only on oceanic
islands in the Pacific Ocean and has an unusual distribution among New Guinea,
Hawaii, and the Cook Islands. Ten of the eleven Hawaiian species are considered
rare and endangered. Based on available evidence New Guinea is the source area
where Tetramolopium evolved and was later dispersed to the other Pacific
islands. The two specific goals of the research are: 1. To assess the initial
amount of genetic diversity that was introduced into Hawaii and compare this
value to those found in the present Hawaiian species. This will be accomplished
by comparing genetic diversity in New Guinea species to those in Hawaii through
use of two independent molecular techniques. 2. To determine how many genes are
involved in the process of adaptive radiation in Hawaiian species and estimate
the proportion of the total gene pool represented by these genes. This will be
one of the first non-domesticated plant species to have the number of genes
controlling morphological differences determined and mapped. The results of this
research will provide detailed information that will be invaluable for the
management of threatened and endangered plant species.