* 9204680
* The High Pressure Structure of Silicate Liquids:            Constraints on the Chemical and Physical Properties of Deep Earth Melts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Quentin Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/1995
* USD 180,000.00

This project involves collecting information on the structure and electrical
transport properties of silicates-analogue liquids at high pressures and
temperatures and on the structures of glasses formed at high pressures and
temperatures and quenched only in temperature. The primary structural probes are
vibrational spectroscopy: principally Raman spectroscopy for the liquids, and
infrared spectroscopy or quenched glasses held in situ at high pressures. The
plan is to utilize the externally heated diamond cell to generate pressure and
temperature for both spectroscopic and conductivity experiments on liquids, and
laser heating coupled with the diamond anvil cell to form high pressure glasses.
Such data are critically important in predicting and evaluating changes in the
physical properties, such as density and viscosity, of magmatic liquids under
compression, and bear fundamentally on the processes by which the Earth has
differentiated to its present state. The goals is to provide a structural basis
for changes in the geochemical, thermodynamics, and transport properties of
silicate melts at high pressures. These experiments have been rendered feasible
by recent advancements in both the generation and calibration of high pressures
and temperatures within the diamond anvil cell, as well as advances in solid-
state detector technology.