* 9204672
* Light/Shade Adaptation of Prochlorothrix Hollandica
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* George Bullerjahn, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1995
* USD 153,014.00

The rationale for this work is based on the fact that all photosynthetic
organisms must adapt to changes in environment light intensity in order to
maximize photosynthetic efficiency. At high light, excess energy has to be
dissipated to prevent photodamage, while at low light, photon capture has be
maximized to allow photosynthesis to proceed efficiently. We have been studying
the photosynthetic prokaryote, Prochlorothrix hollandica, as a model system to
examine the light/shade adaptation of the photosynthetic apparatus. This
bacterium is well-suited to these studies because it is structurally similar to
higher plant chloroplasts, but can be manipulated in the lab more easily that
higher plants or eukaryotic algae. Our work has characterized the events
occurring during light/shade adaptation in both P. hollandica and plant
chloroplasts, and we have shown that similar mechanisms occur in both systems.
Overall, we believe that analyzing this process in P. hollandica will reveal in
more detail the pathway required for plants to handle alterations in
environmental light intensity. %%% Specifically, our work has shown that
light/shade adaptation involves in part the interplay of two separate events.
First, upon a shift to high light, the overall chlorophyll pigment system
becomes reorganized in approximately 30 minutes; we calculate 40% of the
accessory chlorophyll pigments are capable of changing their orientation such
that energy capture and transfer is altered at high light. This mechanism
appears to be controlled by a light-activated protein kinase. Second, as cells
experience high light for several hours, a light-activated metalloprotease
activity degrades a subset of the accessory chlorophyll-binding proteins. The
function of this protease is probably to limit the amount of photon capture at
high irradiances. Understanding precisely the mechanism(s) by which cells sense
high light and trigger these responses will help us understand how
photosynthesis is regulated in chloroplast (plant) systems. To date, we have
cloned many of the genes encoding the components involved in these mechanisms;
these include the genes encoding the protein kinase. We are currently examining
how light affects the expression of these genes, and how the function of the
kinase affects the function and organization of the photosynthetic light-
harvesting antenna. Lastly, we are examining in detail how the proteolytic
activity acts to destroy the accessory chlorophyll-proteins in high light; it is
possible that the accessory chlorophyll-proteins are targeted for proteolysis by
their phosphorylation by the thylakoid protein kinase.