* 9204415
* Intense Flux Tubes on the Sun, U.S.-India Cooperative       Research
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Wolfgang Kalkofen, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

Technical Narrative: In a joint research project, Dr. Wolfgang Kalkofen of the
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, Cambridge and Dr. S.S. Hasan of the
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore will study intense flux tubes on the
sun. This investigation of small-scale solar magnetic fields is directed towards
a fundamental, unsolved problem in solar physics, the heating of the quiet
chromosphere which takes place mainly in magnetic flux tubes. This investigation
seeks to examine the stability, dynamics, energy transport and oscillations in
collapsing flux tubes by means of 1.5-D time-dependent, dynamical calculations.
The use of two-dimensional radiative transfer, will be a significant improvement
over previous analyses. The results of this study will help in understanding the
physics of flux tubes, the structure of the bright chromosphere, and long-period
oscillations of the atmosphere in flux tubes. Scope: This project joins efforts
in radiative transfer by W. Kalkofen and colleagues at the Harvard-Smithsonian
Center for Astrophysics and in magnetic fields by S.S. Hasan and colleagues at
the Indian Institute of Astrophysics in Bangalore. It will begin collaboration
between the Harvard group working on problems in radiative transfer, static
magnetic fields and chromospheric heating and the Bangalore group investigating
time-dependent magnetic fields, solar magnetic fields and chromospheric lines.
Drs. Kalkofen and Hasan are highly competent researchers and the Indian
Institute of Astrophysics has an excellent tradition of research on the Sun.