* 9204283
* Proposal for a Workshop to Design a Soil-Structure          Interaction Experiment
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1992
* Mehmet Celebi, Geological Survey-Menlo Park
* Standard Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 12/31/1992
* USD 5,000.00

It is recognized that soil-structure interaction during strong earthquake ground
shaking alters the response characteristics of a structural system. However
there are no strong-motion data from instrumented buildings to confirm the
validity of the soil-structure interaction analysis methods and procedures; even
though the effects of this interaction are now included in various seismic codes
(e.g. ATC-3, NEHRP-1985). Workshops held between 1978 and the present have
repeatedly included the recommendation to instrument a building for soil-
structure interaction studies. Although there are over 100 structures in the
U.S. instrumented to measure the effects of strong earthquake ground shaking,
there are no instrumented structures that would allow detailed calibration
and/or confirmation of the validity of soil-structure interaction analysis
methods. The objective of this workshop is to plan for and to design such an
experiment, which is being undertaken by the U.S. Geological Survey. This action
is for support of this initiative by the National Science Foundation. The
purposes of this workshop are: (a) to bring together a panel of experts to reach
a consensus on the benefits and feasibility of implementing a soil-structure
interaction experiment by instrumenting a building in a seismically-active
region of the U.S., and (b) to plan the details for such an experiment.