* 9204323
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems in Harmonic Analysis   Related to Wavelets
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Michael Frazier, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1995
* USD 40,000.00

The thrust of this mathematical research revolves around applications of recent
developments in wavelet theory. The first application will focus on algebras of
linear operators generated by those of Calderon-Zygmund type. These operators
arise in the analysis of partial differential equations. The operators are too
complex to study individually; the goal of current research is to choose wavelet
bases in which the operators may be represented as almost-diagonal matrices.
From this representation, one can read off many hidden properties of the
operators. A second line of investigation concerns wavelet decompositions in
higher dimensional space. This work will begin with the representation of radial
functions in term of wavelets which somehow respect the symmetry. The
fundamental difficulty is that one cannot symmetrize one-dimensional wavelets
and maintain the desired translation properties. Some progress has been made in
developing a new wavelet-type function with many desirable properties preserved.
A third direction of this research is that of distinguishing the behavior of the
different Riesz transforms on functions spaces using wavelet-type
representations. Wavelet theory has introduced an extraordinary new tool into
the field of harmonic analysis. It contains the elements of a highly effective
theoretical method for the representation of functions along with natural
algorithms for the computation of various expansions of functions which are
simultaneously local in time and frequency. There applications are only
beginning to be felt in the scientific and engineering community.