* 9204577
* Herder-Forager Interactions in an Unstable Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1994
* C. Garth Sampson, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1994
* USD 40,052.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Garth Sampson and his colleagues
will conduct archaeological and paleoenvironmental research in the Zeekoe valley
region in South Africa. The goal of the work is to examine the relationship
between environmental change and the response of humans who live at a simple
technological level. Potsherds collected in the course of prior archaeological
research in the region will be dated by both thermolumenescence and radiocarbon
dating of adhering organic materials. Changing paleoenvironment will be
reconstructed through the analysis of hyrax dung middens. This latter is a
technique pioneered by Dr. Sampson. Hyrax are small territorial animals who
return over generations to favored habitation sites. Resultant dung middens can
span centuries and can be dated by radiocarbon. Because the contained material
includes pollen grains, these latter can be analyzed to provide insight into
changing climatic conditions. With these data Dr. Sampson will be able to
correlate environmental cause and human response. For many years Dr. Sampson and
his collaborators have worked in the Zeekoe valley region. Thousands of sites
have been located and studied and the general chronology and sequence of events
have been established. Over the period from about 600 - 1800 AD this region was
most likely inhabited by two groups, one which subsisted by hunting and
gathering and the other by herding sheep and goats. The interactions between the
two appear to be complex and changing over time. When European settlers entered
the region in the 1800s they encountered only hunters and gatherers there. While
the pattern has been established, its cause is unknown and this is the focus of
Dr. Sampsons' present work. The Zeekoe is a semiarid region which has undergone
significant climatic fluxuation in historic times and likely in prehistory as
well. This research is important for several reasons. It will increase our
understanding of how humans adapt to changing climate and how groups at a simple
level of technological development relate to each other in a varying
environmental context.