* 9204249
* An ASTRAL-Based Support Environment for Formal Software Development of Realtime Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1997
* Richard Kemmerer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 06/30/1997
* USD 210,044.00

This award addresses the need for improving system reliability through better
software development methods and tools, and specifically, through applying
formal methods to the development of realtime systems. The solution sought is a
formal framework for the specification and analysis of realtime systems. This
framework is based on the ASTRAL formal specification language and includes the
ASTRAL language for writing requirements and design specifications of realtime
systems, a formal proof theory for proving properties about ASTRAL
specifications, and a support environment for the construction and analysis of
the specifications. The tools that make up the support environment are a syntax-
directed editor, an ASTRAL to TRIO translator, an ASTRAL specification
processor, and a mechanical theorem prover. The TRIO-based model checkers,
developed at the Politecnico di Milano, are being integrated into the support
environment. The main theoretical issues to be investigated deal with the
composability of ASTRAL specifications. The research is developing a proof
theory that prescribes how the proofs of the individual state machine
specifications can be combined to produce a proof of the entire system. Another
composability issue to be investigated is the composition of two or more ASTRAL
system specifications (i.e., a global specification and its associated
collection of state machine specifications) to derive the specification for the
composite system. ASTRAL is being used to specify complex realtime systems taken
from a variety of application areas to evaluate its effectiveness and utility.