* 9204117
* Development of SPEAR for Ultra-High Vacuum-High Resolution  Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Peter Stair, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/1995
* USD 450,000.00

This project for instrument development will provide components for a
multichamber surface science system that will be attached to an ultra-high
vacuum high resolution electron microscope at Northwestern University for the
fundamental study of material surfaces. Unique studies of film growth,
interactions of gases with surfaces, fundamental surface science, and buried
interface problems with a true marriage of traditional surface science and high
resolution electron microscopy will be capable with this instrument. The basic
idea is to change from a single, limited transfer chamber to a set of
interconnected chambers, each specializing in a different set of techniques. The
resulting system will consist of four chambers with a small airlock specimen
entry system and a central transfer vessel. This project has several goals: to
store samples under UHV, to have separate chambers where deposition or gas
treatments can be performed, to have small probe imaging equipment available, to
have good chemical analysis. The project combines electron microscopy with
surface science and thin films technology. Research projects will focus on
fundamental thin film research, surfaces and catalysis, and grain boundary
studies, involving several groups at Northwestern, collaborations with National
Laboratories, and industry. //