* 9204136
* Structure Determination of Small Transition Metal-          Containing Ions by Matrix Isolation/Fourier Transform       Infrared Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* George Leroi, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 07/31/1995
* USD 220,094.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professors Allison and Leroi will study the matrix isolation infrared
spectroscopy of mass-selected ions. Based on early promising experiments carried
out under their previous grant, these researchers will develop a new methodology
via laser-induced fluorescence and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of
small cations in neon matrices at 4 K. Structural analysis of both organic and
organometallic cations, co-deposited with counter ions, will be demonstrated.
Complementary theoretical calculations of ionic structures and vibrational
frequencies will also be carried out. The goals of this work are to provide a
new tool for the structural characterization of molecular ions as well as to
probe the structure/function relationships governing organometallic chemistry.
%%% The collaborating principal investigators have designed and constructed a
unique instrument which is a marriage of two completely different types of
spectroscopy, one which separates different ions according to their masses, the
other which measures the characteristic absorption or emission of light by
molecules or ions. This technique should aid in the determination of the
molecular structures of transient species as well as in the elucidation of
mechanisms of ion-molecule reactions which are important to many areas of
atmospheric, environmental, and materials sciences.