* 9204356
* Support for the Primate Facility at Field Museum of         Natural History
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Jack Fooden, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1994
* USD 25,537.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Field Museum of Natural History
will rennovate and equip space to serve as a study area for its extensive
primate specimen collection. A large formica work counter will be constructed
and overhead fluorescent lights installed. Electrical outlets will be situated
along the counter to permit convenient and multipe access for lights, computers
and other electric-powered equipment. Shutters will be removed from windows near
the counter to permit reseachers to utilize natural light to study materials.
Finally the floor will be painted and sealed. The Field Museum in Chicago houses
one of the finest collections of primate specimens in the world. The total of
ca. 4,500 individuals includes all families, most genera and a majority of
species and subspecies of primates worldwide. The taxonomic and geographic
composition of the collection is excellent and the majority of the individuals
were taken from the wild at a time when it was legally and ethically possible to
do so. These specimens document natural distributions and habitat associations
of species and reveal the morphological effects of natural foods, movement
patterns and social conditions. It would be impossible to duplicate the
materials today. While the museum has undertaken major work in restoring the
materials to make them more accessible to reseachers, lack of a proper study
area still hampers access. This grant will remedy that situation. This project
is important because it will make a significant national scientific resource
more readily accessible to a large number of interested reseachers.