* 9204529
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Probabilistic Aspects of        Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1997
* Charles Moore, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 09/30/1997
* USD 73,800.00

Several mathematical problems situated at the interface between harmonic
analysis and probability theory will be addressed in this project. The
application of probability theory to questions of mathematical analysis has a
rich history of success in refocusing the point of view and providing new,
powerful methods. Among the targets of this work is an examination of
Khintchine's inequality for lacunary trigonometric series. This inequality
bounds the p-norm of the Rademacher expansion of a function by sums of (squares
of) the coefficient. The same type of inequality obtains if a lacunary expansion
is used. Efforts will be made to show that the constant in the lower bound can
be estimated accurately enough to measure its dependence on the p-th power. A
second line of investigation concerns tail laws of the iterated logarithm for
harmonic functions. This law, discovered by Kolmogorov in 1950, measures partial
sums of trigonometric series against the sum of squares of its coefficients. The
tail law is similar except that it compares only the tail of the series and tail
of the coefficients. Recently analogous results have been obtained in which
harmonic functions are compared with iterated logarithms of their gradients.
Current work seeks to give estimates of corresponding tail comparison. Other
work seeks to relate developments of exponential martingales with classical
Littlewood-Paley theory.