* 9204325
* Mathematical Sciences: RUI                                  Uniqueness of Multiple Trigonometric Series and Symmetric   Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Danny Rinne, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

This project continues collaborative research on mathematical questions
concerning multiple trigonometric series. The starting point of the work rests
with the 1870 result of G. Cantor who showed that at most one trigonometric
series can converge to a given function. This is a different question from that
of determining whether a given series converges. It falls into the category of
what is known as a uniqueness question. A longstanding problem has been the
uniqueness question for multiple trigonometric series. There are many more
obstacles to this question arising from the multiple methods of summation
available, which do not show up in the one variable case. The investigators have
determined that the uniqueness is valid in the case of rectangular summation.
Work will now be done in carrying over newly developed techniques to investigate
other summation methods such as iterated or spherical convergence. In addition,
further studies will be carried out on questions of multiple uniqueness and the
problem of determining when a trigonometric series (in several variables) is a
Fourier series. Trigonometric series form the backbone of the modern theory of
harmonic analysis. They play a ubiquitous role in the study of analytic problems
ranging from pure number theory to the solution of partial differential
equations of physics. Recent results on the uniqueness question has opened up a
new avenue of research possibilities which have essentially been dormant for
decades.