* 9204313
* Ancient Atmospheric P(CO2), Paleoclimates and the Stable    Isotope Geochemistry of Low Temperature Iron Oxides
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Crayton Yapp, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1996
* USD 224,758.00

The actual role of CO2 as a "greenhouse" gas in the Earth's past can only be
learned from proxy data on ancient atmospheric Pco2 and corresponding climatic
temperatures. Research conducted in this laboratory has found that the oxygen
isotope systematics of the common mineral goethite (a-FEOOH) make it a suitable
indicator of paleotempeatures and ancient sources of water. Furthermore, we have
discovered that goethite contains an apparent Fe(CO3)OH component in solid
solution whose abundance is related to ancient ambient Pco2. These
characteristics of natural goethites have been used to deduce tropical
temperatures and atmospheric CO2 pressures 440 million years ago. A broader
application of these properties of goethite is planned. Part of the work well
involve experimental study of the isotopic effects of substitution of Al for Fe
in goethite. Such information is of importance to isotopic paleoclimatic
research involving goethites in tropical soils, where degrees of Al substitution
can be high. another portion of the proposed research will undertake the study
of the oxygen isotope systematics of goethite + phosphate as a promising mineral
pair oxygen isotope paleothermometer. The two-component CO2 mixing model for
soils (as manifested in the Fe(CO3)OH component of surficial goethite) will be
tested further as a third aspect of the research with data obtained from
goethite in active Cenozoic laterites. Goethite-bearing Mesozoic oolitic
ironstones and laterite will also be isotopically, etc., analyzed to evaluate
ancient temperatures, water sources and possibly atmospheric CO2 pressures.