* 9204870
* UNIDATA: Equipment Proposal for Participation in the                 UNIDATA Program
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* L.Michael Trapasso, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Jacobs
* 02/28/1994
* USD 5,105.00

This project will purchase two suitable PC systems for the College Heights
Weather Station located in the Department of geography and Geology at Western
Kentucky University. This weather station is a vital laboratory facility for
physical geography students in the Meteorology/Climatology track-Baccalaureate
Degree, and Meteorological Technology-Associate Degree programs. In addition to
departmental majors, students enrolled in introductory weather and climate
courses total 500-600 students per year. In total, no less than five faculty
will derive benefit by the output from the funded equipment. The new equipment
will complement the recently acquired Zephyr Weather Satellite Receiving System
to take full advantage of the PC-McIDAS capabilities and fully participate in
the UNIDATA Program. The products produced from this new hardware coupled with
UNIDATA software and services will be integrated into various levels of
coursework offered in the department. The principal investigator will write a
new set of laboratory exercises and restructure course curriculum elevating them
to state-of-the-art status. As such, new avenues for research and hands-on
experience will benefit students and faculty alike. The newly equipped College
Heights Weather Station coupled with the Kentucky Climate Center (also housed in
the Department of Geography and Geology) will make Western Kentucky University a
focus for the study of atmospheric sciences in Kentucky. It is also expected
that positions of employment and acceptance into graduate programs will increase
for our graduates as they demonstrate an enhanced understanding of weather
systems.