* 9204626
* Paleoceanography and Paleoenvironments of the Late          Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway:  An Integrated Study of Geochemistry and Foraminiferal Paleoecology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* R Leckie, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 08/31/1994
* USD 43,776.00

Our previous study of the paleoenvironments of the southwestern margin of the
Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway used a joint investigation of clay minerals
and foraminifera to yield some new ideas on the interaction of sedimentation,
tectonics, climate and oceanography on a regional scale. Specifically, we have
been able to discriminate between eustatic and climatic influences on sediment
distribution during the Late Cretaceous, and we have correlated changes in
source area and circulation patterns to foraminiferal populations. In this
study, we intend to expand the scope of our scrutiny to more rigorously evaluate
short-term changes in depositional conditions, water-column stratification, and
the development of oxygen-minimum zones at a proximal basin locality spanning
the upper Cenomanian to basal Campanian (Mesa Verde, CO). The principal methods
to be used will be sedimentary geochemistry (Fe, Mn, S, CaCO3, TOC and Rock-Eval
pyrolysis) coupled with foraminiferal population and shape studies, and
integrated into the detailed stratigraphy gathered previously during two field
seasons. Moreover, we will correlate the environments at this site to those at a
neritic basin site (Lohali Point, AZ) further west where we have a detailed
section from the Cenomanian to the upper Turonian. This will provide us with the
basis for comparing conditions in this nearshore locale with those that have
been documented for distal basin sites to the east, (such as at Pueblo, CO) and
will enable us to reconstruct the comprehensive paleoceanography of this
southwestern sector of the Western Interior Seaway.