* 9204852
* REU:  ER:TI:LiNbO3 Guided Wave Integrated Optic Amplifier
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Leon McCaughan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah L. Crawford
* 02/29/1996
* USD 335,000.00

Ti:LiNbO3-based guided wave optics has produced the largest and most
sophisticated integrated optic structures to date. At present these devices lack
the ability to produce or amplify light. As a result design must be kept
conservative to reduce optical loss, thus placing severe limitations on the
allowable number of integrated optic elements and their packing density. Certain
important functions, like signal regeneration and fan-out (i.e., the
distribution of one data stream to many outputs), must also be done
electronically- re-imposing both the bandwidth limitations and the added
complexity of electronics. A solution to these limitations is an integrable
guided wave optical element gain. One of the goals of the proposed research is
to fabricate a LiNbO3-based guided wave optical amplifier, incorporating Er3+ as
the amplifying medium. (Er has a strong emission line at ~ 1500 nm, a wavelength
of importance for telecommunications systems and well beyond the optical region
where optical damage to LiNbO3 can take place.) Toward this end, the PI has
recently developed a method for locally incorporating much higher concentrations
of Er into LiNbO3 than previously reported. This research has several promising
waveguide circuits which take advantage of the unique characteristics of
intersecting waveguides. We have previously developed a rigorous theory which
correctly explains both the coupling and radiative loss characteristics of
intersecting optical waveguides and we are applying this theory to the design
and analysis of Er:Ti:LiNbO3 guided wave optically pumped amplifiers and light
sources. Preliminary measurements and calculations indicate that reasonable gain
coefficients (g ~ 400m-1@ 1mW pump power) can be obtained. We propose to
continue our study of the enhanced incorporation of Er by way of co-diffusion of
Ti and to investigate several other promising co- diffusants. In this study will
also examine the incorporation of pairs of rare earth elements. Such paired
systems may provide additional useful pump transitions (e.g., diode laser) as
well as more efficient energy transfer mechanisms for optical gain. Site-
selective fluorescence spectroscopy will be used to characterize the optical
properties of rare earth ions in the LiNbO3 matrix, as well as to identify the
substitution site and transport mechanisms for this co-diffusion process.