* 9204445
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  High-Resolution Event Stratigraphy of the Kope-Corryville Interval in the Type Cincinnatian
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Steven Holland, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 12/31/1994
* USD 17,501.00

The current nomenclatural framework for the type Cincinnatian suggests an
underlying lithostratigraphic complexity that inhibits utilization of its rich
fossil biota for paleoecological and macroevolutionary investigations. However,
several recent studies indicate that this apparent complexity is partly an
artifact of difficulties with the nomenclature itself. The purpose of the
research is to develop a high-resolution chronostratigraphic framework for the
Kope through Corryville Formations (Edenian- Maysvillian) in the Cincinnati
region that transcends stratigraphic nomenclature through the use of event
horizons for correlation, including: transgressive surfaces, epiboles,
earthquake-disrupted beds, storm beds with unusual sedimentological features,
and sea level-associated stratigraphic "spikes" in lithologic and faunal
characteristics. A series of field localities and cores from throughout the
region will be measured and described in detail, and faunal samples collected
and analyzed, to delineate event horizons within the study interval. Previous
investigations indicate the presence of several such horizons, and it is
anticipated that our work designed specifically for this purpose, will permit
the recognition of several more. The result will be a series of cross- sections
and maps illustrating a chronostratigraphic framework for the sequence. As a
first use of this framework, we will conduct a series of gradient analyses on
documented event horizons to calibrate the degree of lateral variability in
paleoenvironments and paleocommunities at specific times during the Edenian and
Maysvillian stages.