* 9205522
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1994
* NONE NONE, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 01/31/1994
* USD 8,809.00

Most geographical studies of waterways and boundaries have emphasized the
boundary function of waterways, particularly between political entities. Few
studies have addressed the problems associated with state ownership of
waterbottoms. The important issue in determining ownership is navigability
because most states own the waterbottoms of all naturally formed navigable
waterways. In recent years, the problem of waterbottom ownership determination
has been magnified by accelerating rates of land loss along coastal zones and
channel filling within drainage basins. In the state of Louisiana, both of these
changes are due, in part, to cultural alterations of sediment- bearing channel
flow. This research project will examine the impact of waterway changes on
ownership of waterbottoms within south Louisiana waterways. It will test the
hypothesis that the state is losing ownership of property through accretion
within areas of extensive deposition while it is gaining property through
erosion within the coastal zone. The Atchafalaya Basin and the Bayou Lafourche
will be compared as extremes of these two processes. Geological, historical,
geographical and legal data will be assembled in order to test the hypothesis.
This study is unique in that it addresses the ownership of a particular type of
property, the waterbottoms of inland and coastal waterways. It blends
geomorphological evidence with legal decisions to better understand the
relationship between natural and cultural processes which modify waterway
boundaries and the legal framework for adjudicating disputes over boundaries. It
will have practical applications to boundary determination problems elsewhere,
and it will further elucidate the problems which occur when the legal and
legislative systems lag behind the actual physical changes to boundaries.