* 9205530
* Mathematical Sciences: Set Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Sy Friedman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 01/31/1996
* USD 127,800.00

Friedman intends to investigate four areas within set theory in addition to
beginning work on a book on the method of L-coding. (The latter should help make
the many significant applications of this method accessible to a wider audience
of set-theorists.) (1) With his former student, Dorshka Wylie (now an NSF fellow
and an instructor at M.I.T.), he is engaged in a radically new approach to the
core model K for a strong cardinal, which should provide a powerful new tool for
establishing combinatorial principles in K. (2) A second goal is to enable
coding methods to lift smoothly to K, permitting extension of results such as
his proof of the Pi-1-2- Singleton Conjecture to the core model context. (3) A
long- standing open question in the theory of iterated forcing concerns the
problem of extending the method of countable support iteration beyond omega-2
without collapsing cardinals. A number of important consistency problems could
be solved by such a technique. With his student, Dimitiros Tzimas, Friedman will
attempt to develop such a method through the use of morasses. (4) Friedman will
also explore questions in descriptive set theory as to whether the full
structure theory for projective sets can be developed directly from the
existence of large cardinals, without the use of infinite game theory. Set
theory provides the popular way to lay the foundations for all of mathematics,
the best known systematic attempt to do this being Russell and Whitehead's
Principia Mathematica, dating from the early part of the 20th Century. Important
foundational questions concern the independence and the consistency of the
axioms used to establish set theory. Zermelo and Fraenkel's axioms (ZF for
short) are one of the most convenient sets of basic axioms. However, it has been
known since the work of Kurt Goedel in the 1930's that no axioms for set theory
can be complete as well as consistent. This means that no set of axioms can be
powerful enough to prove every possible proposition or else its negation, but
not both. Upon this startling theorem has been erected a rich theory, treating
possible propositions P such that either P or Not P can be added to ZF without
resulting in a contradiction. Any such proposition P is said to be independent
of ZF and can be taken as an additional axiom of set theory. The principal
technique for finding such independent propositions is Paul J. Cohen's so-called
method of forcing and its offspring. This is the circle of ideas involved in and
motivating the investigator's research.