* 9205856
* Molecular Genetic Characterization of Mutationally-Induced  Cell Death in C. Elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1997
* Monica Driscoll, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1997
* USD 428,442.00

Dominant mutations in two C. elegans genes, mec-4 and deg-1, induce the deaths
of specific groups of neurons. Dying neurons are characterized by cell swelling
and morphologically resemble a commonly observed pattern of death termed
necrosis. Because in C. elegans cell death mechanisms can be dissected using
genetic approaches characterization of this necrotic like death should provide
novel insight into this death process. Mec-4 and deg-1 are members of a gene
family that appear to encode membrane proteins. These genes (called degenerin
genes) mutate in the same way to induce death. mec-4 and deg-1 DNA sequences
appear to cross hybridize to DNAs from a number of species, raising the
possibility that members of gene degenerin families in other organisms might
also be capable of mutation to forms that induce death. The term long objective
of the research is to determine how mec-4 (d) induced cell death occurs at the
molecular level and to investigate whether similar death mechanisms are utilized
in other cell types and in other organisms. Specifically, the work outlined in
this proposal will 1) accomplish a structure/function analysis to define domains
and amino acids required for mec-4 function, 2) identify suppressor mutations
that block mec-4(d)-induced death to identify proteins that participate in the
death process, and 3) isolate degenerin family members from different species.
%%% Elucidation of mechanisms of cell death are important for understanding
development, homeostasis and pathology.