* 9205946
* Mineralogical Trends in Upper Paleocene-Lower Eocene        Sediments of the Gulf Basin and Southern Rocky Mountains:   Test for Synchroneity between Source Area Uplift and.....
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1995
* Earle McBride, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 05/31/1995
* USD 141,234.00

Preliminary analysis of mineralogical trends through time in two large clastic
wedges in the northwestern Gulf of New Mexico Basin (Wilcox and lower Claiborne
Groups), and time-equivalent upper Paleocene-lower Eocene strata in Laramide
basins of the Southern Rocky Mountains, suggests that the two-phase uplift
history of Laramide orogeny described by Chapin and Cather (1983) may be
recorded by detrital mineralogy. Temporal changes in composition also indicate
that changing climate played a role in the evolution detrital mineralogy. The
proposal is to study the temporal changes of detrital and diagenetic mineralogy
in the Wilcox and lower Claiborne Groups of the northwestern Gulf of Mexico
Basin, and coeval sediments in Laramide basins of the Southern Rocky Mountains.
This information will provide a test of the theory that pulses of
intracontinental Laramide tectonism are recorded by episodes of deltaic-wedge
progradation in the Gulf of Mexico Basin. In particular, we will address the
question: Is the response of delta growth geologically instantaneous, or does a
geologically significant lag-time exist between filling of basins adjacent to
interior uplifts and the deposition of associated sediment at the continental
margin? Palynological analysis of sample intervals will place the trend of
mineralogical changes within a time framework. This temporally constrained
analysis of mineralogical changes will allow an assessment of synchroneity
between interior-continental orogeny and continental-margin sedimentation.