* 9205425
* Control of RNA Processing Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Lillie Searles, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1996
* USD 424,750.00

The goal of this research is to determine the role of the nuclear protein
encoded by the Drosophila suppressor of sable ısu(s)! gene in RNA processing
control. Mutations of the su(s) gene elevate the expression levels of three
vermilion (v) mutants. These v mutants have insertions of a retrotransposon in
the first exon of the v gene. The transposon insertion in this position behaves
as a large intron and is spliced from the precursor RNA at cryptic sites near
the ends of transposon sequences. Experimental observations indicate that su(s)
mutations increase the stability of these transcripts. Two models are being
proposed to explain the observations. First, RNA stability could be increased if
su(s) mutations enhance spliceosome formation at cryptic sites, thereby
unspliced RNAs would be stabilized and allowed more time for splicing to occur.
Thus, su(s) might encode a component of the splicing machinery. Alternatively,
su(s) could encode a protein involved in targeting nuclear RNAs for degradation,
suggesting that su(s) might play a direct role in controlling the stability of
specific transcripts. The objectives of this proposal are the following. (1) To
establish whether the response of v mutants to su(s) mutations depends on
splicing at the cryptic sites, these splice sites will be altered (e.g.,
eliminated and improved) by site specific mutagenesis. After transformation of
these derivatives into the Drosophila germ line, expression will be examined in
su(s) wild type and mutant backgrounds. (2) To develop an in vitro assay for
su(s) activity, nuclear extracts will be prepared from su(s) wild type and
mutant embryos and tested by in vitro splicing, spliceosome assembly, and RNA
degradation assays. (3) To examine the biochemical properties of the su(s)
protein, anti-su(s) antibodies will be used to determine whether the protein
fractionates with spliceosomes or if it binds to RNA. Furthermore, attempts will
be made to partially purify the protein from either embryos or cultured cells
that have been engineered to over express the protein. %%% These studies will
provide new information about RNA processing control mechanisms in eukaryotes.