* 9205328
* Small Sample Methods for Interrupted                        and Noninterrupted Time-series Designs
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1992,03/31/1995
* Joseph McKean, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 03/31/1995
* USD 110,000.00

The general objectives of this research are to describe the small sample
problems associated with several of the most frequently used time-series
statistical procedures and to develop improved alternative methods. The plan is
to provide researchers and applied statisticians with information regarding the
negative consequences of employing conventional time-series methods with small
sample sizes and to provide more satisfactory procedures for the small sample
case. More specifically, the nature and magnitude of small sample bias will be
evaluated in a wide variety of descriptive and inferential statistics used in
the analysis of simple and complex intervention and non-intervention time-series
studies. The investigation will require computer simulations of the sampling
distributions of various autoregressive and white noise processes. The focus
will be on simple univariate autoregressive models because such models appear to
characterize a large proportion of applications in the social sciences. The
early stages of the work are expected to specify clearly the weaknesses of
several conventional methods. It is anticipated that new procedures developed in
the last stage of the research will lead to improved statistical and substantive
conclusions in many areas of science that now employ time-series methods. The
principal investigators are well qualified to carry out this project. They are
expert in both time-series analysis and robustness and they have many years of
experience in their respective fields.