* 9205811
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Controls on Sequence Geometry and Bounding Surfaces in Ramp Settings
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Dag Nummedal, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 12/31/1994
* USD 70,702.00

Clastic sediments delivered to the margins of many sedimentary basins commonly
form deltaic successions which forestep and backstep on evenly deepening ramps,
rather than the more commonly modeled shelf-slope-basin floor bathymetry. The
properties of sequence boundaries, and the geometry and stacking of sequence
elements ("systems tracts") in such ramp settings are highly controversial and
very few published examples are well constrained. This project is an integrated
study of sequence geometry in ramp settings. The project will consist of
conceptual and numerical modeling accompanied by rigorous field testing in one
of the best exposed successions of clastic ramp sequences in the world: the
Upper Cretaceous marginal marine deposits of the San Juan basin, New Mexico. The
primary objectives of this project are to (1) identify, evaluate and map
stratigraphic surfaces, which meet such objective criteria for a sequence
boundary as downward shift in onlap and subaerial exposure of older marine
strata, (2) test the concepts of instantaneous versus diachronous formation of
sequence boundaries, (3) document stacking patterns and volumetric partitioning
of sediment between different elements (systems tracts) of the sequences, (4)
forward model variations in sequence geometry in response to different rates of
tectonic subsidence, rates and amplitudes of sea level change, and sediment
supply. Two-dimensional, flexural backstripping will be applied to reconstruct
the geometry of the depositional surfaces through time. The modeling will be
based on a combination of two numerical methods. One is a kinematic model using
preset depositional slopes and sediment supply to generate the stratigraphic
response to sea level and tectonic fluctuations. The second is a diffusion model
that simulates sediment transport in a "foreland" basin setting. The overall
goal of the project is to provide improved precision in models predicting the
spatial and temporal distribution of lithologic units in basins with ramp
margins, and to enable the extraction of more precise information about past sea
level fluctuations from the stratigraphic record.