* 9205137
* Workshop: CO2 and Climate Change Effects on Plants and Soil;to be held Washington, DC; November 1992
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1994
* Jerry Melillo, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1994
* USD 62,000.00

Since the beginning of the industrial revolution the CO2 concentration in the
atmosphere has risen by approximately 25%, from 280 ppmv to 350 ppmv. Current
climate models estimate that even if man-made emissions of CO2 could be kept at
present rates, atmospheric CO2 would increase to about 450 ppmv by the year
2050, and to about 520 ppmv by the year 2100 (IPCC 1990). These increases in
atmospheric CO2 concentration, combined with increases in the concentrations of
other greenhouse gases such as methane and nitrous oxide, are predicted to lead
to global climate change comprised of higher temperatures and changes in the
hydrological cycle. How will simultaneous changes of CO2 concentration and
climate affect linked plant and soil processes? This is one of today's critical
environmental questions. The U.S. National Committee of SCOPE (Scientific
Committee on Problems of the Environment) will hold a workshop on linked
vegetation and soil responses to increasing CO2 and climate change. The goals of
the Workshop are: 1) To coalesce current understanding of CO2 and climate change
effects on linked vegetation and soil systems, both natural and managed. 2) To
evaluate our ability to predict responses of both natural ecosystems and
agroecosystems to simultaneous changes in CO2 and climate. Contributions from
agronomists, ecologists, plant physiologists, and soil scientists will be needed
to accomplish these goals. Both experimentalists and modeler will be invited
because a crucial aim of the workshop is to improve communication between those
scientists conducting laboratory and field research on increasing CO2 and land
use and those scientists who are projecting the potential effects of changing
atmosphere and climate on ecosystems through the use of models.