* 9205696
* Surficial Processes and Geomorphic Evolution of Desert      Pavement Landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1995
* Stephen Wells, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 05/31/1995
* USD 100,173.00

The project were (1) test the eolian/pedogenic accretionary model of desert
pavement formation by cosmogenic 3He exposure age dating at selected study sites
in the Mojave Desert and Great Basin of western North America and in the Atacama
Desert of South America; (2) elucidate the types of pedogenic (e.g., vesicular A
horizon formation), physical (e.g.,soil deformation and particle movement) and
biological (e.g., clast displacement due to plant growth) processes operating on
and modifying pavements by field and laboratory investigations; and (3)
establish a potential terrestrial analog for planetary studies of ancient
Martian regolith development. Initial cosmogenic 3He surface exposure ages on
clasts from pavements developed on basaltic lava flow surfaces confirm that
clasts have remained at the pavement surface since the eruption of the lava
flow. Traditional and experimental methods of soil deformation and clast
movement in 3-D space will be accomplished at selected study plots using
subsurface and surface measurements. These data sets will be compared with (1)
soil profile properties and development within the study plots, (2) chemical
weathering parameters on clasts from the pavement and at various levels within
the subsurface, and (3) plant transect and trench data showing relations between
plant distribution and pavement properties and bioturbation and clast
concentrations in the eolian accretionary mantle. This research will help the
endeavors of field geologists who use pavements for mapping purposes,
geomorphologists and geochronologists who use pavements for dating landscapes,
archaeologists who examine cultural artifact distribution on pavements,
Quaternary geologists who reconstruct paleoenvironments of land surfaces in
desert regions of the world, and planetary geologists who seek terrestrial
analogs for the evolution of the Martian regolith.