* 9205234
* Cholesterol and the Thermal Adaptation of Membranes in      Poikilotherms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Jeffrey Hazel, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 02/29/1996
* USD 270,021.00

The goal of the proposed research is to determine whether variations in the
cholesterol content of plasma membranes from various cell types of the rainbow
trout account for the thermal adaptation of membrane function characteristic of
these animals (i.e., the ability of trout and other cold-blooded animals ıthose
animals at the same temperature as their environment! to maintain similar levels
of membrane-related activities ısuch as nutrient and ion transport! at different
body temperatures, even though membrane structure and function are markedly
perturbed by temperature), and the means by which the cholesterol content of
these membranes is modified in response to temperature change. The results of
the proposed experiments will provide a broadly applicable definition of the
role of cholesterol in membrane structure and function. The proposed experiments
will determine the effects of growth temperature on i) the plasma membrane
content of cholesterol; ii) the distribution of cholesterol between the plasma
membrane and intracellular stores; iii) the capacity for cholesterol
biosynthesis in liver and intestine; and iv) rates of cholesterol transport from
its site of synthesis into the plasma membrane. In addition, the influence of
modulation in cholesterol content on various membrane functions (membrane
fluidity, permeability, and rates of transport) will be assessed. The rainbow
trout is an ideal animal model in which to address these basic questions in
membrane biology because: 1) trout remain active and behave normally over a wide
range of temperatures, indicating that they acclimate well to variations in
temperature; 2) in marked contrast to homeotherms (e.g., humans or, more
generally, mammals) the membrane lipid composition can be readily manipulated in
a noninvasive and physiologically meaningful context, simply by altering the
water temperature, thus providing a powerful tool for probing the relationships
between membrane structure and function not available in higher animals; and 3)
the membranes of vertebrate, cold- blooded animals are more similar to those of
higher vertebrates with respect to both lipid composition and diversity than are
those of microorganisms, which have also been extensively employed to study this
problem.