* 9205272
* Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Tobamovirus Movement      Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Carl Deom, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1996
* USD 270,000.00

This project is focused toward increasing our understanding of the role(s)
played by virally-encoded movement proteins (MP) in facilitating the transport
of viral RNA between cells of the infected host plant. The research plan calls
for the generation of a series of chimeric MPs, produced by genetic
recombination of distantly-related tobamoviruses, in an effort to determine
which protein motifs affect virulence, host specificity, and intercellular
transport. The plan will also involve the expression and study of MP from sunn-
hemp mosaic virus (SHMV) in transgenic plants to determine its effects on
plasmodesmatal structure and sieving properties. Finally, photochemical
crosslinking studies will be performed on inoculated protoplasts, to assess MP
binding to RNA during infection and/or transport. %%% A major facet of the viral
infection of host plants involves the intercellular movement of viral nucleic
acids through plasmodesmata. This transport is facilitated by a series of viral
proteins known collectively as the movement proteins. The generation of chimeric
movement proteins is a creative approach to assess their specificity and
function. This work will provide significant, new information on an important
problem in plant pathology.