* 9205697
* Small GTP-Binding Proteins and Cell Division Control
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Clarissa Cheney, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1996
* USD 268,400.00

In this proposal, the overall aim is to determine the role of small GTP-binding
proteins in the regulation of mitosis. A small regulator for GTP-binding
proteins, called a GDP Dissociation Inhibitor (GDI), has been identified from
Drosophila melanogaster, through the developmental mutant known as quartet. In
quartet, GDI fails to undergo a post-translational modification, and processes
regulated by GTP-binding proteins are altered. Prominent among the anomalies in
quartet are changes in mitotic behavior; mitotic chromosomal separation is
blocked. Thus, chromosomal separation in mitosis may involve small GTP-binding
proteins. %%% Mitosis is the process by which already-replicated chromosomes
align, split apart, and then separate into two groups in an orderly fashion.
Mitosis is similar in widely divergent cells throughout the eukaryotic realm,
but our understanding of this process is not well-developed. The increased
availablity of conditional mutants that exhibit anomalous entry into or
progression through mitosis have proven to be powerful tools with which to
dissect the mechanisms by which chromosomes move. In this project, a mutant of
Drosophila exhibits anomalous progression through mitosis. The underlying
mechanism for this block to chromosomal separation appears to be linked to a
family of regulatory proteins that have heretofore not been linked to the
process. This work has the potential to provide important clues about the
regulatory components that control chromosomal separation in all higher
organisms.