* 9205755
* Next-Generation Terabit Lightwave Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Biswanath Mukherjee, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 08/31/1996
* USD 284,955.00

This research will investigate both single hop and multihop architectures for
terabit networks. The approaches will exploit the characteristics of WDM
lightwave technology so that efficient protocols and easily-reconfigurable
architectures can be developed. For single-hop systems, the PI will examine both
control-channel-based and non-control-channel-based protocols and integrate
packet-switched protocols as well as mechanisms to accommodate circuit-switched
traffic. The approaches will employ realistic assumptions on optical component
characteristics (e.g., nonzero transceiver tuning times), and they will be aimed
at supporting a multiuser base (possibly 1000's) which can be time-varying
scalable. For multihop architectures, the PI will investigate optimal node
placement in regular structures to suit nonuniform traffic conditions. In
addition, he will study dynamic reconfiguration algorithms of the embedded
virtual network topology to combat changes in the offered traffic conditions and
explore alternative multihop architectures for suitability of application to
optical networks. The PI will also consider if various single-hop and multihop
systems can be compared in a meaningful fashion (assuming equivalent system
parameters). He will try to develop techniques which will to understand under
what circumstances a given architecture may be considered superior to others.