* 9205839
* Sequence Stratigraphy, Third-Order Accommodation Events and Related Diagenetic History of the Middle Cambrian Bonanza   King Formation, Southern Great Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Jay Banner, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 01/31/1996
* USD 136,945.00

The proposed research involves a combined sequence stratigraphic and diagenetic
analysis of cyclic passive margin carbonates of the Middle to Late Cambrian
Bonanza King Formation of the southern Great Basin (California and Nevada). The
formation ranges from 300 to 1350 meters and forms a westward-thickening wedge
from craton margin to shelf-edge and base-of-slope facies. The Bonanza King is
composed of &gt;200 meter-scale carbonate cycles that provide a remarkable strip
record of Middle to Late Cambrian third-order relative sea-level oscillations.
Preliminary results suggest that four and a half third-order sequences can be
recognized and mapped out across the Bonanza King platform. Intervals of thick
subtidal cycles appear to characterize the transgressive systems tracts,
intervals of thin peritidal cycles characterize the highstand systems tracts and
thin zone of peritidal cycles exhibiting evidence of sporadic exposure probably
manifest sequence boundary zones. Intracyclic abundance of early dolomite
decreases systematically from craton margin to outer platform. Cycles in
sequence boundary zones and upper highstand systems tracts are dominantly
dolomite whereas cycles in transgressive systems tracts and lower highstand
systems tracts retain abundant limestone. The objectives of the research are
fourfold: 1) Dissect the internal anatomy of carbonate stratigraphic sequences
using the excellent exposures, broad outcrop area and extraordinary cyclicity of
the Bonanza King Formation as the data base. Predictable variations in cycle
stacking patterns and cross-platform trends will be used to identify the
component systems tracts and bounding unconformities. 2) Develop a reliable
Middle to Late Cambrian accommodation curve of comparison to other published
curves to determine the degree of eustatic control on sequence development. 3)
Document the effects of sea-level fluctuations of all frequencies on early
diagenesis of Bonanza King carbonates. 4) Evaluate the textural, petrophysical
and geochemical changes that occur in early diagenetic facies during fluid-rock
interaction throughout burial. This study integrates the sequence stratigraphy
with the sea- level and diagenetic history recorded in the Bonanza King
Formation and is the first major attempt to decipher the diagenetic history of
early Paleozoic carbonates of the Cordilleran passive margin.