* 9205535
* Mathematical Sciences:  Theory and Applications of Homo-    clinic and Heteroclinic Bifurcation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Xiao-Biao Lin, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice Alexander
* 02/29/1996
* USD 135,000.00

The investigators continue research on homoclinic and heteroclinic bifurcation
and on several important applied problems in which homoclinic and heteroclinic
bifurcation theory are crucial. They continue work begun by Lin on spatially
patterned solutions of reaction-diffusion wquations near spatially homogeneous
solutions, represented by homoclinic orbits on heteroclinic cycles of the
reaction equation. They investigate a new approach, based on earlier work, to
the stability of stationary solutions of reaction-diffusion equations with small
diffusion that consist of regular and transition layers, in which the stability
would be checked layer by layer. They continue work begun by Schecter using
heteroclinic bifurcation theory to study the solutions of systems of
conservation laws. They also continue work on the stability and convergence of
numerical methods for finding homoclinic and heteroclinic orbits to
nonhyperbolic equilibria. It can happen that if one starts a dynamic process
near one of its steady states, the resulting orbit of the process goes far from
that state, then returns to the same or a different steady state. Such an orbit
is called homoclinic or heteroclinic respectively. These orbits turn out to be
key to understanding numerous phenomena in the sciences. The investigators
continue their studies of homoclinic and heteroclinic orbits, and of
mathematical aspects of them that are important in applications. One subject
they investigate is how two interacting dispersed populations can spontaneously
become organized into spatial patterns of varying population densities that
fluctuate over time, because of homoclinic or heteroclinic orbits in the
underlying dynamics. The second subject is an idea of Lin for understanding the
stability of propagating fronts, in chemical reactions, for example, by viewing
the fronts as heteroclinic orbits. The third subject is complicated waves that
arise in solutions of equations such as those that model the recovery of oil
from an underground reservoir when water is pumped in to force it out. These
waves can be viewed as heteroclinic orbits. The fourth subject is the robustness
and accuracy of numerical methods used to compute homoclinic and heteroclinic
orbits.