* 9205731
* Accretion and Core Formation in the Earth: Evidence from    Siderophile and Chalcophile Trace Elements
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Horton Newsom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1993
* USD 27,000.00

The abundances of siderophile and highly mobile elements will be used to
investigate the accretion of the Earth and the separation of the Earth's core
and crust from the Earth's mantle. Well characterized samples from different
geochemical reservoirs will be analyzed by neutron activation analysis and
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry for the moderately siderophile and
chalcophile trace elements Mo, W, As, Sb, and Pb and later for the platinum
group elements. The formation of the continental crust, involving the extra
enrichment of highly mobile elements including Pb, Cs, As, Sb, and W, will be
extended by analysis of a large suite of the Earth's oldest known rocks from
Canada. Crust formation processes will be studied in suites of volcanic arc
rocks for which data on other highly mobile elements are available, especially
10Be. The possible origin of hot spot plumes from near the core-mantle boundary
will be addressed by a study of the siderophile element content of samples from
both ocean island hot spots and continental flood basalts. The abundances of the
siderophile elements in different terrestrial reservoirs will be used to
determine the abundances in the bulk silicate Earth. These abundances provide
clues to accretion and metal segregation in the mantle, which will be evaluated
in quantitative models.