* 9205606
* Degradation and Transport of Recent Crinoid Ossicles at     San Salvador, Bahamas:  Part 2, the Winter Season
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Ronald Lewis, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 12/31/1993
* USD 22,747.00

Crinoid skeletal elements are a rare component in modern seafloor sediment, but
ancient crinoid ossicles are commonly abundant enough to be major constituents
of marine rocks. Thus, the study of fossilization processes of separate ossicles
is important for sedimentologists as well as for paleontologists. In order to
determine the effects of in-place degradation of crinoid ossicles, the elements
will be glued to plexiglass plates and fastened to concrete hemispheres on the
seafloor. Ossicles will also be glued to plexiglass rods buried vertically in
the seafloor sediment to study the effects of burial. These techniques have
already proven effective in a study of biologic degradation over the summer
months (March-September, 1991). Infesting and encrusting organisms and their
effects on the crinoid's calcite stereom are currently being studied using
ossicles left on the seafloor for periods from 5 days to 6 months. The proposed
research will focus on the winter months, using the same approach. Transport of
ossicles has not been observed directly in the summer, but is expected to be a
major part of the proposed research. Dye will be released into the water, grains
will be stained and monitored, and sediment traps designed to sample both
traction and suspended load will be used to measure ossicle transport directly
and indirectly. In addition, sediment samples will be taken along transect from
shore to shelf edge, and examined for ossicles transported from their living
sites.