* 9205674
* RUI: Seasonal Turnover of Organic Matrix Collagen in        Octocoral Spicules
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Roni Kingsley, University of Richmond
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 08/31/1996
* USD 136,336.00

Calcification is an extremely widespread phenomenon occurring in organisms as
diverse as bacteria, plants, sponges, clams and humans. Among the invertebrates,
there are calcified structures that cover or encase their bodies such as coral
reefs, snail shells, crab exoskeletons and sea urchin tests and spines. Other
invertebrates form numerous usually microscopic calcified structures that
impregnate the body called spicules or ossicles. The octocoral or sea whip
Leptogorgia virgulata is an excellent example of an animal possessing elaborate
spicules throughout its body. Like most invertebrate calcified structures, these
spicules contain an internal organic matrix that provides a framework for the
deposition of calcium carbonate. What is unusual, however, is our discovery that
this octocoral spicule matrix contains collagen, a protein that is critical in
the formation of bones and teeth, but is rarely associated with invertebrate
calcium carbonate structure. Furthermore, this octocoral collagen varies
seasonally, being predominant in the summer. This three-year project will
explore in depth the relationships between octocoral spicule calcification over
time will be studied using a variety of specific markers. For example,
tetracycline is a fluorescent marker and 45Ca is a radioactive calcification.
Radiolabelled proline and specific antibody markers that we have recently
developed, mark collagen synthesis. These components can be visualized through
fluorescence and transmission electron microscopy, and measured by quantifying
the amount of label present. Bone remodelling involves changes in acidity and
enzyme spicules using enzymatic reactions and other specific antibody markers.
An important dimension of this project is the involvement of student
investigators.