* 9205344
* Regulation of Protozoan Myosin-I Function
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Henry Zot, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1996
* USD 290,190.00

The goal of this proposal is to identify and characterize proteins that reguate
the interaction of the membrane-bound motor molecule, myosin-I, with
phospholipid surfaces such as cell membranes. Myosin-I is the only motor
molecule known to use a lipid surface as a substrate for motility, and because
cellular movement is accompanied by motile events at the leading edge of the
cell where myosin-I is concentrated, myosin-I is a likely candidate for driving
cell movement. To search for proteins that regulate myosin-I, extracts from
Acanthamoeba castellanii will be screened with three in vitro assays that
measure different activities of myosin-I: (1), a direct binding assay, to
determine the effect of regulatory proteins on myosin-I's association with
membranes; (2), ATPase activity to evaluate the effect of regulatory proteins on
myosin-I's enzyme activity; and (3), a motility assay to observe the effect of
regulatory proteins on myosin-I's ability to move actin filaments. After
regulatory proteins have been identified in these assays, specific proteins will
be purified using standard biochemical procedures and polyclonalantibodies to
each of these proteins will be produced. These antibodies will be used in the
above assays to test their effect on regulatory protein activities and in cells
to localize the regulatory proteins by immunostaining. These experiments will
provide important information on how myosin-I is organized at the cell membrane
and how myosin-I's activity is regulated. %%% Cellular motility is fundamental
to the life processes of unicellular organisms and essential to many
physiological activities of higher organisms, such as development, neuronal
growth, angiogenesis, defense mechanisms, wound healing, and organismal
locomotion. Cellular movement requires the coordination of membrane and
cytoskeletal systems. As a result of its lipid- binding properties, the
cytoskeletal motor protein myosin-I has been implicated in many membrane-
mediated motile processes. However, unlike other motor proteins (e.g., myosin-
II, kinesin, or dynein) it has not been possible thus far to show that mysoin-I
is required for some generalized cellular process. The problem of what myosin-I
does may not be easily solved solely by studying mysoin-I, since it appears
likely that multiple genes encode a family of myosin-I molecules with
overlapping functions. The results of this study will contribute to the
understanding of myosin-I's role in cell motility.