* 9205329
* Purchase of a Computer
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1993
* Kenneth Brown, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas C. Farrar
* 11/30/1993
* USD 71,090.00

The Department of Chemistry at Mississippi State University will use this award
from the Chemical Research Instrumentation Program to help acquire a medium-
range computing facility. The areas of chemical research that will be enhanced
by the acquisition include the following: 1. Theoretical Studies of Molecular
Structure and Reactivity. The proposed research includes software development,
accurate ab initio studies of conformational problems and weak interactions, and
semiempirical studies of solvation effects and large organometallic systems. 2.
Surface Analysis. Spectroscopic studies of chromatographic of surfaces will be
augumented with molecular modeling calculations. 3. Conformational Analysis
using NMR. Molecular modeling calculations will be used to generate three-
dimensional structures of vitamin B12 derivatives and neuropeptides from NMR-
data. %%% The computational demands of modern chemical research require the
proper computing system that would avoid wasteful bottlenecks by balancing a
variety of computational capabilities with individual workstations, networks,
hardware and software maintenance, support personnel and training in all areas
of computational chemistry. Many new insights into kinetics of chemical
reactions can be developed through theoretical studies with use of mini
supercomputers when the experimental data are inaccessible.