* 9205764
* Biochemistry of Hemoglobins and Oxygen Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Austen Riggs, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 225,000.00

A problem of major importance in biochemistry is the determination of mechanisms
by which different parts of proteins communicate with one another. The giant
200-subunit hemoglobin of the earthworm is an important model system for such
studies because ligand binding is highly cooperative and subunit assembly is
ligand-dependent and is controlled by pH and calcium ions. This laboratory has
determined the amino acid sequences of chains a, b and c that form a disulfide-
linked trimer, which, together with a 4th heme- containing chain (sequenced by
others) and non-heme linker chains, associate to form the full-sized molecule.
The goal is to determine the subunit association equilibria, their calcium and
pH dependence and their linkage with oxygen binding. These studies will form the
basis for understanding structure and function of the intact molecule. The
hemoglobins from a wide range of invertebrates and vertebrates aggregate upon
deoxygenation to form complexes of lower affinity for oxygen than the separate
components. This is a control mechanism of considerable physiological and
evolutionary importance. A major long-term goal is to determine the structures
of the associated complexes and the linkage between oxygen-binding and
aggregation in amphibian, avian and lamprey hemoglobins among vertebrates and
echinoderm and molluscan hemoglobins among invertebrates. %%% Many proteins in
nature are composed of smaller proteins which may be are identical or different.
These subunits can sometimes affect the structure of neighboring subunits and
thus cooperatively "communicate" with one another. The giant 200-subunit
hemoglobin of the earthworm is an important model system for such studies
because when certain molecules bind to one subunit many subunits change shape.
The subunit shape is controlled by pH and calcium ions. The primary structure is
known of subunits a, b and c that form a complex which, together with a 4th
heme-containing subunit, associate to form the full-sized molecule. The goal is
to determine how tightly the subunits associate, and what effect calcium and pH
have on this association and with oxygen binding. These studies will form the
basis for understanding structure and function of the intact molecule. The
hemoglobins from a wide range of invertebrates and vertebrates aggregate upon
deoxygenation to form complexes of lower affinity for oxygen than the separate
components. This is a control mechanism of considerable physiological and
evolutionary importance.