* 9205935
* The Limits to Copepod Growth: Resolving the Malthusian      Dilemma
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Michael Landry, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1995
* USD 90,042.00

Zooplankton are the major pathway for carbon transfer to higher trophic levels,
and to deeper water and the sediments. Estimates of zooplankton production are
critical in understanding how short and long term variations in primary
production affect these rates of carbon transfer. Drs. Landry, Huntley and Lopez
have hypothesized that copepod growth is predictable with first-orderprecision
from habitat temperature alone. If this relationship proves to be robust, we
will have a powerful tool for estimating zooplankton production. However, the
apparent simplicity of this relation raises major issues about plankton dynamics
since it denies the usual assumption that zooplankton are food-limited. These
investigators from the Universities of California and Hawaii will investigate
the thesis that, at the population level, food limitation of copepods operates
mainly through changes in mortality rate. They suggest that there is strong
evidence for this in fish populations where density dependence operates on the
mortality of the early life stages. Thus, the general solution of the Malthusian
dilemma for marine populations is to die young rather than starve later. They
will address these key questions in the following ways: - (1) Direct
measurements of the generation times of a variety of warm-water copepod species,
to fill a critical gap in the database; - (2) Experimental testing of the
hypothesis that size-specific predation pressure can compensate for the effects
of food-limited growth rate by increasing apparent development rate at the
population level.