* 9205968
* Dendroclimatic Characterization of Southwestern             Paleoclimate During the Past 2000 Years
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Donald Graybill, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1993
* USD 52,163.00

Drs. Dean and Graybill will continue their dendroclimatological work to
reconstruct past climates in the United States Southwest. Because the size and
configuration of annual growth rings in trees are affected by changes in
rainfall and other environmental variables, it is possible to use them to
reconstruct past climatic change. Also, since tree rings are deposited on an
annual basis, they permit an accurate dating of this change. Drs. Dean and
Graybill will add to an already substantial data base through the analysis of
additional cores from living trees in Arizona, New Mexico, Utah, and Colorado.
Their preliminary work show a major climatic peturbation at approximately 1300
AD; this corresponds to a time of major cultural change in the Southwest. The
Arizona team will focus their attention on this issue. They will reconstruct
changing annual and seasonal variations in precipitation, temperature, growing
season length, the Palmer Drought Severity Index, and changes in stream flow.
The Southwestern United States saw the rise, in pre Hispanic times, of complex
cultures which covered large portions of several states. These archaeological
complexes expanded and contracted over time and the largest disintegrated before
the arrival of the Spanish. Archaeologists have hypothesized that these cultural
changes were in fact responses to variation in the environment and that the
Southwest offers an excellent change and human response. The tree ring data will
significantly aid in analyses of this kind. This research will be important not
only for archaeologists, but also paleoecologists and scientists interested in
climate dynamics and changes. Changes in temperature and precipitation which are
of such concern today occurred many times in the past. It is important both to
understand them and to learn how human societies responded.