* 9205511
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Experimental Study of Downstream   Fining in Coarse-Grained River Channels
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Peter Wilcock, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1995
* USD 82,458.00

This is a renewal of a 2-year project whose overall goal is to study downstream
fining by aggradation and selective deposition in gravels. The main results so
far have produced downstream fining by a factor of two in a channel 50 m long
and 0.3 m wide at the St. Anthony Falls Hydraulic Laboratory (SAFHL),
demonstrating unequivocally that selective deposition is an effective fining
mechanism and that it can be studied in laboratory experiments. In parallel
experiments at Johns Hopkins University (JHU), a novel colored-grain system is
providing the fractional-transport data base needed to perdict the fining
observed at SAFHL. This phrase now involves a series of runs a SAFHL with a
channel width of 2.0 m; this will produce braided topography, enabling
invesitgation of the effect of lateral sorting and topography on downstream
fining. The present fractional-transport program at JHU, will continue adding
components on the effect of sediment feed versus recirculation and the influence
of small-scale sedimentary features. Finally, a concurrent set of runs at MIT to
examine local lateral sorting in a 1.0 m wide channel as well as the effects of
varying deposit geometry and percent extraction is planned. This research seems
as the first real connection between engineering hydraulics and fluvial
sedimentology and represents fundamental research related to sediment transport
mechanics.