* 9205435
* Applications of Radiogenic Isotope Geochemistry to Studies  of Igneous and Hydrothermal Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Alexander Halliday, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Maryellen Cameron
* 06/30/1996
* USD 550,500.00

This is for continued support of three separate programs of research in
radiogenic isotope geochemistry as applied to hydrothermal processes, silicic
magma systems and mantle geochemistry. 1. The research in hydrothermal processes
will emphasize the further development of techniques for determining the timing
and scales of fluid movement. These techniques may include dating of fluid
inclusions, dating of sulfides, dating of carbonates, phosphates and accessory
mineral overgrowths, and REE analysis of a variety of hydrothermal phases
including sulfides and fluorite. Research will be concentrated on MIssissippi
Valley Type (MVT) deposits and pluton-related mineralization in the U.S. and
U.K. 2. Studies of silicic magma systems will focus on dating of magma
differentiation using Rb-Sr techniques, the longevity of magma chamber residence
by resolving differentiation ages from eruption ages, and the study of mass
transfer within silicic systems. A number of systems in the U.S. and elsewhere
have been chosen for study. 3. Current research on the geochemistry of the
mantle under the Cameroon line is to be expanded to study trace element
enrichment processes as a function of lithospheric age using lavas and/or
ultramafic xenoliths from various volcanic centers. In addition, techniques for
dating young MORB using 40Ar-39Ar are being developed.