* 9205892
* RUI:  Structure and Catalytic Mechanism of Plant Carbonic   Anhydrase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Roger Rowlett, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 02/29/1996
* USD 110,000.00

Dr. Rowlett will isolate and purify carbonic anhydrase, an enzyme thought to be
important species such as corn. Once isolated in pure form, he will examine the
structure of the enzyme and several laboratory-modified derivatives using UV-
visible spectroscopy, and powerful X-ray absorption techniques. Dr. Rowlett also
proposed to investigate the catalytic role of plant carbonic anhydrase in detail
using nuclear magnetic resonance and stopped-flow spectroscopy methods which are
capable of picking apart individual chemical steps in their mechanism of action.
%%% Although carbonic anhydrases of animal origin are well-known, plant carbonic
anhydrases are poorly understood, and what little is known indicates that the
plant enzyme is evolutionarily distinct from carbonic anhydrases of animal
origin. Thus, the characterization of plant carbonic anhydrases is highly
significant, for two reasons. First, plant and animal carbonic anhydrase may
represent one of a few pairs of enzymes in nature which have evolved from
different origins to arrive at an identical function (convergent evolution). By
comparing the structures of such convergently evolved enzymes, it will likely be
possible to distinguish the essential and nonessential features of protein
structure responsible for chemical catalysis. Second, the study of the catalytic
ability of plant carbonic anhydrase may help resolve the exact function of plant
carbonic anhydrase in photosynthesis, a function that is currently unknown,
primarily because of a lack of fundamental information about the catalytic
ability of the enzymes.