* 9205931
* Pelagic to Benthic Coupling of Recruitment in the American  Lobster (Homarus americanus)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1992,09/01/1992
* Richard Wahle, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/01/1992
* USD 42,918.00

Rates of larval settlement may be a major determinant of subsequent year-class
size for many benthic invertebrates. However it is often difficult to elucidate
the relative importance of pre- and post-settlement processes to spatial and
temporal variability in recruitment. The American lobster, Homarus americanus,
recruits from a pelagic postlarva to shelter- providing benthic substrata, but
little is understood about the regulating factors or the consequences of this
process. This project will examine the linkage from late pelagic to early
benthic phase along the central coast of Maine, where shallow subtidal cobble
provides prime recruitment habitat. Previous studies from 1989-1991 suggest that
lobster recruitment at some sites may be limited by larval supply, whereas
others may be limited by the availability of suitable habitat. This study will
utilize an experimental approach at two different sites that consistently
represents the extremes in recruitment density despite apparent similarities of
the habitats. At these sites habitat manipulations and postlarval seeding
experiments will test the influence of postlarval supply, habitat quality, and
density-dependent processes on benthic recruitment. Hydrographic data will be
collected to examine possible differences in stratification as well as absolute
temperature structure that may influence postlarval diving behavior.