* 9205844
* Diversity of Terrestrial Locomotor Design: Mechanics and    Energetics
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Robert Full, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John A. Phillips
* 08/31/1996
* USD 283,521.00

The general objective of the proposed research is to determine the limits of
performance during non-steady state, intermittent activity in order to reveal
general principles of organismal design. Our objective will be accomplished by
exploiting the enormous variation in the way animals are built for legged
terrestrial locomotion. Energy, oxygen transport and musculo- skeletal systems
have been well studied during steady-state, constant speed locomotion, but these
systems must also function under non-steady state, transient conditions. We
propose to test whether or not performance limits established under steady-state
exercise is conducted intermittently. We will determine the extent to which
endurance during intermittent locomotion in arthropods is dependent on exercise
period duration, pause period duration, the ratio of exercise to pause duration,
and the speed during the exercise period. We will also test whether or not the
cost of intermittent locomotion, both per time and per distance, is more
expensive than continuous locomotion at the same average speed when both aerobic
and anaerobic sources are considered. Finally, we will determine the
physiological correlates of intermittent exercise performance. We will both
measure and model correlates of fatigue causing agents that accumulate during
exercise periods, but are removed, reduced or cleared during the pause periods
and fatigue causing agents that accumulate during the pause periods. The
proposed research on intermittent locomotion attempts to advance the previous
paradigm based on steady-state locomotion and takes the next step logical to the
development of a general theory of activity.