* 9205744
* Downhole Logs as Paleoclimate Tools:  A Case Study from     Ocean Drilling Project Leg 128, Sea of Japan
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Roger Anderson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 07/31/1995
* USD 125,000.00

The primary goal of this proposal is to reconstruct continuous, quantitative
biogenic and terrigenous deposition records from downhole logs and core data at
ODP Site 798 on the Oki Ridge, Sea of Japan. We employ an innovative and
efficient research strategy whereby continuous, multivariable log data are
calibrated using "ground-truth" sediment lithological information obtained from
cores. Site 798 was the Leg 128 target for a complete late Neogene
paleoceanographic "reference" section for this climatically-important region;
however, sporatic core recovery precludes a solely core-based reconstruction of
these records below ca. 1 Myr. We describe separate core-based and log-based
lines of research whose products will be merged to reconstruct sediment
component percentage and flux records for the last 3 Myr. Discrete core sections
are analyzed for biogenic opal, carbonate, organic carbon, and terrigenous
percent using contiguous 30-cm "channel" samples which mimic log resolution. Ash
layers provide accurate core-log depth correlations, and oxygen isotopic data
are used to define glacial-interglacial stratigraphy, sedimentation rates, and
phasing relationships. New computational techniques developed by Schlumberger-
Doll Research are used to enhance the log resolution and sensitivity. These and
other statistical techniques are used to quantitatively relate specific
electrical, chemical, and physical log responses to the measured core
lithological variations. The continuous percentage and flux records developed
from this research provide us with an unique opportunity to: 1) Evaluate the
utility of downhole logging methods to paleoclimate research, and 2) Understand
the Pliocene-Pleistocene evolution of Japan Sea paleoceanography and
paleoclimate within the context of other global climate records.