* 9205938
* Limits to Prolonged Planktonic Life among Larvae of TropicalBenthic Invertebrates and its Biogeographic Consequences
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1994
* Jan Pechenik, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1994
* USD 43,082.00

The widespread existence of teleplanic or "long distance" larvae of sublittoral
invertebrates in the tropical epipelagic waters of the central Pacific, Atlantic
and Indian Oceans supports the hypothesis that larvae contribute importantly not
only to initial colonization of oceanic islands and, more generally, to the
present continuous or disjunct ranges of such species, but also to the
continuing genetic exchange among islands or even between islands and far
distant continental populations. However, no one has yet demonstrated in any
systematic way that teleplanic larvae are capable of metamorphosing at the time
of their collection in the open sea. We do not yet know whether teleplanic
larvae are physiologically adapted for remaining planktonic over long periods of
time or whether the lack of further growth already documented instead is due to
low phytoplankton concentrations in the open ocean. The future research will
address these two questions 1) by obtaining larvae in the open ocean and
ascertain experimentally whether or not these larvae are competent to
metamorphose, (2) by maintaining larvae in the laboratory to determine whether
individuals that would not metamorphose in the sea eventually become competent
to metamorphose, and 3) by determining whether or not teleplanic larvae are
physiologically capable of further growth given adequate phytoplankton
concentrations or alternatively whether growth stasis, i.e., a quasi-
holoplanktonic state, is achieved.