* 9205970
* Cellular, Molecular, and Genetic Analysis of Meristem       Initiation and Organization
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1996
* Ian Sussex, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1996
* USD 320,000.00

Apical meristems are responsible for the production of the entire postembryonic
plant, aerial and subterranean. The sites at which meristems are initiated, and
their patterns of development, growth, and arrest are responsible for the
establishment of the architectural patterns of the shoot and root systems. These
architectural patterns contribute to the overall light harvesting efficiency,
water and nutrient absorption, and productivity of the plant. For these reasons,
and for gaining increased understanding of basic plant developmental processes,
it is important to analyze the ways in which meristems are initiated, organized,
and function. The experiments that Dr. Sussex will carry out are based on the
assumption that the initiation and organization of lateral root meristems
represents a developmental pathway consisting of a sequence of genetically
controlled molecular and cellular events. The experiments are designed to
dissect this pathway in the following ways. First, he will define cellular
events that occur early in lateral root meristem formation, including the
contribution of cell cycle events and the role of cortical microtubule arrays;
second, he will analyze the regulation of genes that are expressed during
initiation and early development of lateral root meristems; third, he will
isolate, map, and analyze mutants in lateral root meristem initiation and
organization, and order the pathway into a temporal sequence. He will relate the
cellular and molecular aspects of lateral root development genetically by
comparing them in wild type and in mutants for lateral root development, and
experimentally by uncoupling lateral root development from cell division and DNA
replication.