* 9205702
* Expression and Biochemical Characterization of              Arabidopsis Calmodulin Isoforms
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Raymond Zielinski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1996
* USD 300,000.00

This project is aimed toward the elucidation of intracellular signalling
pathways that involve calcium in the transduction of hormonal and environmental
stimuli in higher plants. The current project focuses on the part of the signal
transduction pathway that involves the interaction between calcium and
calmodulin, and the consequent activation of specific target enzymes. The
preliminary work for this project established the existence of four different
calmodulin isoforms encoded by at least six different genomic DNA sequences from
Arabidopsis thaliana. This diversity of calmodulin isoforms is unprecedented in
either the plant or animal kingdoms, and preliminary phylogenetic analyses
suggest that this arrangement may be unique to Arabidopsis or to the crucifer
family. These findings have led to the hypothesis that the different Arabidopsis
calmodulin isoforms have evolved to optimize the interaction of calmodulin with
specific target enzymes, particularly target enzymes associated with membranes.
%%% This project is directed toward intracellular signal transduction pathways
in higher plants. At present, there is only a general understanding of these
processes in the plant kingdom. The preliminary data demonstrate the existence
of multiple isoforms of the calcium-binding elicitor protein, calmodulin, in
Arabidopsis thaliana. This unexpected result may underlie significant
differences between plants and other organisms in the mechanisms of signal
reception and transduction.