* 9205181
* Mathematical Sciences: Proof Theory and Computational       Complexity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Samuel Buss, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1995
* USD 73,800.00

The research of Samuel Buss deals with formal systems of mathematical logic and
with low-level complexity and the interrelationships between these subjects. The
logical systems to be studied include fragments of arithmetic, especially
bounded arithmetic, and pure first-order logic and propositional logic. The low-
level complexity classes to be studied include alternating log time and the
polynomial time hierarchy. He is particularly concerned with developing new and
fruitful connections between computational complexity and the proof theory of
formal systems. Past research has already established intimate connections
between these areas. This project concerns primarily (1) formal theories with
proof-theoretic strength closely related to various computational complexity
classes and (2) the structure of first- order and propositional proofs,
especially, the lengths of proofs. Proof theory is concerned with such
properties of proofs as their length, correctness being understood and taken for
granted. Thus a typical result might assert that the proposition P is a deeper
result than the proposition Q in the sense that any proof of P (in a specific
formal system) is longer than some known proof of Q (in the same system). A
slightly more complicated type of result considers a sequence of propositions
P1, P2, P3, ..., Pn, ..., all provable both in the formal system F and in the
formal system G. If, for example, the lengths of the best proofs of these
propositions in F grow in length as the square of n, while their best proofs in
G grow exponentially in n, then it would seem that F is a more powerful system
than G. Buss has found ways to relate questions of this nature to complexity
classes of arithmetic functions that have already been studied by computer
scientists.