* 9205853
* Infrastructure and Research Program for Signal              Processing in Multimedia Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1999
* S. McGrath, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/1999
* USD 1,842,730.00

The objective of this proposal is to establish an infrastructure for signal
processing in multimedia systems. Equipment will be acquired, installed, and
integrated into an existing research environment consisting of networked UNIX
workstations and minicomputers. This equipment will provide the capabilities to
acquire multimedia signals, including image, video, speech, audio, text, and
fax; store and access these signals on high-speed, high- capacity disk storage
subsystems; process them using custom high- speed, real-time, DSP microcomputer-
based processors, hosted by UNIX workstations; communicate a variety of these
signals between workstations over a high-speed fiber network; and output the
processed signals at their intended destinations. Special-purpose systems - an
HDTV workstation, and a custom DSP multiprocessor - will be integrated into the
infrastructure to allow for real-time processing of high-resolution video
sequences and images. The goal of this infrastructure is to build an environment
in which the DSP algorithms, which will play a major role in the growth of
multimedia technology, may be developed in such a fashion as to lead directly to
real-time implementations of those algorithms. The companion part to this
infrastructure is a program of research based on this environment, to be
conducted in areas with immediate and urgent application to the problems facing
multimedia information systems. This includes real-time video encoding,
concentrating on the problems of inter- and intra-frame redundancy elimination.
Advances in this area will lead to affordable applications in a host of areas
such as video mail, video messaging, real-time video communications, and
interactive learning and presentations.