* 9205567
* Application of Latest Cretaceous-Paleogene Fossil           Vertebrates from South-Central Wyoming to Study of Laramide Evolution of the Rocky Mountains
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Jason Lillegraven, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 12/31/1994
* USD 106,028.00

The Hanna and Carbon coal basins of south-central Wyoming became structurally
defined during the Laramide Orogeny. The Hanna Basin is unique among depocenters
of the Rocky Mountain foreland (within the province of Laramide-style
deformation) in its thick sedimentary accumulation (Upper Cretaceous through
lower Eocene,> 32,000 ft) relative to its to its short map dimensions (24x40
mi). In comparison with other Wyoming foreland depressions, the Hanna Basin
provides an extreme case in terms of rates of basinal subsidence, adjacent
contemporaneous uplift, syntectonic deposition, and intervening episodes of
major basin-margin erosion. However, temporal constraints on the depositional
and structural evolution of the Hanna/Carbon basins are rudimentary. Use of
vertebrate fossils linked to described sections of the Ferris and Hanna
formations will provide the first detailed determinations of (1) relative age
relationships within the thick sequence of uppermost Cretaceous through lower
Eocene strata, (2) rates of deposition, and (3) timing and estimates of
magnitude of basinal and basin-margin reverse-faulting and adjacent uplift. A
temporally controlled series of interpretive geological cross-sections,
extending southward into the Hanna Basin from its northerly, adjacent ranges,
will be developed following completion of surifical geological description
allied with analysis of cobble provenance. Additional important research
components of the Hanna/Carbon basin project include (1) paleogeographic and
biostratigraphic interpretations of ubiquitous shark teeth collected from
Paleocene fluvial sections of the Hanna Formation, and (2) description and
interpretation of vertebrate faunal changes across the Mesozoic-Cenozoic
boundary. Knowledge derived from various elements of the project will allow, for
the first time, quantitative comparisons of the greater Hanna Basin's evolution
with other, better understood, Rocky Mountain foreland basins.