* 9205767
* Radiogenic Isotope Systematics of Granitoid Weathering: the                  Influence of Climate and Glacial History.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Yigal Erel, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1995
* USD 138,157.00

The proposed research will utilize Pb and Sr isotope systematics to investigate
weathering rates and mechanisms in areas of granitoid bedrock. Waters, soils and
bedrock will be investigated from drainages with variable glacial histories in
arctic, temperate and tropical regions. Pb and Sr are well suited for this study
because each has highly variable isotope ratios in granitic minerals, the two
elements are concentrated into different minerals, and they have complementary
aquatic behavior. Pb is relatively immobile in the hydrocycle (adsorbed by
O-donor surface groups), whereas Sr is mobile in the hydrocycle (remains in
solution). Pb and Sr isotopes studied in conjunction with other trace metals,
major cations and anions can be used to look through secondary geochemical and
biochemical processes and directly determine the relative rates of weathering of
the various bedrock minerals. This study will have applications to estimations
of modern weathering rates and mechanism in areas of variable climate and
glacial history. We will also investigate the effects of global climate change
of weathering by studying the fluvial and lacustrine record of changes in the
isotopic composition of Pb (in Fe-Mn oxide coatings on sediment particles) and
Sr (in calcareous shells) released by weathering back through the stratigraphic
record of glacial and interglacial cycles.