* 9205213
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Sucrose Metabolism in     Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Karen Koch, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Hans J. Bohnert
* 06/30/1996
* USD 250,000.00

Import and metabolism of sucrose is essential to growth and development of non-
photosynthetic cells in the vast majority of plant species. Only two enzymatic
reactions can catalyze sucrose breakdown; sucrose synthase or invertase. The
physiological significance of each pathway has been widely debated. Recent
advances in molecular analysis of the genes encoding these enzymes have opened
up exciting possibilities for resolving these issues. We have previously shown
that the sucrose synthase genes of maize are differentially regulated by sugar
availability. Recently we have been able to extend this combined molecular
genetic and physiological approach to the invertase genes in maize. A cDNA clone
for maize invertase and identified maize lines with genetic deficiencies in
invertase expression has been isolated. In particular, we have focused a maize
genotype that specifically lacks invertase activity in the primary root system,
leaving the whole plant free from direct effects of the deficiency. These
proposed experiments will: 1) Characterize a pair of maize invertase genes -
their structure, expression, and physilogical function, 2) Determine the genetic
basis and physiological consequences of a primary root invertase deficiency in
maize, 3) Test the effects of double and triple mutant combinations of sucrose
synthase and invertase deficiencies.