* 9205665
* Structure-Function Studies of Lipid Binding Proteins from   Intestine
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1998
* David Cistola, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1998
* USD 458,865.00

Unlike other tissues, the small intestine abundantly expresses more than one
(actually four) homologous lipid binding protein (LBP) in the same cell type.
These proteins exhibit differences in lipid- binding specificities and
stoichiometries, regional expression, and developmental regulation. Because of
these differences, the LBP homologues represent excellent model systems for
investigating structural differentiation within a gene family of lipid-transport
proteins. The overall objective of the proposed research is to determine and
compare the structural and dynamic properties of three LBPs in solution using
NMR and recombinant DNA techniques. The specific aims are: (i) to purify large
quantities of native and isotope-enriched proteins from bacteria using suitably
constructed prokaryotic expression vectors, (ii) to establish sequence-specific
proton, carbon-13, and nitrogen-15 resonance assignments for each protein using
isotope-directed multidimensional NMR methods, and (iii) to use the resulting
assignments. for each protein to define and compare their structures, dynamics
and detailed interactions with bound lipids. A detailed comparison of the
solution structures and lipid interactions with these transport proteins will
yield fundamental information regarding the molecular determinants of ligand
specificity, stoichiometry, and affinity and provide insights into their
individual functions. %%% This research involves the study and comparison of
three similar but distinct proteins found in the lining of the small intestine.
These three proteins are thought to play a role the absorption and processing of
fatty substances absorbed from the diet. They are not presently known to be
linked to any disease state involving cholesterol or fats. However, the
individual functions of these proteins are not well understood. The goal of this
research is to develop a complete picture of the molecular architecture of these
three proteins so that their individual molecular properties and roles in fat
metabolism and transport can be understood. To do this, we are taking advantage
of state-of-the art magnetic resonance methods (NMR), combined with recombinant
DNA procedures. It is likely that the information obtained will provide insights
into how these and other similar proteins achieve specificity as carriers of
fatty substances.