* 9205321
* Organizing ALBICORE Workshop:  Milankovitch Forcing of      Climate and Oceans in the Greenhouse State (100 MA BP)
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1993
* David Bottjer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 05/31/1993
* USD 15,250.00

Funds will support an international workshop devoted to the organization of an
international program (ALBICORE) to investigate global patterns of climatic-
oceanic response to orbital forcing in the Mid-Cretaceous greenhouse (ca. 100
million years BP). Our work in the Italian Albian has revealed sedimentary and
paleontological oscillations with periods corresponding to those of the orbital
variations. Such responses of different sorts have been recorded in other
Mesozoic stratigraphic sequences, but remain isolated cases. Greenhouse climates
responded to orbital forcing, but application to a better understanding of
Climates and Geochronology calls for developing a global picture of the
responses for a given time. ALBICORE is designed to foment international work on
such a time-slice - the Albian sub-zone of Ticinella praeticinensis. The
workshop seeks (1) to generate interest by showing what has been accomplished,
and the promise of extending such work; (2) to demonstrate the multidisciplinary
techniques (sedimentological, paleontological, geochemical and geophysical) that
we have developed and found useful, and to discuss alternatives and
improvements; and (3) to develop an overall plan of procedure, including (a) a
set of tactical ACTION GROUPS that would undertake the drilling of cores and
their analysis, (b) ADVISORY COMMITTEES that would serve to advise on techniques
and would be helpful in finding laboratory facilities, and (c) a STEERING
COMMITTEE that would coordinate the global effort.