* 9205027
* A Coupled Model of the Effects of Planetary Waves on the    Zonally Averaged State of the Middle Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1992,12/31/1995
* John Boyd, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 12/31/1995
* USD 127,555.00

The circulation of the middle atmosphere is driven by complex interactions of
chemical, physical, and dynamical processes. Ideally this circulation should be
simulated with a fully three dimensional model, but to do so can be
computationally prohibitive. For this reason, and also in order to isolate
certain processes for in-depth studies, researchers rely on simpler models for
much of their work. In designing simpler models, researchers endeavor to make
them as realistic as possible. Under her last award, the principal investigator
coupled a quasi-geostrophic time-dependent wave model to a zonally averaged
(two-dimensional) chemical- radiative-dynamical model of the middle atmosphere
(principally the stratosphere). The wave model is used to determine the driving
of the mean flow by Rossby waves and subsequently the eddy transport of chemical
species. Her goal was to obtain more realistic simulations of stratospheric
circulation and associated trace species transport than would be possible with
the two dimensional model alone. With this renewal award, Dr. Smith will
continue her research on the middle atmosphere. The coupled model will be made
more realistic with the addition of an interactive lower boundary at the
tropopause. The principal objective then will be to assess the quality of the
coupled model's dynamical interactions and the ability to simulate transport of
chemical species (the distribution of which also affects the circulation). The
coupled model will be compared in detail with a fully nonlinear three
dimensional model of the stratosphere to determine the ability of the wave model
to represent transport processes.