* 9205506
* The Southwest Archaeological Obsidian Project
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* M. Steven Shackley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1994
* USD 17,653.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Steven Shackley will continue his
work to locate and characterize obsidian deposits in the U.S. Southwest. The
research will proceed in several stages. First he will use energy-dispersive
X-ray fluorescence analysis to convert semiquantitative data from materials
already collected into quantitative form. This will aid future analysis and
facilitate interlaboratory comparison. Secondly he will work to discover the
location of other obsidian sources which, through analysis of their byproducts,
are known to have been used by prehistoric peoples. The work will be focussed in
Arizona and western New Mexico and will proceed through the use of regional
geological maps and interview with local rock collectors. Because obsidian is
often found in alluvial deposits, he will search for such sources as well.
Finally Dr. Shackley will collect samples from known sites to determine the
degree of intrasource variability. This will help him to determine the degree of
confidence with which archaeological artifacts can be tied to individual
sources. Obsidian, or "volcanic glass" is intensively studied by archaeologists
for two reasons. First, when fractured it forms and maintains extremely sharp
cutting edges and therefore was prized by prehistoric peoples for making tools.
It is often found in archaeological sites in many parts of the world. Secondly
different sources usually have descrete chemical signatures and elemental
analysis often permits one to tie a sample to a specific source area. Through
analysis of archaeological obsidian it is often possible to reconstruct
prehistoric patterns of trade and movement. This in turn provides insight into
subsistence, social and political organization. For this process to work however
it is essential to locate and characterize all source areas and this goal lies
at the core of Dr. Shackley's work. This project is important for several
reasons. It will improve and expand a data base which will be widely be used by
archaeologists. It will also shed light into the lifeways of prehistoric
inhabitants of the United States Southwest.