* 9205703
* Enhanced Radiocarbon Chronology from Ohio:  A Northern      Hemisphere Glacial Geologic Test of Alternate Glacial       Climate Hypothesis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Thomas Lowell, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1995
* USD 145,186.00

The goal of the proposed research is to recover a detailed record of Laurentide
Ice Sheet fluctuations in southern Ohio during the last glacial cycle to test
climate-change hypotheses. Multiple (~150) radiocarbon ages from organic
materials associated with glacial deposits of the Miami and Scioto sublobes will
delineate a high-resolution chronology (e.g. glacial phases dated to within
30014C years) and architecture of these ice marginal changes through the last
glacial maximum. This record by itself will clarify the behavior of southern
sector of the huge Laurentide Ice Sheet (a key component of the ice-age climate
system). It may also be an important repository of climatic change. If so, this
basic stratigraphic record will be the basis for tests between at least two
current hypotheses of ice-age climate. The first suggest that orbital changes
drive ice sheets which in turn drive climate, thus predicting specific leads and
lags between ice sheet growth and climate change. The second view suggests that
ice-age climate changes result from abrupt ocean-atmospheric reorganizations,
thus predicting widespread, synchronous changes across the global cryosphere-
atmosphere-hydrosphere system. For example, the second hypothesis requires that
glacial fluctuations in various parts of the Northern Hemisphere will be in
phase and that these in turn, will be concurrent with glacial fluctuations in
the Southern Hemisphere. Present stratigraphic interpretations of southern
Laurentide fluctuations in Ohio are inadequate to delineate ice- sheet dynamics
or test any climate theories because they have not fully considered the genesis
of glacial deposits and have only weak (+2,00014C years) chronologic control.