* 9205191
* Rock Magnetic and Pedogenic Studies of the Paleoclimate     Record of Loess Deposits
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Kenneth Verosub, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1996
* USD 240,000.00

Sequences of paleosols and loess units throughout the world have been
interpreted as geologic records of terrestrial climate change. Of particular
significance has been the discovery of a correlation between variations in the
magnetic susceptibility in the Chinese loess sequence and the oxygen isotope
record of the deep sea. Using an approach that combines rock magnetic
measurements with a soil chemistry extraction procedure, we have obtained new
data that challenges previous interpretations about the origin and nature of the
magnetic susceptibility signal. In this proposal we request support for a
comprehensive, interdisciplinary study of the rock magnetism and soil chemistry
of paleosol/loess sequences in China and elsewhere. The goals of our study are
1) to complete our determination of the general characteristics of the magnetic
susceptibility signal using a combination of rock magnetic and soil chemistry
techniques, 2) to compare our rock magnetic analyses of the Chinese
loess/paleosol sequence with similar analyses of loess/paleosols sequences in
Alaska and New Zealand, and 3) to obtain complete soil descriptions and detailed
profiles of soil chemistry and rock magnetic properties from selected loess and
paleosols units. The work for this last objective will be done in close
collaboration with Chinese colleagues.