* 9205409
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1992,05/31/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 05/31/1994
* USD 10,000.00

Migration theory emphasizes the various ways in which social networks based on
family, kin, and ethnic ties are established by expatriate communities in
response to new political, economic, and social circumstances. Missing from this
genre of research is insight into how gender interacts with ethnicity and class
in the process of migration and settlement. Much research has overlooked the
importance of international migrations within the Third World, focusing instead
on labor migration from economically less well developed to more developed
countries. This research project will examine the abrupt and large population
movement of Indians in Tanzania in the period 1960- 1990 as a means of
understanding the complex processes of large scale migration within the Third
World. The study will highlight how groups of migrants were affected by and
responded to geographical differences in social, economic, and political
conditions associated with migration. Data from archives in both India and
Tanzania will be combined with personal interviews and participant observation
of migrants to test hypotheses relating gender, class, caste, age, and family
structure to particular migration streams to and within Tanzania. Within the
past century, and particularly since the breakup of colonial empires, there have
been substantial migrations of people into Africa. One of the most dynamic
situations has involved the migration of Asian Indians into and with the country
of Tanzania. This project will not only provide documentation of this
phenomenon, but it will also explain how such disruptions help to redefine
ethnic boundaries, gender relations, and class hierarchies under changing
political and economic conditions.