* 9205890
* Implicit attitudes, implicit stereotypes, and prejudices
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Anthony Greenwald, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 12/31/1994
* USD 52,545.00

ABSTRACTS This research will investigate implicit sterotypes and attitudes.
These evaluations are predicted to occur when critical attributes of a social
stimulus that control judgment (e.g., stimatizing attibutes such as gender,
race, SES) are not at the respondent's focus of attention. In Part 1, a
procedure will be used in which the attribute of fame is incorrectly assigned as
a result of a bias in memory caused by perceptual familiarity. This procedure is
used to identify that equal familiarity with male and female names results in a
higher probability of assigning false fame to male than female names. Variations
of this procedure will be used to identify the unconscious nature and limiting
conditions of this bias, Part 2 will establish the generality of this
phenononmenon to another social category, by using names that vary in perceived
race and ethnicity, and judgments such as criminal and politician. Part 3 will
present a method to study implicit attitudes, and attempts to conceptually
differentiate the (cognitive) stereotype construct from the (affective) attitude
construct. This research is designed to examine whether discrimination can be
controlled by implicit stereotypes even in the presence of positive implicit
attitudes. Together, the 3-part program of research seeks to demonstrate the
value of implicit measures of stereotyping and prejudice, to provide
understanding of the subtle yet powerful information processing mechanisms by
which biases in evaluation are produced, and to question the currently dominant
conception that such evaluations operate primarily within consciousness.