* 9205792
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Integrated Biostratigraphy and     K-bentonite Chronostratigraphy in the Middle Ordovician of  the Northern Appalachian Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1992,09/30/1994
* Charles Mitchell, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 09/30/1994
* USD 62,635.00

The late Middle and early Upper Ordovician carbonate and siliciclastic rocks of
the Trenton Group in the northern Appalachian foreland basin enclose a large
number of altered volcanic ash beds (K-bentonites) deposited from Plinian
eruptions on an off-shore volcanic arc. These strata also form part of the
standard reference section of the North American Ordovician time scale as well
as the reference standard for the conodont and graptolite biozonations commonly
used for temporal correlation in this interval. The goal of the research is to
employ geochemical fingerprinting of unaltered phenocrysts within the
K-bentonites together with new and detailed studies of the ranges of graptolite
and conodont species to integrate these separate stratigraphies into a unified
chronostratigraphic network. We propose to accomplish this by 1) establishing
precise ties between the graptolite zones and the North Atlantic and
midcontinent conodont zones based on detailed collecting of range data from
numerous measured sections that each span the facies transition from Trenton
Group carbonates into the Utica Shale and 2) establishing precise ties between
the laterally equivalent siliciclastic and carbonate facies based on the
identification of synchronous time planes through geochemical fingerprinting of
the K-bentonites. The techniques to be employed for K-bentonite correlation
include analysis of 1) major and trace element composition of melt inclusions
within quartz phenocrysts. Additionally, we propose to use high precision U-Pb
zircon geochronometry to calibrate our chronostratigraphy. The resulting
chronostratigraphy will provide a temporal framework, calibrated in years, that
will provide a direct test of the accuracy of the existing graptolite and
conodont biostratigraphies as well as sequence stratigraphic and
coenocorrelation studies of these rocks. This chronostratigraphy will constitute
the temporal framework necessary for studies of the rate of evolution among
graptolites and other organisms that occur in the studied sections.
Simultaneously, the K-bentonite geochemical and geochronological data will
provide unique insights about the tectonic provenance of these altered volcanic
ash beds and the nature and duration of Taconic orogenic events.