* 9205269
* The Role of Dehydration-Induced Proteins in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1998
* Timothy Close, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/1998
* USD 510,000.00

Water is important to plants during all stages of development. The lack of
sufficient water can place strains on plants, which may result in decreased
yields or increased susceptibility to disease. Yet plants not only survive but
proliferate on land, even in water- limited environments such as semi-arid areas
and deserts. This remarkable ability to tolerate seemingly inhospitable
conditions is due to the cumulative effects of nmerous adaptive properties that
exist within plants. In seed-bearing plants the best example of such
adaptability is the seed itself, which often remains alive in a relatively dry
state for many years. Studies over the last decade have demonstrated that
growing plants and the embryos (or germ) within dry seeds have much in common at
the cellular and biochemical level. For example, certain proteins that
accumulate within the cells of growing plants during water-limitation are also
found in embryo cells during their normal maturation drying process. Dehydrins
are one such group of proteins and are the focus of this research project. The
basic question that will be addressed by this rpoject is what role dehydrins
play in adaptation to cellular dehydration. The location of dehydrins within
plant cells will be determined, and blochemical tests of function will be
carried out on dehydrin protein that has been extracted from plant cells. In
addition, dehydrin genes will be examined in normal and mutant plants. Through
an understanding of the fundamental biochemical role and genetics of dehydrins,
it may be possible in the longer term to design new strategies for the
development of plants with improved tolerance to environmental stress.