* 9205248
* Analysis of DNA Sequence Recognition by Three Types of      Sequence-Specific Protein
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Robert Blumenthal, University of Toledo Health Science Campus
* Continuing grant
* Charles D. Liarakos
* 07/31/1996
* USD 367,998.00

The long-term goal of this project is to understand both how proteins recognize
specific DNA sequences, and how the recognition mechanisms are varied to
accommodate the functional requirements of the protein. To that end, a
combination of mutant characterization and protein biochemistry will be used to
study three functionally disparate DNA-binding proteins which all come from the
Pvu II restriction-modification system. The first of these proteins is the Pvu
II DNA methyltransferase, which binds S-adenosylmethionine and the DNA duplex
sequence CAGCTG and methylates the amino group of the internal cytosine. The
second protein is the Pvu II restriction endonuclease, which binds the same DNA
sequence and Mg++ and catalyzes phosphodiester cleavage between the central two
bases. The third protein is the Pvu II C protein, which appears to have a more
degenerate recognition specificity on the DNA and activates transcription of the
endonuclease gene. The immediate goals are to identify the domains and amino
acids that play key roles in recognizing the substrate DNA sequence and the
other substrates as well. Understanding sequence-specific recognition of DNA by
proteins, particularly when a catalytic center must be brought into proximity
with the DNA, is an important goal both for a sophisticated understanding of
gene expression and for the further development of biotechnology. %%% The two
long-term goals of this project are to understand how proteins recognize
specific DNA base sequences despite the large excess of nonsubstrate DNA in the
cell, and how these sequence recognition mechanisms vary to accommodate the
other functional requirements of the protein when a catalytic center must be
brought close to the DNA to carry out reactions. Understanding sequence-
specific recognition of DNA by proteins is an important goal both for fully
understanding the control of gene expression, and for the further development of
biotechnology. In this study, a combination of mutagenesis and protein
biochemistry will be used to study three DNA-binding proteins which all come
from the Pvu II restriction- modification system but which each have very
different fuctions. The first of these proteins is the Pvu II DNA
methlytransferase, which binds S-adenosylmethionine and the DNA duplex sequence
CAGCTG and methylates the amino group of the internal cytosine. The second
protein is the Pvu II restriction endonuclease, which binds the same DNA
sequence an Mg++ and catalyzes phosphodiester cleavage between the central two
bases. The third protein is the Pvu II C protein, which appears to bind the Pvu
II DNA and activate transcription of the endonuclease gene. The immediate goals
are to identify the domains and amino acids of these three proteins that play
key roles in recognizing the substrate DNA sequence, in recognizing the other
substrates, and in carrying out the chemical reactions of methylation or
cleavage.