* 9205019
* Primary Electron Transfer Processes in Photosynthetic       Bacterial Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Dewey Holten, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/1995
* USD 244,960.00

The bacterial reaction center (RC) is the membrane bound pigment- protein
complex within which light energy is converted into chemical energy. This
photoconversion process occurs via a series of fast and highly specific electron
transfer reactions that separate charge across the RC (and thus across the
membrane) with unity quantum yield. The ultimate goal of this work is to arrive
at a comprehensive understanding of this process at a molecular level. To this
end, transient absorption spectroscopic measurements spanning the femtosecond to
millisecond timescales as well as other spectroscopic studies will be carried
out to directly identify and study the intermediate states of charge separation
and the rates and yields of their formation and decay. These studies will be
carried out on both wild-type RCs and a wide variety of mutant RCs in which one
or more amino acids are changed. Numerous unresolved issues regarding the
involvement of specific chromophores in the pathway of electron transfer, and
the selectivity (or directionality) of these reactions will be addressed.
Factors underlying the balancing of the competition between the forward electron
transfer reactions and the deactivating (or back) reactions will be
investigated. These studies will also address the role of the protein in the
charge separation process, both at the level of specific amino acids and at a
more global level. The results of this work will be compared with predictions
from various theoretical models for electron transfer and, indeed, will likely
form the basis for further theoretical developments. %%% The conversion of light
energy into chemical energy is essential for life on earth. Detailed studies of
the mechanism of this energy conversion process are essential not only for
increasing the understanding of one of the most important biological processes,
but also as a foundation for devising biomimetic systems for solar energy
conversion. The proposed studies will provide diverse information that is
critical for elucidating the molecular mechanisms by which the reaction center
functions. The studies also will advance knowledge of the factors that control
electron transfer, which is one of the most fundamental processes in biology and
chemistry. Additionally, the research will provide detailed new information on
the effects of pigment- protein interactions and protein dynamics on the
energetics, rates and mechanisms of biological processes. Hence, the proposed
research should have a very positive impact on our fundamental understanding of
photosynthesis and on the applied aspects of photosynthetic energy conversion.