* 9205717
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Effect of Global Climatic Change onRegional Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Istvan Bogardi, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1995
* USD 93,591.00

A multi-institutional effort is proposed to obtain space-time series of
regional hydrological quantities reflecting climatic change scenarios. The
geographical areas to be investigated cover central Arizona and the lower Platte
river basin of Nebraska. The approach is based on an analysis of the occurrence,
persistence and transition probabilities of atmospheric circulation patterns.
These patterns are defined daily as pressure surfaces using available and
reliable data. The proposed research consists of three phases. In the first
phase, a classification of circulation patterns will be sought; each type of
pattern is then related in a conditional framework to local space-time
precipitation, runoff, temperature, and wind. Temperature and wind are used to
define regional drought indices. Precipitation will be transformed into runoff
using relatively simple watershed models. In the second phase of the research,
available GCM outputs are used to define scenarios of possible daily time series
of circulation precipitation, runoff, temperature, and regional droughts.
Finally, the historical series of regional hydrologic events can be compared to
the various scenario predictions. In the third phase of the research, the
consequence of climatic change will be analyzed by taking the example of the
Great Salt Lake in Utah.