* 9205280
* Symposium on Development in Vertebrate Embryos:             Environmental, Parental and Embryonic Interactions;         Cambridge, United Kingdom; August 9-13, 1992.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1993
* Carol Vleck, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 07/31/1993
* USD 6,000.00

This proposal seeks funding to support the overseas travel costs of American
participants to a two-day symposium which is part of a larger four-day meeting
at Cambridge University in August, 1992. This meeting is jointly sponsored by
four scientific societies located in Europe, Canada and the United States and
will be attended by approximately 300 biologists from throughout the world. The
symposium is entitled "Development in Vertebrate Embryos: Comparative
physiology, environmental influences and parental role." It was organized by Dr.
Carol Vleck (University of Arizona) and Dr. Amos Ar (Tel Aviv University,
Israel) and will be attended by 19 persons from nine countries, including 11
American. The symposium will focus on the special physiological problems that
vertebrate embryos face as they progress from just a single cell to an
independent individual. These developing forms do not have the same arsenal of
physiological and behavioral responses that adults do to maintain function in
the face of stress, yet still must be able to cope with conditions to which they
are exposed. Relatively little attention has been given to understanding the
diversity of physiological strategies available to embryos and how parents
ameliorate the physical environment in which the embryo develops. The symposium
will bring together for the first time persons from diverse backgrounds in
vertebrate physiology. but all with a special interest in embryonic form and
function.