* 9205583
* Elongation & Termination by Yeast RNA Polymerase II
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Caroline Kane, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Todd M. Martensen
* 07/31/1995
* USD 340,000.00

Transcriptional regulation is one of the major control points for gene
expression in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and controls during elongation
and termination operate by a variety of strategies. For several years, the
elongation and termination properties of mammalian RNA polymerase II have been
studies in this laboratory. This research includes studies on these reactions
with yeast RNA polymerase II using in vivo and in vitro techniques. The
advantage to studying these processes in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) is the
availability of powerful genetic tools to complement biochemical analyses. There
are five specific objectives: 1) Identify the signals which cause yeast RNA
polymerase II to terminate; 2) Define the physical structure of specific
elongation complexes; 3) Evaluate the contribution of the conserved C-terminal
domain of the largest subunit of the polymerase to the elongation reaction; 4)
Examine the mechanism by which yeast transcript elongation factor SII promotes
terminator read through by RNA polymerase II; and 5) Identify other cellular
proteins involved in regulating transcript elongation in the cell. The results
from these experiments should provide fundamental information about the
regulation of transcript elongation in eukaryotes. The similarities in
components of the transcriptional machinery between yeast and larger eukaryotes
suggest that much of the information obtained here will be directly related to
mechanisms in other eukaryotes. Any differences which we observe obviously will
also be important. The advantage to this approach is that genetic tools are
available to complement the biochemical and cell biology approaches available in
mammalian cells. %%% Transcriptional regulation is a major control point for
gene expression. This control can occur during initiation elongation or
termination. Controls during elongation and termination by mammalian RNA
polymerase II have been studied in this laboratory for several years. While
studies of the mechanisms controlling transcript elongation and termination
mammalian cells have provided much preliminary information, there are limits to
the types of experiments that can be done in such systems. Thus, we propose to
expand our previous work with mammalian cells by studies of transcription
regulation in yeast. The advangatage to studying these processes in yeast
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae) is the availability of powerful genetic tools to
complement biochemical analyses. There are five specific objectives: (1)
Identify the DNA sequences are which yeast RNA polymerase II stops elongating an
RNA chain, These experiments will use both the intact cell in vivo as well
components isolated from those cell in vitro. (2) Define the physical structure
of specific elongation complexes containing the polymerase, the DNA template,
and the RNA transcript. Enzymatic and chemical probes will be used to identify
the molecular contacts between the protein and nucleic acid components in these
complexes. (3) Evaluate the contribution of the C-terminal domain of the largest
subunit of the polymerase to the elongation reaction. This subunit contains a
unique structure consisting of multiple. Repeated heptapeptide sequences.
Quantitative analysis of the elongation properties of polymerase molecules
containing and lacking this domain will be carried our (4) Examine the mechanism
by which a yeast transcript elongation factor (SI) stimulates elongation by RNA
polymerase II. The clone for the yeast SII protein will be mutagenized, and
activity of the mutant proteins will be compared. (5) Identify other cellular
proteins involved in regulating transcript elongation in the cell. genetic
analyses will be used to identify candidate proteins which will be further
characterized in vivo. Complementing in vivo and in vitro results will provide
strong evidence for the participation of particular proteins in elongation
control.