* 9206659
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in the Cohomology of          Arithmetic Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Mark McConnell, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 01/31/1996
* USD 49,100.00

The investigator intends to work on three projects. The first, joint with Avner
Ash (Ohio State), deals with arithmetic subgroups G of SL(3,Z). A cuspidal
cohomology class for G which is a Hecke eigenclass generates an automorphic
representation which should be attached to a family of Galois representations.
They will study these Galois representations in two special cases. The second
project involves a general approach to understanding the cohomology of G(N) in
SL(3,Z) for prime N. The third project is joint with Robert MacPherson (M.I.T.).
For any torsion-free finite-index G in Sp(4,Z), they have built a G-equivariant
deformation retract (a "spine") inside the symmetric space for Sp(4,R); it has
properties like those of the well-rounded retract for SL(n). They intend to
attempt to extend their construction to non-torsion-free G, and to build a
similar object for Sp(6) and higher-rank groups. The intricate computations
envisioned here are intended to shed light on structures which arise in
important ways in several different mathematical areas. The so-called arithmetic
locally symmetric spaces interest number theorists as well as geometers, while
some of the questions about them have been transformed by the investigator into
pure topology. No transformation removes their difficulty, but when looked at in
the right way, some difficulties can be seen to have been addressed by earlier
generations of geometers. Seventeenth and nineteenth century geometers studied a
beautiful class of objects known as projective configurations, and bearing out
the mathematical dictum that beautiful objects repay study because they recur
again and again in different guises, properties of these configurations have
turned out to bear on the cohomology of certain arithmetic groups, normally
considered a purely twentieth century invention.