* 9206770
* Excavation of Aztec Urban Houses at Yautepec, Morelos,      Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Michael Smith, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/1996
* USD 151,151.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr.Michael Smith will conduct
archaeological excavations at the Aztec-period site of Yautepec which is located
in north-central Morelos, Mexico. The site, at the edge of the modern town of
Yautepec consists of a large palace structure and 30 hectares of adjacent fields
with traces of house remains. This is one of the only areas of a major Aztec
city anywhere in central Mexico where a district of houses is available for
excavation. The project itself has five major objectives: 1. The exposure of
large horizontal areas of 3 to 6 houses; 2. limited testing of another 15 or
more houses; 3. establishment of a fine-grained chronology for the site by means
of ceramic seriation, stratigraphy and radiocarbon dates; 4. determination of
the size and extent of the Aztec city by means of a surface survey of the modern
town of Yautepec; 5. synthesis of the data in economic and social terms. Cities
are important components of nearly all state societies and archaeologists have
long acknowledged the crucial role played by urban centers in the origin and
operation of states. Many of the traits that distinguish states from simpler
societies are also characteristics of cities and important political, economic
and religious institutions are usually concentrated in urban centers. Therefore
in order to document and explain the development and organization of ancient
states, archaeologists need to map and excavate cities. The Aztecs constructed
one of the largest and most impressive New World states. It was heavily
urbanized yet very little is known about the nature of Aztec urbanism. Dr.
Smith's project will help to solve this problem. His data have the potential to
help resolve a number of issues involving urban structure, economic organization
and the political processes which characterized Mexico at this time. This
research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to a
large number of archaeologists and shed light on how complex societies -
including our own - arise and are maintained. This area is slated for urban
development. Thus the site is threatened and research must be conducted quickly.