* 9206540
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Morphology, Geochemistry, and      Stable Isotope Compositions of Vertic Paleosols as          Indicators of Paleozoic Paleoclimate
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Claudia Mora, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1994
* USD 99,488.00

This is a collaborative research between C.I. Mora and S.G. Driese (University
of Tennessee; lead institution) and D.E. Fastovsky (University of Rhode Island)
to support ongoing research on aspects of Paleozoic paleoclimates that are
reflected in vertic-featured paleosols preserved in the central and southern
Appalachian sedimentary sequence. The study takes advantage of the wide spatial
and temporal distribution and climatic-dependency of these paleosols, as well as
their amenability to stable isotopic analysis. Morphology, geochemistry, and
stable isotopic compositions of the vertic paleosols form the database of the
study. Vertic-featured paleosols are exposed in six states, representing fluvial
and marginal-marine environments from the Ordovician through the Permian.
Because vertic paleosols are, by comparison with other paleosol type, diagnostic
of specific climatic variables such as annual wet/dry cyclicity and subtropical
to tropical conditions, these paleosols are ideal subjects for the
reconstruction of paleoclimatic variables. Moreover, the common occurrence of
pedogenic carbonate permits the estimation of annual rainfall (based upon
nodular horizon depth), as well as the opportunity to estimate Paleozoic
atmospheric pCO2 and to tests of models of global atmospheric CO2 concentrations
throughout most of the Paleozoic Era.