* 9206737
* Symposium:  Comparative Gastrointestinal Endocrinology:     Integration of Function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1993
* Christopher Loretz, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 08/31/1993
* USD 14,880.00

The gastrointestinal tract is a dynamic, chemosensory endocrine organ that
integrates feeding behavior, digestion, absorption, and assimilation. This
proposal requests support for a one day symposium to examine how that
integration is mediated by hormones. Entitled "Comparative Gastrointestinal
Endocrinology: Integration of Function," the symposium will be part of the
American Society for Zoologists annual meeting held in Vancouver, B.C. in
December 1992. The symposium has three objectives. First, the ten speakers will
examine how the separate processes they investigate contribute to the regulation
of the whole digestive system. Second, examples of the hormonal control of gut
function will come from animal groups ranging from mammals to insects. Third,
the symposium will emphasize hormone actions, rather than gut hormone chemistry.
The outcome should lead to: 1) an evaluation of the integrative roles of
regulatory factors for which functions are known; 2) strategies for determining
the actions of "orphaned" chemical mediators, having known structures but
unknown functions; 3) knowledge of interactions between gut peptides and
hormones released at sites remote from the gut; and 4) an assessment of optimal
biological models in nonmammalian vertebrates and invertebrates, for simplifying
regularity complexity and for constructing the phylogeny of endocrine
regulation.