* 9206589
* Post-transcriptional Controls in Virus-infected Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Victor Chinchar, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 02/28/1997
* USD 180,000.00

Eukaryotic gene expression is regulated at transcriptional, post-
transcriptional, and translational levels. Although the importance of
transcriptional, mechanisms is understood, the role of post- translational
controls is only beginning to be elucidated. Several observations suggest that
the iridovirus, frog virus 3 (FV3), may be an excellent model in which to study
post-transcriptional/ translational gene regulation: (a) the steady state level
of FV3 early messages does not decline in infected cells, whereas host
transcripts are rapidly degraded; (b) FV3 messages are translated more
efficiently than host or heterologous messages in vitro; (c) early mRNA is not
degraded and, after extraction, actively directs protein synthesis in vitro; and
(d) late viral messages, which are major gene products in vivo, are translated
poorly in extracts from uninfected cells. Taken together these phenomena suggest
that FV3 gene expression is controlled, at least in part, at the post-
transcriptional/translational level. %%% In this proposal, the nature of
putative post transcriptional/ translational controls will be explored. To
accomplish this, two specific aims have been established. Sp. Aim whether the
expression of FV3 genes is regulated at the translational level by cis-acting
mRNA control sequences and/or trans-acting mRNA-binding proteins. Sp. Aim
nucleotide sequence of a representative panel of FV3 immediate early, early, and
late mRNAs and ascertain whether viral messages possess unique regulatory
signals that control translational efficiency. successfully completed these
studies will provide important information on the mechanisms of virus-mediated
translational control and on the cis and trans elements that regulate viral
protein synthesis. In addition, these studies will extend our understanding of
translational control mechanisms in eukaryotic systems.