* 9206096
* Molecular Genetics of a New Tumor Suppressor Gene in        Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Peter Bryant, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 04/30/1996
* USD 390,000.00

We propose a molecular genetic analysis of a newly discovered tumor-suppressor
gene (warts,abb.wts) in Drosophila. The gene is identified by the tumorous
phenotype of mitotic-recombination clones that are homozygous for small
chromosome deficiencies of the wts gene. Absence of the wts gene from imaginal
disc cells causes excess cell proliferation, causes clone rounding presumably by
interfering with control of oriented cell divisions, and allows cuticle to be
secreted between cells as well as over their apical surfaces. The wts gene is
known, from cytogenetic mapping, to be present in DNA that has already been
cloned. We will isolate new mutations in wts and other unidentified tumor
suppressor genes using a new method for revealing the homozygous phenotype of
recessive mutations in mitotic recombination clones. We will identify the
transcription unit corresponding to wts in the cloned DNA by mapping deficiency
breakpoints and wts mutations at the DNA level. We will isolate cDNAs
corresponding to wts and determine their nucleotide sequence in order to predict
the amino acid sequence and possible function of the gene product. Antibodies
will be raised against a fusion gene product made in bacteria, and the
antibodies will be used to localize the gene product at both light and electron
microscopic levels. We will mark wts clones in the undifferentiated imaginal
disc in order to further examine the effects of the mutation on clone growth and
on the distribution of cytoskeletal and cell-surface proteins. %%% The
identification and characterization of novel tumor-suppressor genes in this
simple model system of the fruit fly may lead to the identification of new
tumor-suppressor genes in man.