* 9206037
* Fundamentals of Surface Exposure Dating:  Latitude, Matrix  and Geometric Effects
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* David Elmore, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1994
* USD 129,281.00

Cosmogenic nuclides provide an important tool for determining the time a rock
has been exposed to cosmic rays on the Earth's surface and also for determining
erosion rates of geomorphic surfaces. Several important applications have
already been demonstrated: dating past glacial episodes from exposure ages of
rocks on moraines, dating volcanic eruptions, and dating meteor crater impacts.
Although these studies have been successful in producing semi-quantitative
results, reliable interpretation requires a better understanding of the
fundamentals of production mechanisms of cosmogenic nuclides. The three aspects
of surface exposure dating that have been studied least are the dependence of
the cosmic ray flux on latitude, the dependence of the production rates on the
rock matrix, and the dependence of production rates on the geometry of the rock.
The limited data available on the cosmic ray flux does not include important
effects of the air/ground boundary. This proposal requests funding to measure
10Be, 26Al, and 36Cl depth profiles in several rocks of same age and in the same
location but of different lithology using accelerator mass spectrometry. The
latitude correction will be investigated using granitic rocks of same age, but
from different latitudes. All rocks will be dated independently and will show
glacial polish to rule out erosion. A production rate model will be developed
using Monte Carlo particle transport codes and measurements will be compared
with theoretical values. The production rate model developed will then be
available for others to predict surface production rates in other rocks of
different lithology, other geometries, and other latitudes.