* 9206909
* Symposium on Magnetic Field and Spin Effects in Chemistry;  University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany; July 26-31, 1992
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1993
* Nicholas Turro, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 04/30/1993
* USD 9,000.00

This grant provides funds to allow scientists from the US to attend the
Symposium on Magnetic and Spin Effects in Chemistry to be held at the University
of Konstanz in Germany, July 26-31, 1992. The Symposium will include
presentations on magnetic field effects in solution, in the gas phase, in the
solid phase, at interfaces, in supramolecular aggregates, in photosynthetic
reactions and in enzymatic reactions. Other topics in the fields of chemically
induced dynamic polarization and chemically induced electron polarization will
be included in the five-day Symposium. The Symposium is designed to bring
chemists fron a variety of different sub-disciplines together in an environment
which will provide direction for future work in this rapidly developing field of
chemistry. %%% The symposium will bring together chemists from a variety of
subdisciplines to discuss the effects of magnetic fields on thereactivity of
chemical species. In addition to demonstrating that magnetic fields have a
profound effect of the reactivity of chemical processes of synthetic molecules,
the prospects for influencing the reactivity and products generated in
biological systems will be presented. By utilizing magnetic fields to influence
the chemical consequences of a reaction, the chemist has a new tool to employ in
generating useful chemical products in a controlled environment.