* 9206482
* Substrate Specificity of V-Src and v-Tyrosine Kinases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* W. Todd Miller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 02/28/1994
* USD 90,000.00

This proposal focuses on the role of protein-protein interactions in the
function of the v-Src and v-Abl tyrosine kinases. It has been suggested that the
Src homology (SH) regions 2 and 3 of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases are important
both in the regulation of kinase activity and in the recognition of cellular
substrates. Regions of v-Src and v-Abl which are involved in intra-or-
intermolecular recognition will be identified by peptide-based photoaffinity
labelling experiments. Modified regions inside and outside the SH2 and SH3
domains will be studied further by site-directed, mutagenesis and the mutant
enzymes will be tested by in vitro phosphorylation with tyrosine-containing
synthetic peptides. These results will be correlated with a model of the three-
dimensional structure of v-Src based on the recent crystal structure of the
catalytic domain of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Finally, to identify
determinants in protein substrates for v-Src which confer recognition by the
enzyme, synthetic peptide "libraries" will be used to select those peptides
which give maximal phosphorylation by v-Src. The goal of these studies is to
describe at a molecular level the steps leading to the formation of the
"signalling complexes" which play a central role in signal transduction and
oncogenic transformation. %%% This research involves the role of certain regions
of a protein in its ability to phosphorylate tyrosine residues of other
proteins. These regions may be important for its biological activity. These
regions will be identified by chemical labelling and genetic experiments. These
results will be correlated with a model of the three-dimensional structure of
protein based on the recent crystal structure of a similar enzyme. Lastly,
special substrates for the enzyme will be prepared by random substitution of a
variety of amino acids for the particular one found in a peptide which the
protein phosphorylates. This will be used to describe structural features of
substrates recognized by the modifying protein.