* 9206536
* SGER: Study of Plasma Transfer Across the Magnetopause
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1994
* Walter Heikkila, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Timothy E. Eastman
* 03/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

The plasma physics of the magnetopause is the central problem of magnetospheric
research and our proposed impulsive penetration process is truly innovative in
the sense that it (i) provides solar wind plasma onto closed field lines in the
boundary layer in sufficient quantities to drive magnetospheric and auroral
processes, and (ii) changes the state of interconnection between interplanetary
and geomagnetic field lines. We intend to proceed along three approaches in our
research effort: (i) Particle simulation. We plan to cooperate with others on
computer simulation, notably Dr. H. Okuda from Princeton University. He is doing
state-of-the-art computer simulation of the physics of the magnetopause. (ii) A
test particle approach. Starting from M. Gorton's model, perturbations of the
magnetopause will allow us to calculate the inductive electric field and the
magnetopause currents. (iii) Analysis of Experimental Data. Finally, we plan to
take the September 6, 1981 event as a primary test case for the theory and
modeling. On that unique occasion, DE-1 went outside the magnetopause during a
period of very high magnetospheric compression while DE-2 traversed the foot of
the field line on several orbits. Either a clear disconfirmation of the
impulsive penetration process or a clear confirmation of it would be very
important for advancing magnetopause physics.