* 9206419
* Collaborative Basic Research Towards the Development and    Maturation of Phytolith Analysis in Archaeology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Dolores Piperno, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1994
* USD 25,905.00

Drs. Deborah Pearsall and Dolores Piperno will collaborate on a project to
develop the application of phytolith analysis to archaeological materials.
Phytoliths are small bodies of silica which are deposited within plants and are
usually preserved in soil after death and decomposition occurs. Although one
species of plant may produce phytoliths of many shapes, and very few shapes are
restricted to a single species, it is possible to examine phytolith assemblages
and make some species identifications. The research team will concentrate on
corn and related species. They will obtain phytoliths from different vegetative
parts of both domestic corn and possible confusing species to determine what
features are unique to corn phytoliths. they will also develop an expert system
to permit accurate and easy identification. Only under the most unusual
conditions are plants remains preserved in archaeological sites. Thus, because
plants play such an important dietary role, it is extremely difficult to
reconstruct prehistoric diets. In tropical areas of the work, where preservation
is extremely poor, this problem is particularly acute. Phytoliths, because they
are so durable, provide a potential way around this problem and therefore merit
attention. However, because of the lack of one to one correspondence between
phytolith species, analysis poses difficulties. This research should help to
solve this problem. The project is important because it will provide
archaeologists, as well as paleobiologists, with a value tool which should be
useful in many parts of the world.