* 9206080
* Genetic Analysis of the Photosynthetic Reaction Center      in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Edward Bylina, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

The bacterial reaction center complex mediates a series of efficient electron
transfer reactions resulting in the conversion of light into chemical energy.
This pigment-protein complex is the only membrane protein whose structure has
been determined to atomic resolution. While the highest resolution structural
data (2.3A) is available from the reaction centers of Rhodopseudomonas viridis,
a system for the expression of genetically modified reaction centers in this
organism is not available. We have been characterizing a heterotrophic strain of
Rps. viridis which will be used to develop such a genetic system. The puf operon
of Rps. viridis (encoding the beta and alpha subunits of the light haveresting
complex and the L subunit, M subunit, and cytochrome subunit of the reaction
center) will be deleted from the Rps. viridis chromosome. A plasmid containing a
copy of the puf operon will be used to complement this chromosomal deletion. To
efficiently grow the large volumes of Rps. viridis required for spectroscopic
and crystallographic studies of genetically engineered reaction centers, culture
conditions will be optimized for the dark growth of Rps. viridis in a bench
fermentor. The development of this system will allow the modification of
pigment-protein binding interactions throughout the reaction center by site-
directed mutagenesis of the Rps. viridis structural genes., followed by the
crystallographic and spectroscopic characterization of these altered reaction
center complexes. %%% The insights provided by the Rps. viridis reaction center
system will provide a more detailed understanding of substrate
recognition/binding requirements in membrane proteins and electron transfer in
biological systems.