* 9206711
* RUI:  The Cytokinetics of a Maternal Effect in the                Developing Endosperm of Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Richard Kowles, Saint Mary's University of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1994
* USD 77,750.00

A maternal effect influencing DNA endoreduplication activity in the developing
endosperm of maize has been observed in data generated by flow cytometric
techniques. The overall objective of this project is to expand the information
concerning these maternal effects in the developing endosperm. Specifically,
tests will be made to determine: (1) the extent of the maternal effects in
reciprocal crosses among a wide range of inbreds; (2) the precise
characteristic(s) that are governed by the maternal effects; and (3) the role of
these maternal effects in the cytokinetics of the developing endosperm. Flow
cytometric analyses of endosperm will be obtained from a diallel pattern of
parents and F1 reciprocal crosses at the peak of endoreduplication activity and
at closely spaced intervals over an extended developmental period.
Brd/Urd/monoclonal antibody techniques in conjunction with an in vitro ear
culture system will be used to determine the role of maternal effects upon cell
cycle phases and DNA replication rates. The information could lead to new ideas
about DNA replication, cell cycle timing, genome interaction, and even combining
ability and hybrid vigor. The possibility exists that such information might
eventually be used in a predictive manner for the selection of parents for
hybridization.