* 9206734
* Trophic Factors of the Vertebrate Integument:  Role in the  Regulation of Pigment Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Joseph Bagnara, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 120,000.00

This research is based upon the hypothesis that the expression of pigmentation
patterns of vertebrates from primitive fishes to man is determined by the
presence of intrinsic inhibiting and/or stimulating factors present in the skin.
It is considered that these factors work in concert with other agents, viz.
hormones such as melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH), to either inhibit or
stimulate the development and maintenance of the circumscribed pigment cells of
vertebrates. These include the black or brown melanophores, the yellow to red
xanthophores, and the iridescent iridophores. All three pigment cell types are
derived from the cadre of the neural crest cells that migrate from atop the
neural tube to the skin. Presumably, after these prospective pigment cells
arrive at their destinations, they are exposed to the localized putative
melanization inhibiting factors (MIF) and melanization stimulating factors (MSF)
which affect pigment cell development. The activities of these factors, both
individually and in combination, on various aspects of amphibian pigment cell
expression will be tested in vivo and in vitro. Both biological and biochemical
characterization of the putative MIF and MSF will be undertaken and antibodies
raised to these molecule will be utilized as probes to further study the
distribution and activities of these factors. This information should provide
insight into our understanding of the mechanisms of pigment pattern formation
and maintenance. These patterns include the dorsal ventral pigmentation patterns
commonly found in most vertebrates as well as the individual spots and stripes
that are also seen frequently.