* 9206441
* RUI:  Control of Ventilation and Acid-Base State in         Heterothermic Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1996
* Joseph Szewczak, Deep Springs College
* Continuing Grant
* David Vleck
* 09/30/1996
* USD 103,287.00

This project aspires to further our understanding of ventilatory control in
mammals, with special regard to changing body temperature and extreme conditions
of gas exchange. Small bats will primarily be used because they are uniquely
suited for revealing the processes of ventilatory control under these
conditions. The extreme energetic demands of flight provide a system in which to
probe the upper limits of mammalian respiratory function. In addition, the
ability of small bats to reduce their body temperature and metabolism through
torpor permits the exploration of ventilatory control when operating in its most
reduced extreme. Exploring ventilatory control processes in whole animals is
often thwarted by the experimental process itself, because ventilatory control
is subject to conscious override. However, a further advantage of torpor is that
it provides a state in which ventilatory processes may be investigated free from
conscious interference, thus assuring dependable data. Experiments will be
performed using a variety of innovative techniques specially designed for bats.
This study will help elucidate physiological control mechanisms regulating 1)
unusually low and high metabolic states, 2) different patterns of ventilation,
and 3) the adaptation to environmental changes. This investigation of
undisturbed integrated function will also provide important corroboration of
investigations that involve non-intact ventilatory components and more invasive
techniques.