* 9206921
* Provenience Clarification of Peabody Museum Human           Osteology Collections
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* David Pilbeam, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1993
* USD 93,700.00

With National Science Foundation support, the human osteology collection at the
Peabody Museum, Harvard University, has been reorganized and stored in
individual containers which both protect the specimens and make them readily
available to researchers. Work has also been done on the supporting
documentation which places these materials into a meaningful archaeological
context. In this final stage of the work, the Peabody team will continue the
computerization of the materials to make the data base readily accessible. This
osteology collection is one of the largest and most important such systematic
collections in the United States. It consists of over 15,000 individuals from
well documented archaeological, medical and forensic investigations. These
collections form a broad comparative resource for cross cultural research in
physical anthropology. The materials are widely used by researchers and in
scientific demand. Unfortunately lack of organized documentation makes them
difficult to use and places an often unacceptable burden in terms of time on the
researcher. This project will alleviate the situation. This project is important
for several reasons. It will improve access to an important body of scientific
data. It will also facilitate research which helps to explain human biological
adaptation to varying environmental and cultural environments.