* 9206346
* Structural Regulation of the Extracellular Domain o#fCD44
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Ellen Pure', Wistar Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 12/31/1995
* USD 245,000.00

This proposal describes a plan to study how the molecular structure of CD44, a
protein expressed on leukocytes and important in signalling and adhesion, is
related to its function. The project involves the generation of multiple cDNAs
of CD44 isoforms, the transfection of cells with each of these cDNAs, and
analyses of consequent cell behavior. Post-translational modifications of CD44,
primarily in the form of glycosylation, apparently affect the binding
specificity for the protein. This project also focuses on changes in the
glycosylation in the various isoforms of CD44, and the consequent changes in
adhesion functions for the molecule. %%% The interaction of endothelial cell
glycoproteins and their complementary leukocyte receptors directs the
extravasation of lymphocytes into inflammatory sites. CD44 is the principal
receptor for hyaluronic acid, is constitutively expressed on leukocytes, and
mediates both intercellular attachment and extracellular matrix adhesion. CD44
also interacts with intracellular cytoskeletal elements, and thus, may provide
an important link in coordinating extracellular attachments and subsequent
changes in intracellular organization. The glycosylation of CD44 appears to play
an important role in the binding specificity for the protein. Functional
comparisons of various isoforms of CD44 with differing glycosylation patterns
will provide information on the mechanism by which leukocytes migrate and
insight into the events that transduce information from the extracellular
environment into coordinated cellular movements.