* 9206506
* Characterization of cis- and trans-acting factors regulatingroot-specific gene expression in tobacco
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Mark Conkling, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1995
* USD 180,000.00

In this proposal, we propose to further our analysis of the regulation and cell
biology of the tobacco root-specific gene, TobRB7. We have chosen to concentrate
our analyses to genes expressed specifically in roots. To date, only seven such
genes have been reported (four of which were reported by us). Cis-acting
sequences responsible for regulated root-specific expression have been
characterized for only one gene (TobRB7). We propose to combine linker-scanning
and internal deletion mutational analysis with DNA footprinting experiments to
identify the precise sequences responsible for regulating root-specific gene
expression. These sequences will be used subsequently to identify cDNA clones
encoding the cognate DNA-binding proteins. The cell biology of the TobRB7 gene
product (expressed in the immature vascular tissue and predicted to served as a
membrane channel) will be characterized further. Immunolocalization experiments
have putatively localized the gene product to the plasma membrane. Experiments
are proposed to examine the physiology of transgenic plants carrying sequences
designed to disrupt TobRB7 gene product function. Finally, we propose to
initiate the analysis of a second root-specific gene (TobRD2) using technologies
similar to those that have proven successful for TobRB7. In situ hybridization
experiments using TobRD2 probes demonstrate that this gene is expressed
specifically in the root cortex. We propose to compare and contrast the
regulatory circuitry of this gene with that of TobRB7. %%% Despite the
importance of roots in plant growth and development, relatively few genes
expressed specifically in roots have been isolated. The results of this study
should significantly improve that situation.