* 9206051
* Initiation of Transcription in Chromatin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* David Pederson, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1995
* USD 180,000.00

In eukaryotes, newly replicated DNA assembles with histones and regulatory and
general transcription factors to form nucleosomes and transcription initiation
complexes. Competition between the binding of regulatory factors to DNA and
assembly of the same DNA into nucleosomes may play a key role in establishing
and maintaining patterns of differential gene expression. The goal of this
proposal is to help elucidate mechanisms which govern the outcome of this
competition in vivo and guide studies of transcription using chromatin templates
in vitro. Initial studies demonstrated that heat shock factor (HSF) can activate
transcription while bound to a nucleosome in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This
result suggests that the position which a factor binding site adopts when it is
packaged in a nucleosome influences the outcome of competitive assembly events
in vivo. To test this possibility and to determine why HSF, like most regulatory
factors, is usually bound to nucleosome-free DNA, we will systematically examine
the influence of helical orientation and other geometric factors on the ability
of regulatory factors to bind to nucleosomal DNA or, alternatively, to prevent
the formation of nucleosomes. Cells will be transfected with plasmids that
present cells with a choice between the binding of a regulatory factor to DNA
and the assembly of the same DNA into a uniquely positioned nucleosome. HSF and
the ACEI factor will be used as model regulatory factors. Results will be
assessed using transcription and high resolution genomic footprinting assays.
%%% Because of its great length, DNA must be extensively compacted to fit into
the nuclei of cells. Compaction of DNA is accomplished by histones, proteins
which associate with DNA to form nucleosomes. Nucleosomes are altered or absent
from DNA in regions bound by a second class of proteins, namely those which
regulate gene expression. Replication of DNA partially disrupts nucleosomes and
displaces regulatory proteins. Thus, DNA must be repackaged each cell
generation. Whether repackaging is by histones or by regulatory proteins may be
central to whether specific patterns of gene expression are maintained or
altered. However, mechanisms which govern how DNA is packaged in vivo are poorly
understood. The goal of the proposed research is to elucidate these mechanisms.
We will determine how the unique configuration which DNA adopts in some
nucleosomes affects its packaging. The occurrence of this unique configuration,
termed nucleosome positioning, suggests that if a DNA segment were forced by the
binding of a rgulatory protein to adopt an alternative configuration in the
nucleosome, the stability of the nucleosome would be impaired. To test whether
this can account for the formation of nucleosome-free regions, we will construct
a series of test DNA sequences. These sequences, when introduced into yeast,
will present cells with a choice between ıa! the binding of a regulatory factor
which excludes or shifts the position of nucleosomes, ıb! the assembly of a
positioned nucleosome which excludes the regulatory factor, or ıc! the formation
of a factor:nucleosome complex. The choice cells make will be related to the
structure of nucleosomes, and interactions between regulatory proteins and DNA.