* 9206707
* Functional Analysis of Abd-B Homeodain Containing Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1997
* Michael Kuziora, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 01/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

Like other proteins that regulate gene expression, homeodomain proteins appear
to be modular in nature. Regulatory target specificity is determined by the
homeodomain and immediately adjacent regions while other less characterized
protein domains are required for regulating gene expression. The specific aim of
this proposal is to understand how protein domains outside of the homeodomain
contribute to regulatory activity. The Drosophila homeotic gene Abdominal-B
provides an excellent experimental system for the study of regulatory domains.
Abdominal-B encodes two proteins that differ only by a glutamine rich domain,
but have different genetically defined functions during development. Using a
heat shock promoter system to ectopically express proteins during embryogenesis,
preliminary results demonstrate that distinct segmental transformations are
generated by each Abdominal-B protein, as well as a chimeric protein consisting
of the Deformed protein but with a substituted Abdominal-B homeodomain. To
analyze the contribution of regulatory domains to the diversity of phenotypes
observed, putative regulatory domains will be altered through in vitro
mutagenesis. The modified constructs will be ectopically expressed, and their
effect on cuticular transformations and expression of target genes will be
compared to the regulatory activity of the normal Abdominal-B proteins.