* 9206033
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,10/31/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 10/31/1994
* USD 10,000.00

Research on Holocene landscape evolution in the Mediterranean region concerns
the relative impact of climate change and human activity on episodes of erosion
and valley alluviation. The complex nature of geomorphic response to climate
change often results in differing landscape adjustments to a given stimulus
within a single drainage basin, resulting in temporal lags in certain portions
of the basin as the system progressively adjusts to the new conditions. Because
the character and intensity of anthropic disturbances vary spatially and
temporally, geomorphic responses to these stimuli are typically asynchronous and
more variable. One approach to assessing causality is to conduct tandem studies
in several different basins which have been subject to different types and
intensities of cultural activity while experiencing similar shifts in climate.
This project addresses the overall question of late Quaternary landscape change
in southern Italy by examining the stratigraphy and sedimentology of alluvial
and colluvial deposits in six drainage basins. It will integrate geomorphic,
sedimentologic, and pedological evidence with regional paleoenvironmental,
archaeological, and historical data in order to generalize about the nature and
timing of landscape change. Sediment data will be collected in the field, and
they will be augmented by laboratory analysis and aerial and topographic map
analysis to determine the causes of landscape change. Results of this research
will add new knowledge on the regional geomorphology of the Mediterranean
region, and it will establish the relative importance of climate and human
causative factors in the evolution of the landscape during the late Quaternary.