* 9206854
* Responses of Flood Magnitudes and Frequencies to Climatic   Changes Since c. 2000 years B.P.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1996
* James Knox, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1996
* USD 123,536.00

This project incorporates the use of alluvial stratigraphic and morphologic
evidence in the geologic record of Upper Mississippi Valley floodplains to
determine at a high resolution scale (e.ge., event, years, and decades to
centuries) how climatic changes of the last few thousand years have influenced
the seasonality of floods and the recurrence intervals of extreme flood events.
A major objective involves quantifying and modelling how flood magnitudes and
recurrence frequencies differed between times of climatic transition versus time
of climatic extremes, and how the relative direction of climatic change (e.g.
warm/moist to warm/dry versus warm.moist to cool/moist etc.) influences flood
magnitude and frequency characteristics. Results of the research will indicate
how the shape and dispersion of a flood frequency distribution change with
changes in the mean of a flood distribution. The stratigraphic record of
climate/flood associations will be compared with selected long historical
climate/flood records from Europe and from the Yellow River system of China. The
project provides important "event scale" understandings of linkages between
climatic and hydrologic systems that might be anticipated for future climatic
conditions that have been projected for various scenarios of atmospheric
greenhouse gas loadings. This type of "event scale" information generally is not
available from present global atmospheric circulation models.