* 9206729
* Developmental and Hormonal Regulation of Gene Expression    During Flower Senescence
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* William Woodson, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/1996
* USD 315,000.00

The senescence of flower petals is associated with increased synthesis of the
phytohormone ethylene, which in turn serves to initiate and regulate the
processes of programmed cell death. This research aims to investigate the
molecular mechanisms involved in the induction of ethylene synthesis, and
determine how ethylene acts to initiate this developmental program. The initial
experiments have focused on identifying senescence-related mRNAs and
characterizing their temporal, spatial, and hormonal regulation. Among these
senescence-related transcripts are those encoding enzymes in the ethylene
biosynthetic pathway including 1- aminocyclopropane- 1 carboxylate synthase and
the ethylene forming enzyme. Expression of antisense RNAs of senescence-related
genes will be used to determine if these genes are essential for programmed cell
death. The PI will define the cis-acting elements involved in the regulation of
tissue-specific and/or ethylene- regulated expression of petal senscence-related
genes and >- glucuronidase and the PI will evaluate the expression of this
reportedr gene in response to developmental factors and ethylene in transgenic
plants and transient assays. Identification of regulatory sequences will allow
us to screen expression libraries of senescing petal mRNAs for clones whose
products specifically bind to these DNA sequences. Aside from questions
concerning the developmental biology of programmed cell death, these experiments
will identify intermediates in the signal transduction pathway linking initial
perception of ethylene to gene expression.