* 9206712
* Flavonoid-Induced Pollen Germination: Localization, Kinetics and Gene Isolation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Loverine Taylor, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1995
* USD 160,000.00

Most higher plants reproduce sexually, consequently factors that influence
fertilization have a significant impact on reproductive success. Despite that
little is known of the cellular and molecular events surrounding pollen
germination, tube growth, and deposition of the sperm into the embryo sac. We
established that flavonoids, normally found in pollen, are essential for
successful fertilization. Flavonoid-deficient pollen is unable to germinate but
this defect can be "rescued" by the exogenous application of micromolar
quantities of a specific class of flavonoids leading to germination and tube
growth in vitro and normal fertilization and seed-set in vivo. How do these
small, hydrophobic molecules induce pollen germination? The basic tool to
address this question if the pollen rescue assay. To begin, the accumulation
site and intracellular transport mechanisms of flavonoids will be determined by
localization and kinetic analysis. The identical flavonoid required for
germination also stimulates transcription; this suggests a molecular mechanism
of flavonoid action and requires that these genes be identified by cloning and
sequencing. This will lead to a model of flavonoid action during pollen
germination. The product of this proposal will extend the knowledge of basic
reproductive biology and provide information useful in the design of mechanisms
to manipulate plant fertility.