* 9206879
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Development of the Triad Junction inSkeletal Muscle
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Mark Ellisman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1994
* USD 90,000.00

The triad junction is a complex structure involving plasma and sarcoplasmic
reticulum membranes and at least seven proteins, and is the site where
electrical excitation is transduced to release intracellular calcium, and thus
has a critical role in coupling electrical excitation to muscle contraction.
Additionally, it may interact with the cellular cytoskeleton to form muscle-
specific morphology. Two key components of the triad junction, the
dihydropyridine (DHPR) and ryanodine receptors (RR), are expressed early during
embryonic chick skeletal muscle differentiation. The aim of this project is to
determine how these proteins are incorporated into the triad junction and become
active in the release of intracellular calcium in developing skeletal muscle,
and whether the calcium release events mediated by the triad junction influence
other aspects of muscle development. The specific aims are to: (1), define the
experimental in detail by establishing the time course of the expression of the
DHPR and RR in developing embryonic chick skeletal muscle; and (2), investigate
whether these proteins influence skeletal muscle development by testing the
hypothesis that DHPR and RR serve as organizers for the assembly of the triad
junction and its integration into mature muscle structure. This will be done by
defining the time course of incorporation of these and other junctional
components into the junction, and assess the significance of interactions
between junctional proteins and cytoskeletal elements. Dr. Ellisman's
contribution to the project will be primarily with regard to the morphological
aspects. Skeletal muscle provides the contractile force to move bones and other
structures, effecting organ or whole organism movement. The signal which "tells"
the muscle to contract and ensures synchronous contraction along the length of
the muscle involves an electrical wave generated at the neuromuscular junction,
which travels down the length of the muscle fiber along the plasma membrane. The
conversion of the electrical signal to contraction occurs by transduction of the
electrical signal to a "second messenger" signal, namely release of calcium from
intracellular stores (sarcoplasmic reticulum) into the cytoplasm. At the "triad
junction" of the muscle cell, the membrane of the sarcoplasmic reticulum is
closely apposed to a specialized structure of the plasma membrane known as the
transverse tubule. This highly specialized region contains a set of unique
sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane proteins which interact with the closely apposed
transverse tubule membrane to effect the coupling of the electrical signal to
the opening of a calcium channel which allows the release of calcium from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum to the cytoplasm. Neither the mechanism of this signal
transduction event, nor the cellular development of this intricate subcellular
structure, is well understood. The results of this research will increase our
understanding of both of these very important processes in vertebrate muscle.