* 9206765
* Kinetic and Thermodynamic Studies of Long Distance          Electron Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1997
* Matthew Zimmt, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1997
* USD 422,000.00

An investigation of the factors which govern the rate and efficiency of electron
transfer reactions will be conducted. The effect of spacers separating donor and
acceptor groups will be evaluated by measuring photoinduced charge separation
rate constants and emission spectra as a function of temperature and calculating
free energies of electron transfer. Picosecond photocalorimetry will be used to
evaluate enthalpy and volume changes which occur upon electron transfer.
Finally, through-solvent electron coupling and its impact upon electron transfer
will be investigated in structurally rigid molecules. Correlations between
transfer rate constants, electronic coupling matrix elements, and solvent band
structure will be analyzed. %%% A process which is common to a large number of
chemical reactions is the rapid transfer of electrons. With this grant from the
Organic Dynamics Program, Profssor Matthew Zimmt of Brown University will
investigate the factors which govern the rate of electron transfer processes
which are complete within a few trillionths of a second. The parameters which
influence electron transfer will be investigated using molecules specially
designed so that both the distance between donor and acceptor groups and the
identity and positions of the intervening atoms are well-defined. The results of
the study may make it possible to design molecular systems which will maximize
electron transfer efficiency.