* 9206130
* Control of Heterocyst Differentiation in Free-Living and    Symbiotic Cyanobacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* John Meeks, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/29/1996
* USD 338,000.00

The PI hypothesizes that the mechanisms regulating the differentiation of
heterocysts (sites of aerobic N2 fixation by Nostoc sp. differ when Nostoc is in
symbiotic association relative to growth in the free-living state. He plans to
use physiological and molecular genetics to test the hypothesis with analyses in
both free-living and symbiotic growth states. Existing mutants will be
complemented by electroporation of genomic DNA after in vitro ligation into a
plasmid. Insertional mutagenesis will be used to isolate additional mutants.
Interrupted genes will be isolated by rescue of the insertion elements; genomic
DNA adjacent to the insertions will be cloned form cosmid libraries and
characterized. Transcriptional regulation of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(zwf) will be analyzed in response to nitrogen deprivation and symbiotic
interaction using the recently cloned gene. Insertional mutants of zwf will be
used to analyze its role in heterocyst function. Recently identified potential
nitrogen and anaerobic regulatory genes will be isolated from cosmid libraries
by heterologous hybridization and used to construct insertional mutants in
Nostoc for analysis of heterocyst differentiation. The results will lead to an
understanding of the environmental signals and mechanisms of regulation of cell
differentiation in filamentous cyanobacteria in two different growth states.