* 9206391
* SGER:  Degradation of the Organic Matrix as a Measure of    Alteration of Fossil Mollusk Shells
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* George Clark, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 12/31/1993
* USD 15,500.00

The organic matrix permeates the structure of calcareous shells, enveloping the
individual crystals and binding them together. It is essentially invisible in
the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of cut of fractured shell sections, and
has received little attention as a structural component. It is important in the
taphonomy of fossil shells, for as long as it remains intact the original
crystallography is preserved. One technique does exist for the SEM investigation
of the organic matrix in its normal relationship to shell microstructure. This
involves cutting, polishing, and etching a section through the shell, and
preserving the exposed organic matrix in place by critical point drying. This
project will examine the utility of this technique in determining the degree of
degradation of organic matrix in fossil mollusks. Four collections of fossils
will be examined, representing both calcite and aragonite in a variety of
microstructures and over a range of preservational quality. If measures of
matrix degradation can provide a consistent means of determining early stages of
alteration in fossil shells, it will open up new avenues of study in the field
of taphonomy, and provide a source of supporting data for studies on fossil
geochemistry.