* 9206325
* Structure and Function of Troponin and Myosin
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1995
* John Collins, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 03/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

The interaction of myosin (thick filaments) and actin (thin filaments) which
results in muscle contraction is regulated by reversible binding of calcium ions
to intracellular, regulatory proteins. Depending on the source of the muscle,
the calcium- binding protein may be a subunit of myosin, troponin (associated
with actin), or both acting in concert. The long term objective of the research
is to elucidate the basic molecular mechanisms of the troponin-linked and
myosin-linked calcium regulation in muscle. We will investigate the way in which
calcium influences the interactions of the muscle regulatory proteins. The
calcium- binding subunits, troponin C and myosin light chains, are homologous
proteins. Our results will identify similarities and differences in the
structures and interactions of these proteins which are indicative of
fundamental common mechanisms as well as key specific differences which have led
to functional specialization in the two regulatory systems. Our experimental
approach is based on the use of intermolecular chemical crosslinking of the
regulatory proteins. Mass spectrometry and protein chemistry techniques will be
used to identify crosslinked amino acid residues in each protein. Site-directed
mutagenesis will be used to be used to increase the range of possibilities for
crosslinking and to further characterize the details of the interaction sites.
%%% Muscle contraction is regulated by reversible binding of calcium ions to
intracellular, regulatory proteins. Depending on the source of the muscle, the
calcium-binding protein may be a subunit of myosin, troponin (associated with
actin), or both acting in concert. The long term objective of the research is to
elucidate the basic molecular mechanisms of the troponin-linked and myosin-
linked calcium regulation in muscle. The calcium-binding subunits, troponin C
and myosin light chains, are homologous proteins. This research will identify
similarities and differences in the structures and interactions of these
proteins which are indicative of fundamental common mechanisms as well as key
specific differences which have led to functional specialization in the two
regulatory systems. The experimental approach is based on the use of
intermolecular chemical crosslinking of the regulatory proteins. Mass
spectrometry and protein chemistry techniques will be used to identify
crosslinked amino acid residues in each protein. Site- directed mutagenesis will
be used to be used to increase the range of possibilities for crosslinking and
to further characterize the details of the interaction sites.