* 9206674
* Membrane Topology and Macromolecular Transport of the       Bacterial Envelope
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1998
* Manfred Bayer, Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1998
* USD 446,000.00

The proposed research focuses on the functional and structural organization of
envelope membranes of established strains of Escherichia coli and of new
constructs. Biochemical, immunological and molecular-biological techniques will
be used in combination with new developments in cryofixation procedures to
optimize high resolution topography of the membranes of Gram-negative bacterial
cells. Emphasis is placed on a biochemical, structural and genetic dissection of
translocation processes involving membrane proteins and polysaccharides as they
are transported from the inner membrane (IM) to their target site at the outer
envelope membrane (OM). Two models of translocation pathways will be tested:
after synthesis and passage through the IM, a molecule may travel either via
IM/OM connections (the membrane adhesions sites), or via the periplasmic space.
The proposed experiments are aimed at the study of topographic relationships of
the envelope components in undisrupted cells, and at a molecular stabilization
of the cell envelope. The work will be subdivided into two aspects: 1, the
topology of export pathways of outer membrane polysaccharides and proteins; and
2, stabilization of the membrane organization using cryofixation and UV-flash
crosslinking, to determine the in vivo structure of adhesion sites and
periplasm. It is hoped that development of the UV-flash and cryo preparation
methodologies will permit future investigations into the spatial distribution of
components of the protein export machinery (e.g., localization of Sec A, Sec E,
and export sites of precursor proteins in wild type and mutant cells). %%% Gram-
negative bacteria are bounded by envelopes consisting of an inner membrane
(equivalent to the plasma membrane of the bacterial cell) and an outer membrane
(a true biological membrane, with proteins associated with a lipid bilayer), and
a layer of wall (peptidoglycan) sandwiched between the two membranes. The
envelope forms a barrier against macromolecules, drugs, and viruses, and
provides mechanical stability toward turgor pressure and physical injury. The
envelope membranes also have to provide for the specific transmembrane transfer
of large molecules (both coming in and going out). It also must be dynamic in
structure, to allow for insertion of new membrane constituents during cell
growth. The goal of this work is to elucidate the structural and functional
organization of the Gram-negative bacterial surface. It is expected that some of
the methodological advances will have broader applications in cell and membrane
biology. This research will contribute significantly to the understanding of the
dynamic organization of the bacterial envelope membranes, their export
machinery, and their structural and functional mosaic.