* 9206689
* Biogenesis of Photosystem II:  Maturation and Stabilization of Transcripts of the psbB and psbC Loci of Chlamydomonas   Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Gregory Schmidt, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1995
* USD 150,000.00

A complex aspect of chloroplast biogenesis is the pervasive involvement of
postranscriptional processes within the organelle that govern the formation of
mRNAs for proteins of the photosynthetic apparatus. We have isolated nuclear
mutants of Chlamydomonas that do not accumulate chloroplast transcripts for two
light-harvesting components, CP47 and CP43, of Photosystem II reaction centers.
Mutants 6.2z5 synthesizes, but does not accumulate, psbC mRNA while GE2.10 is
defective in stabilization of several transcripts from the psbB locus. The
mutants appears to lack proteins that interact specifically with the mRNAs and
function to protect degradation. For GE2.10 however, it is also possible the
maturation of a polycistronic psbB transcript is impaired. Our studies include:
1) completing sequencing of the psbB locus to elucidate the products encoded by
this region of the alga's chloroplast genome and the occurrence of secondary
structures that presumably specify transcript maturation of stabilization; 2)
characterizing the primary transcripts and products of psbB; 3) analyzing
proteins from purified chloroplasts from wildtype versus the mutant strains,
that bind to RNAs from psbB and psbC subclones; 4) isolating of genes encoding
the RNA-binding proteins by use of oligonucleotide probes or complementation of
the mutant strains by transformation with a plasmid library of wildtype nuclear
DNA; 5) if time allows, assessing the roles of non-coding sequences of the psb
transcripts by transforming chloroplasts of the mutants and wildtype with
constructs of psbC gene fragments with psbB flanking regions (and vice-versa).
%%% The photosynthetic apparatus of plants and algae is formed through the
coordinated activities of two cellular compartments: the chloroplast, where
photosynthetic activities are compartmentalized, and the nuclear/cytoplasmic
chambers where many regulatory and photosynthetic proteins are synthesized.
Although chloroplasts can synthesize a many photosynthetic proteins, especially
those involved in light energy conversion into chemical energy, they are not
autonomous with respect to either their ability to generate functional
photosynthetic complexes or with respect to the regulation of their
photosynthetic and synthetic functions. Our work concerns understanding how
chloroplast gene expression is regulated by proteins imported from the
cytoplasm. We have found that nuclear mutants of the unicellular green alga
Chlamydomonas, which unlike vascular plants can easily grown by provision of
simple carbohydrates, are defective in the accumulation of mRNAs encoding
chlorophyll-binding proteins that are made in the chloroplast. This project is
to characterize the nature of the defect which causes the chloroplast gene
products to be rapidly degraded after they are synthesized. Our approach is to
utilize gene sequencing, biochemical and genetic means to resolve the nature of
the proteins that normally interact with and stabilize the chloroplast mRNAs.