* 9206677
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Methods for Biological  Rhythms and Population Genetics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Chichia Chiu, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1995
* USD 80,000.00

The investigators study two different but synergistic areas of applied
mathematics: neural networks and population genetics. The neural network studies
are based on Voltage Controlled Oscillator model Neurons (VCONs), which are
constructible electronic devices that have interesting mathematical models and
many parallels with physiological nerve cells. The investigators have recently
derived VCON networks that filter, process, and store information based on
frequency encoding; they extend and refine this work in parallel with known
physiological circuits. The mathematical aspects of interest in this are
rotation vectors and generalized Fourier analysis of dynamical systems. The
applied aspects are related to the design and study of circuits that can
reproduce known functions of parts of mammalian brains based on frequency
encoding and decoding. Specifically, the investigators study tonotopic mappings,
storage and retrieval of messages, and the structure and function of processing
circuits similar to neocortical columns. The second part of this proposal
studies populations and genetics. The investigators focus on food chains and
colony synchronization in bacterial communities, pattern formation in bacterial
lawns, and plasmid stability in genetically engineered microorganisms.
Computational methods developed for simulation of VCON networks are applied to
study bacterial communities. The project involves two problems in mathematical
biology that illustrate two important contributions that mathematics makes to
the life sciences: First, mathematics enables us to analyze large networks that
resemble parts of our brains, and second, mathematical formulations enable us to
use scientific computers to predict the outcome of experiments that are
expensive or difficult to perform. First, the investigators study large
collections of electronic devices that mimic brain circuits. These devices
(called VCONs) are based on phase-locked loops that are widely used in
electronic communications. They have designed, analyzed, and simulated VCON
networks that focus attention on the most persistent among many competing
stimuli, and that memorize and recall messages. They extend this work to include
other aspects of the brain, including parts of the hippocampus. The novelty of
this work is that it is based on frequency encoded information rather than
discrete information bits, as in digital computers. As a result, the networks
are quite stable, even functioning well when partially destroyed. In the second
part of this work, they use methods developed for VCON networks to study
problems about bacterial communities. While these two problem areas are widely
separated, certain mathematical aspects of the two are remarkably similar:
Bacteria lead oscillatory lives, and using the methods for large networks of
VCON oscillators, the investigators are able to describe in mathematical terms
large communities of bacteria -- for example, as arising in soil. In addition to
working on problems that are similar between the two areas, they study problems
specific to bacterial genetics, including how stable are genetically engineered
variations in bacterial cell lines.