* 9206451
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  A Detailed Test of Cosmogenic      Radionuclide Dating of Moraines:  Pinedale and Bull Lake    Moraines, Fremont Lake, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Edward Evenson, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1994
* USD 51,635.00

This research is a detailed test of cosmogenic radionuclide exposure dating
based principally on measurements of 1OBe, 26Al, and 14C in quartz from boulders
which lie on moraine crest of known or accepted ages at the Pinedale Glaciation
type locality, Fremont Lake, Wyoming. The purpose is to determine the limits,
accuracy, precision, and resolution of the cosmogenic dating technique. We will
adher to a stringent sampling strategy which minimizes errors due to high
erosion rate (i.e. fire-induced surface spallation), pre-exposure, cosmic
radiation shielding, unsuitable boulder surface geometries, and disturbed
exposure, cosmic radiation shielding, unsuitable boulder surface geometries, and
disturbed exposure histories due to redeposition or burial of the boulder. In
the first year we will determine the reliability and precision of the technique
to date a moraine by sampling multiple boulders on single moraine ridges, and
multiple samples from selected boulders. Based on direct dating, regional
correlations to dated stratigraphic equivalents, and correlation to the high
resolution oxygen isotope chronostratigraphy the Pinedale (Stage 2) and Bull
Lake (Stage 6) deposits can be aged bracketed at 14-30 ka and 130-160ka. We will
date 30 samples from each of the Pinedale and Bull Lake terminal moraines at
Fremont Lake. In the second year, armed with a measure of the method's
precision, we will date samples from each of 6 nested Pinedale recessional
moraines in order to determine its resolution. If the ages of the outermost to
innermost moraines yield progressively younger ages this will imply that the
technique will be able to directly measure rates to alpine or continental
glacial retreat. We will also date 10 boulders from a suspect Stage 4 moraine
which lies between the Pinedale and Bull Lake deposits in order to establish
whether or not Stage 4 (Early Pinedale) deposits are preserved at the Pinedale
type locality. Finally, we will make a useful cross check of dates produced from
our method with dates using F. Phillips' 36C1 technique on duplicate samples
from 10 boulders which yield the best dates from Year 1.