* 9206583
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  The Role of Exsolution Lamellae in the Rates and Mechanisms of Dissolution of Plagioclase      Feldspars
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Paul Bloom, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1994
* USD 91,520.00

Plagioclase feldspars are abundant primary minerals in nature and represent an
important source of Ca and Na in noncarbonate systems. Two phase intergrowths of
calcic and sodic rich phases (exsolution lamellae) are common features in
plagioclase feldspars, yet few studies have evaluated their role in the rates,
stoichiometry and mechanisms of plagioclase dissolution. The objectives of the
proposed collaborative study are to (i) determine the effects of exsolution
lamellae on the rates and stoichiometry of plagioclase feldspars, (ii) determine
the effect of preferentially weathered lamellar phases on the interpretation of
data collected using surfaced sensitive spectroscopies such as x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and (iii) examine the potential role of
exsolved phases in preferential release of Ca from plagioclase samples collected
from well characterized watershed laboratories. Collaboration among the
principal investigators will combine expertise and facilities necessary to
accomplish these objectives. Dissolution experiments will be conducted at pH 4
using batch pH stat, flow through cell, and column reaction vessels using
plagioclase samples over a range of an contents with and without exsolution
lamellae. In addition, plagioclase samples from watershed laboratories will be
used in characterization and dissolution studies to evaluate the potential role
of exsolution lamellae in natural systems. The surfaces of reacted minerals will
be characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM-EDX), x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and high resolution transmission electron
microscopy (HRTEM-EDX, HRTEM-ED). Results from this study will be used to model
the rate and stoichiometry of plagioclase dissolution as a function of An
content in minerals with and without exsolved phases. Hypotheses concerning the
mechanisms of plagioclase dissolution and the preferential release of Ca
relative to Si and Na during dissolution will be tested for both laboratory and
watershed weathering environments.