* 9206788
* Workshop on Reconfigurable Free-Space Optical Interconnects;Boulder, Colorado
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1992,04/30/1993
* Charles Stirk, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 04/30/1993
* USD 11,500.00

Optical interconnects play an increasingly important role in computer
architecture. For instance, commercial optical local-area-networks and buses
allow for high-bandwidth, low power, and low- crosstalk communication among
computational resources. In addition, it is now becoming clear that fixed, free-
space optical interconnects will have cost and performance advantages for wire-
limited graph layouts. It is not clear, however, what role reconfigurable free-
space optical interconnects will play in computer architecture. To address this
knowledge gap, a workshop is planned by the University of Colorado consisting of
about 35 participants from leading universities, research labs and companies
working in computer architecture and optical interconnects. The purpose is to
compare the cost and performance of reconfigurable optical interconnects in
different computer architectures against conventional electronic and fixed,
free-space optical interconnect technologies. The result of the workshop will be
an assessment of the current and projected capabilities of reconfigurable
optical interconnects along with the communication needs of future computer
architectures. This will identify the critical areas of research in
reconfigurable optical interconnects. It will also place goals that must be met
so that computer architectures with reconfigurable optical interconnects will
have cost and performance advantages over other approaches.