* 9206976
* Mathematical Sciences: Convergence Properties of Hilbert's  Substitution Method
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Solomon Feferman, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 02/29/1996
* USD 60,000.00

The substitution method was suggested by Hilbert (1930) as a successive
approximation method for finding finite function solutions of a system of
number-theoretic functional equations, which are derived from proofs in formal
systems. Convergence, i.e. termination of this method produces finitistic proofs
of combinatorial identities and numerical realizations of provable Sigma-zero-
one-formulas. The problem of convergence was treated by von Neumann (1927) for
quantifier-free induction and by Ackermann (1940) for the system of first-order
arithmetic. The problem for analysis remained open until very recently, when it
was settled by Mints (1990). Mints now intends to investigate convergence
problems for other systems where the problem is still open, including the
following: 1) predicative analysis and predicatively reducible systems, 2)
stronger subsystems of analysis whose proof- theoretic ordinal is known, 3) the
theory of types, 4) full analysis with the axiom of choice, 5) Zermelo set
theory and possibly stronger systems. Proof theory examines questions about
proofs that lie to one side of their correctness. Correctness is understood and
taken for granted. For example, what axioms are required, all the axioms of a
system or only a proper subset? Indeed, certain axioms are particularly critical
in such studies, the necessity of employing the so-called Axiom of Choice,
involving orders of infinity greater than that of the set of all the positive
integers, 1, 2, 3, ..., being considered particularly interesting. Other strong
axioms of infinity often play this role too. In another direction, one can ask
of a proof that shows that something or other exists whether it provides an
explicit recipe for constructing the thing shown to exist. Proofs which do are
called "constructive," and others, "non-constructive." A particularly intriguing
part of proof theory concerns itself with whether a non-constructive proof can
be reworked in some automatic way into a constructive one. It turns out that the
answer depends on the theory being studied. The investigator has shown that a
method known as the Hilbert substitution method can be used to turn any non-
constructive proof in a certain formulation of analysis into a constructive one
by essentially turning a crank, and he would like to know if the argument he
gave can be adapted to obtain the analogous result for certain other
mathematical systems.