* 9206106
* Biochemical Analyses of Cytochromes c Biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Robert Kranz, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 01/31/1996
* USD 242,000.00

The c-type cytochromes possess heme that is covalenty ligated to the
apocytochrome and these cytochromes are present in distinct compartments within
eucaryotes (i.e., mitochondrial intermembrane space) and procaryotes (i.e.,
periplasmic space). Major questions that remain concern what factors are needed
for their assembly and how these individual factors are themselves transported
to the proper compartments. The long-term objective of this work is to
understand at a detailed molecular level the specific proteins and events that
are required for the biogenesis of c-type cytochromes. Moreover, the mechanism
by which heme is transported across bilayer membranes from its site of
biosynthesis, the mitochondrial matrix or the bacterial cytoplasm, is a
fundamental question in biology. Specifically, using the Gram negative
photosynthetic bacterium, Rhodobacter capsulatus, we will develop biochemical
assays for processes required in cytochrome c biogenesis. Previous molecular
analysis of R.capsulatus mutants that are defective in cytochrome c biogenesis
have indicated that hel genes may encode the first- reported specific heme
transporter; ccl gene products may be involved in the ligation of heme to
apocytochrome c in the periplasmic space. Thus, we will develop (1) in vitro
heme transport assays and (2) in vitro heme lyase assays and apply these to R.
capsulatus mutants that are predicted to be defective in these processes. %%%
Both eucaryotes and procaryotes possess heme proteins called c-type cytochromes
that are present in distinct compartments within their cells. These cytochromes
are vital for mitochondrial and bacterial electron transport processes and
consequently ATP production. The c-type cytochromes have been the subject of
thousands of studies concerning their function and structure (e.g., X-ray
crystallography). Nevertheless, little is known about how a native c-type
cytochrome is assembled in a particular compartment. For example, it is unknown
how (and in what form) heme is transported from its site of biosynthesis, the
mitochondrial matrix or the bacterial cytoplasm, to the assembly site of the
cytochrome (i.e., the mitochondrial intermembrane space or the bacterial
periplasm). Thus, the mechanism of heme transport across bilayer membranes is a
fundamental question in biology. Our previous molecular genetic analysis of
mutants in the bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus that are specially defective in
cytochromes c biogenesis, have implicated specific gene products (called hel) as
the best candidate (and first ever reported) for a specific heme transporter.
This proposal includes the development of in vitro heme transport assays to
further investigate these defects. Additionally, the mechanism by which heme is
covalently ligated to the apocytochromes will be studied by the development of
in vitro assays for this process. The long-term objective of this work is to
understand at a detailed molecular level the specific proteins and events that
are required for the biogenesis of c-type cytochromes in bacteria.