* 9206326
* Empirical and Hierarchical Bayes Methods                    in Small Area Estimation Problems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Parthasarathi Lahiri, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/29/1996
* USD 55,043.00

In large scale sample surveys, estimates of a variety of characteristics are
frequently given for large populations. Similar estimates for smaller domains or
areas also are required. Recently, considerable attention has been given to
improve procedures related to small area estimation problems. The traditional
sample survey estimators which use information from a given small area often
yield large standard errors because of small sample size in the area. Reliable
small area statistics are needed by many federal agencies for regional planning
and allocating government resources. Among these are the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, which is interested in providing estimates of the unemployment rate
not only for the nation but also for the states and the Census Bureau which
inevitably misses people and must face the problem of adjusting spatially for
the undercounts. The investigator spent the last academic year at the Bureau of
Labor Statistics and the Census Bureau as a Senior Research Fellow under the
American Statistical Association/ National Science Foundation Fellowship
Program. The proposed research is a continuation of his work at these agencies
aimed at developing reliable small area statistics. Attention is focussed on
various multivariate and time series models to combine information from related
sources. The plan is to develop different empirical and hierarchical Bayes
procedures. To determine measures of accuracy of the empirical Bayes estimators,
second order approximations will be sought to the mean squared errors of the
estimators. This will require the extension of the existing methodology to
multivariate and time series modelling and also to the situation when the prior
parameters are estimated by the method of maximum likelihood or restricted
maximum likelihood. It is anticipated that the posterior mean and the posterior
variance in a hierarchical Bayes analysis will involve multi-dimensional
integrals. Different sampling-based methods to evaluate the integrals will be
investigated. In this context the modification and approximation of the Gibbs
sampling method will be considered. The principal investigator has a solid
research record in small area estimation and is well equipped by experience and
by his collaborative ties with leading statisticians in the field to conduct the
proposed research. His successes in this project will readily find applications
in the particular areas of government with which he is familiar and other
important arenas as well.