* 9206603
* Studies of Dinosaur Bone Histology:  Paleobiological        Implications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Peter Dodson, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 08/31/1995
* USD 104,750.00

Dinosaur bone contains many significant features including fibro-lamellar bone,
dense vascularization, and secondary haversian bone Such features are found in
living endotherms, and have been cited as supporting the concept that dinosaurs
were endothermic. Recently the view has emerged that all tissue types are found
in both endotherms and ectotherms. Specific histological types of bone may
indicate elevated growth rate. Combined with other approaches such as
skeletochronology, some insight into metabolic rate may be obtained. Progress
was made by careful investigation of the histology of series of femora that span
the ontogeny of two Early Jurassic dinosaurs from Zimbabwe, Massospondylus
carinatus and Syntarsus rhodesiensis. Both dinosaurs show fibrolamellar bone but
neither shows all features of living endotherms. Massospondylus shows growth
rings that indicate it took 15 years to attain a body size f 250 kg. Growth rate
was indeterminate as in modern ectotherms. In Syntarsus growth was determinate
as in living endotherms, but it took 7 years to attain the size of 20 kg. Each
of these dinosaurs occupies a unique position on a physiological continuum
between endothermy and ectothermy. The proposed study will extend the careful
techniques worked out on the Zimbabwean dinosaurs to ontogenetic series of
Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous dinosaurs from North America and Mongolia in
order to obtain a phylogenetic, stratigraphic and geographic perspective on
dinosaurian growth rates and the potential development of endothermy.