* 9206660
* Fine-scale Adaptation to Temperature:  A Physiological,     Biochemical and Molecular Analysis Using Congeneric         Species
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1998
* George Somero, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* John A. Phillips
* 02/28/1998
* USD 605,845.00

Congeneric marine fishes and invertebrates with different latitudinal or depth
distribution patterns, i.e., different absolute temperatures and thermal ranges,
will be studied to determine: (1) the importance of fine-scale adaptations to
temperature in kinetic properties and structural stabilities of enzymes; (2) the
amino acid sequence changes that underlie these adaptive differences in kinetic
and stability characteristics; (3) the roles played by multi-locus and allelic
enzyme variants in adaptation to temperature over evolutionary and seasonal time
course; (4) the effects of evolutionary adaptation and seasonal acclimatization
on mitochondrial respiration and membrane fluidity; and (5) the kinetics of
acclimatory change in protein isoforms and mitochondrial respiration and
fluidity. These studies are designed to fill in important gaps in our
understanding of the thermal biology of animals, specifically the role played by
fine-scale adaptation to temperature in establishing organismal distribution
patterns, the precise changes in protein primary structure that establish
adaptive differences in enzymes(M4 - lactate dehydrogenase and cytosolic malate
dehydrogenase), the minimal amounts of change in temperature required to favor
selection for new protein variants or mitochondrial properties, and the rate
with which acclimation occurs. Comparisons of eurythermal and stenothermal
congeners will reveal underlying biochemical and molecular differences that help
to establish species' thermal tolerance ranges. Study of fine-scale adaptations
to temperature will provide a firmer basis for predicting the effects of global
warming on the distributions and functions of economics animals.