* 9206384
* 1992 Gordon Conference on Science of Adhesion,              August 10-14 at New Hampton, New Hampshire
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1993
* Lynn Penn, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1993
* USD 3,000.00

This award provide funds to assist in bringing together a diverse group of
international scientists and engineers working in the area of adhesion.
Adhesion's pervasive role in areas as diverse as structural materials,
biomaterials, membranes, and protective coatings, to name only a few, has come
to be widely appreciated in recent years. The interest in adhesion as a science
has been spurred by two developments. One has been the growth in techniques to
manipulate surfaces and interfaces in multiphase materials systems, with
significant improvement in the overall behavior of such systems. The other has
been the rapid progress in molecular and atomic level characterization of
surfaces and interfaces. Still being developed is a thorough understanding of
how molecular or atomic level details at the interface between the adhering
phases are related to the macroscopic performance characteristics.
Correspondingly, the construction of a complete and general theory of adhesion
is still in process. To achieve this goal, several scientists need to exchange
not only results, but ideas. They need to challenge each other, teach each
other, and develop insights from one another. This can be best accomplished by
an extended period of personal interaction. The Gordon Conference, providing a
week of close contact among scientists, is one of the few venues that provides
the required face-to-face interaction.