* 9206124
* Conditions Favorable for the Development of Heavy           Precipitation During TAMEX
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Yi-Leng Chen, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/1994
* USD 170,000.00

Flash floods are major meteorological disasters which occur around the globe.
Understanding of this phenomenon is a challenging problem because it is
necessary to understand both complex dynamic and microphysical processes at
scales of motion that are smaller than typically measured by conventional
weather networks. This scale of motion is termed storm-scale or mesoscale by
meteorologists. The National Science Council of Taiwan established a Multiple
Hazards Mitigation Project whose meteorological component focused on improving
flash flood predictions. A major field project, entitled the Taiwan Area
Mesoscale Experiement (TAMEX), was held in the Spring of 1987. The project was a
joint effort of various Taiwanese agencies with participation from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Science Foundation
(NSF). The scientific goals were to study the mesoscale systems that form on a
quasi-stationary and consistent feature known as the Mei-Yu front and cause the
heavy rains known as the "plum rains". Under a previous award, the Principal
Investigator used the special observations collected during the TAMEX in
diagnostic studies that identified important factors for the formation of heavy
rainfall. These studies have lead the Principal Investigator to concentrate on
three topics -- the dynamics of the low level jet; the barrier jet which forms
along the northwest windward coast of Taiwan under the prevailing
southwesterlies; and the upper-level circulations. In addition to further
analysis using the observational data, the Principal Investigator will utilize a
numerical model to help identify the important dynamic factors for heavy rain
production.