* 9206820
* Electromagnetic Studies of the Continents (EMSOC):          Continental Shelf EM Instrumentation
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Jean Filloux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 08/31/1995
* USD 300,000.00

This award provides funding to design and build a set of instruments to measure
the electric and magnetic fields while deployed in the submarine environment of
continental shelves. The design will permit simultaneous recording of variations
in the horizontal electric field, the 3-component magnetic field, tilt of the
instrument, and ambient temperature. The instruments will be developed and built
by collaborating groups at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in
Massachusetts and the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in California. They
will subsequently be used as an essential part of a planned magnetotelluric
geophysical transect reaching from the continental southeastern Appalachians to
the deep Atlantic ocean. Electrical conductivity in rocks, which depends on
ionic fluid content, metal or carbon content, and temperature can provide
information about large scale geological structures that is complementary to
other geophysical measurements such as seismic or gravity. Recent experiments
have demonstrated that large-scaled structures can be imaged with this approach
but that a combination of land and seafloor measurements are essential to proper
interpretations of continental structures extending seaward. Instrumentation for
measuring electrical conductivity on land and in the deep (calm) ocean
environments already exist. This project will result in instrumentation to fill
in the gap for measurements in the shallower waters of the continental shelf
areas.