* 9206716
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* NONE NONE, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 01/31/1994
* USD 8,433.00

Tropical forests in Latin America are disappearing at a rate higher than in any
other region of the world. The causes of deforestation vary with local
conditions, but include conversion of forest to agriculture or pasture lands,
logging, and the expansion of human settlements. One argument for preservation
of tropical forests is that local, regional, and global climates may be altered
by the loss of forest cover. Forests act as climate regulators, influencing the
nature and pattern of temperature and precipitation. Deforestation changes the
radiation budget and microclimate of a local area, but the magnitude and spatial
extent of the change is poorly known. It is even less clear how precipitation
regimes may be affected. Also, little research has been conducted on the
influence of tropical forests on local and regional climates outside of the
Amazon Basin, although the rate of deforestation is greater in Mexico and
Central America. This project will examine the microclimatic, local, and
regional effects of deforestation in the Lancandon Forest of Chiapas, Mexico. It
will involve an analysis of historical climate data for the region, a synoptic-
scale analysis of the regional climate, and a micro level study of local
meteorology in forest and cleared areas to document the effects of
deforestation. This project will contribute to an understanding of how tropical
forests and climate interact, the geographical scale over which these
interactions are important, and it will assess the implication of deforestation
for agricultural and conservation policies in environmentally sensitive areas.