* 9206668
* 5S RNA Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1992,11/30/1996
* Aimee Bakken, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 11/30/1996
* USD 320,667.00

Ribosomes play a key role in the synthesis of proteins in all living cells,
whether they be plant cells, animal cells, or bacteria. In eukaryotes, these
complex giant macromolecules are composed of four kinds of ribosomal RNA
molecules and approximately eighty different ribosomal proteins. Ribosome
assembly occurs in the nucleolus of the cell, where three of the four RRNAS are
synthesized. All other components of the ribosome are synthesized elsewhere and
transported to the nucleolus for assembly. This research project is focused on
identifying and characterizing the transport pathways and regulatory mechanisms
that bring the 5S ribosomal RNA to the nucleolus for assembly into ribosomes.
The research will use mutants of the cloned 5S RNA genes and their associated
proteins to try to disrupt normal ribosome assembly or function in order to
discern how each component might function in normal ribosome assembly. The
mutated genes or their gene products (5S RNAs or 5S RNA-binding proteins) will
be microinjected in Xenopus oocytes, and the gene products will be followed
through the cell by way of the radioisotopic labelling and/or specific
antibodies against the protein or nucleoprotein components. In vitro exchange
studies will be carried out with isolated nucleoli and with isolated ribosomes,
and the results will be verified in vivo through the microinjection experiments.
%%% Protein synthesis is a fundamental process of all living cells. The
machinery for protein synthesis is the ribosome, a complex structure consisting
of many individual macromolecular components, both proteins and polyribonucleic
acids (RNAs). The synthesis of ribosomes is a complex process, since the
synthesis of the individual macromolecular components occurs in various parts of
the cell, and sometimes at different times, yet it is necessary to bring all the
different components together for assembly. The protein components of the
ribosome are themselves synthesized on preexisting ribosomes, and this takes
place in the cytoplasm. The ribonucleic acids are synthesized in the nucleus,
since they are direct transcripts of the ribosomal genes. Three of the four RNA
molecules are synthesized in a specialized region of the nucleus termed the
nucleolus, first as a very long transcript which is processed into the three
smaller pieces. It is to the nucleolus that all the other components are brought
for assembly, including the fourth and smallest RRNA molecule, termed "5S." This
5S RNA is synthesized in the nucleus, but not in the nucleolus. Prior results
from this laboratory have shown that, in Xenopus oocytes, the 5S RNA is
synthesized in advance of the other RRNA components, and that after the 5S RNA
is transcribed it is transported to the cytoplasm, together with its own
transcription factor (a protein termed TFIIIA), and is stored there.
Subsequently, it becomes dissociated from TFIIIA and associates with a different
protein, L5, which is a ribosomal protein; the 5S RNA-L5 complex is then
transported back to the nucleus, specifically now to the nucleolus, where it
becomes assembled into the nascent ribosomes. This project will address the
mechanism and regulation of this complicated nucleocytoplasmic trafficking. The
work is of significance not only for understanding ribosomal biogenesis, which
is itself a very important problem in biology, but also for understanding
nucleocytoplasmic trafficking in general, which as a phenomenon is fundamental
to much of eukaryotic cellular regulation.