* 9206095
* DNA Recognition by Basic-Leucine Zipper Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1999
* Mark Guiltinan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1999
* USD 644,750.00

EmBP-1 is a wheat basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) class transcription factor which
has been implicated in the control of gene expression. Proposed experimentation
will address the structure-function relationships of the DNA binding domain of
EmBP-1. By analyzing mutant DNA binding proteins with altered binding
preferences, insight can be gained of the ways in which amino acid sequences
within the DNA binding domains of bZIP proteins encode functional specificities.
The minimal domains for the dimerization and DNA binding functions of EmBP-1
will be determined using deletion analysis and in vitro binding assays. cDNA
libraries encoding randomly mutagenized basic region domains will be constructed
and probed with degenerate oligonucleotides to determine how changes in the
amino acid sequences of the bZIP domains are manifested in altered binding
specificities. The functional significance of these findings will be tested in
vivo by expressing mutagenized versions of EmBP-1 in transgenic Arabidopsis
plants. Additional, to examine the natural variation in bZIP sequences, members
of the EmBP-1 gene family will be isolated from Arabidopsis. Because the leucine
zipper class of transcription factors has been conserved from plants to animals,
the knowledge gained from the proposed research will be applicable to the basic
principles operating in most eukaryotic cells. %%% EmBP-1 is a wheat DNA binding
protein involved in controlling gene expression. Understanding the way in which
DNA binding proteins recognize specific DNA sequences will lead to a greater
understanding of the mechanisms by which cells activate gene expression. This
has great significance in understanding normal growth and development as well as
in understanding aberrant gene expression which is often associated with human
disease such as cancer. By analyzing mutant DNA binding proteins with altered
binding preferences, insight can be gained of the ways in which this class of
proteins function. Randomly mutagenizeds Dna binding domains will be constructed
analyzed to determine how changes in the amino acid sequences are manifested in
altered binding specificity. These findings will be tested by expressing
mutagenized versions of EnBP-1 in genetically engineered plants, Additionally,
to examine the natural variation in DNA binding sequences, related genes will be
isolated from Arabidopsis (a model plant species used in molecular genetic
studies). Because this type of protein is found within organisms ranging from
plants to animals, the knowledge gained from the proposed research will be
applicable to the basic principles operating in most cells.