* 9206882
* Purification and Cloning of Elicitor Binding Protein(s)     from Soybean
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Michael Hahn, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 01/31/1997
* USD 547,041.00

The long term goal of this research is to understand how plant cells perceive
and respond to extracellular signals. The system being studied is the induction
of plant defense responses, phytoalexin accumulation in soybean (Glycine max)
induced by oligosaccharides (elicitors) originating from the mycelial wall of a
phytopathogenic fungus, Phytophthora megasperma f. sp. glycinea. Considerable
information has been obtained about the structure of an elicitor (a branched
hepta-beta-glucoside) derived from mycelial wall glucans and about the identity
and regulation of elicitor- induced genes encoding enzymes required for the
biosynthesis of the phytoalexins. However, little is known about the mechanisms
by which plant cells perceive the elicitor, or how that signal is transmitted to
the cell nucleus to initiate changes in gene expression. The research described
in this proposal focuses on the first step in the elicitor-stimulated signal
transduction pathway, that is, the recognition of a hepta-beta-glucoside
elicitor by a plasma-membrane localized receptor. The proposed research has
three major goals. The first goal is the identification, purification, and
characterization of hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor binding protein(s) (EBPs) from
soybean root microsomal membranes. Evidence has already been obtained that a
single class of specific, high-affinity (dissociation constant of 1 nM) EBPs
exist in soybean root microsomes originating from the plasma membrane. These
EBPs have been successfully solubilized from the membranes using detergents, and
the solubilized EBPs retain their high affinity and specificity for the
elicitor. The number and identity of the proteins that have hepta-beta-glucoside
elicitor binding activity will be established by photo-affinity labeling. The
EBPs will be purified by affinity chromatography and antibodies against the
binding protein(s) will be prepared. The second goal is the isolation and
characterization of cDNA sequences that encode EBPs. Clones carrying EPB
sequences will be identified by screening cDNA expression libraries with
radiolabeled hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor. Alternatively, partial protein
sequences obtained from the purified EBPs will be used to prepare synthetic
nucleic acid probes with which to screen cDNA libraries. These clones and their
derived sequences will be used to identify possible structural and functional
domains in the EBPs that might relate to their role in signal transduction. The
third goal, which will be undertaken if time permits, is to demonstrate that the
EBPs identified in these studies are physiological receptor(s) for the elicitor.
Sequence comparisons and expression of truncated EBP genes will be used to
identify and delineate functional domains of the EBPs. Transgenic expression of
wild-type and mutant EBPs in plant cells that do not contain endogenous EBPs,
tissue-specific localization of EBPs in relation to localization of plant
defense responses, and determination of the effect of anti-sense EPB sequences
on the expression of hepta-beta-glucoside-induced plant defense responses will
be undertaken to demonstrate the physiological significance of the EBPs in
elicitor-mediated signal transduction. %%% The long term goal of this research
is to understand how plant cells perceive and respond to extracellular signals.
The system being studied is the induction of a defense response in soybean
plants. The defense response is triggered by exposure of the plant to certain
carbohydrates (elicitors) which originate from the filament wall of a pathogenic
fungus which specifically infects the soybean. In response to the elicitors the
soybean plant synthesizes and accumulates protective chemicals known as
phytoalexins. The more immediate goals of this project are to identify and
characterize the plant receptors for the elicitors. Detailed characterization of
the elicitor receptor will be an important step toward understanding of the
signal transduction pathway by which plants detect and respond to pathogens.