* 9206415
* International Cooperation in Geotechnical Experimentation   Sites
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1994
* Jean Benoit, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 03/31/1994
* USD 25,451.00

The approach to site characterization and the quantification of soil behavior by
geotechnical engineers has undergone significant changes during the last twenty
years. However a major obstacle continues to be the lack of well- characterized
and well-documented field sites for geotechnical engineering experiments. The
availability, use, upgrading and management of geotechnical experimentation
sites was discussed at a workshop at the University of New Hampshire, September
26-28, 1988. It was recognized that several foreign countries are well ahead of
the United States in the use of experimentation sites for geotechnical
engineering research. Subsequent to this meeting, the principal investigators
initiated a project to better document the existing experimentation sites in the
United States so as to make this information available to potential users of
these sites. An NSF/Federal Highways Administration workshop in Orlando, FL
during December 1991 selected sites to be developed as national experimentation
sites. Professor Benoit is currently in Europe on sabbatical leave. This action
is to support visits by him to the various organizations responsible for the
existing national experimentation sites in the United Kingdom, France and Italy.
This will permit Professor Benoit to discuss with these organizations their site
and data management structures so that similar programs in the United States can
benefit from this information and experience.