* 9207893
* The Genetic Basis of Sex Ratio Distortion in Silene Alba
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Janis Antonovics, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1995
* USD 203,071.00

While traditional sex ratio theory predicts organisms will produce roughly equal
proportions of the sexes, many species exhibit persistent sex ratio biases.
Consequently, there now exists a rich diversity of theory pertaining to biased
sex ratios. Meiotic drive, cytoplasmic inheritance and other non-Mendelian
mechanisms of sex ratio distortion may play a major role in the evolution of
biased sex ratios. Meiotic drive systems, including sex ratio distorters, may be
central to our understanding of evolutionary processes such as sex chromosome
evolution, the evolution and diversity of sex determining mechanisms, and the
origin of sterility barriers between species (including Haldane's Rule). Initial
research has shown that certain families of Silene alva, a dioecious plant,
exhibit severely female biased sex ratios. Studies involving molecular markers
of the Y chromosome show that the vias is present in the seed and is therefore,
not due to a higher mortality of male progeny. Sex ratio bias is inherited
through or expressed in the male parent. This pattern of inheritance and other
circumstantial evidence lead one suspect and X-linked meiotic drive system may
be responsible for the evolution of the female bias. The proposed research will
determine the genetic basis of sex ratio distortion in Silene alba by using
reciprocal crosses and backcrosses. RAPD markers, will be used to investigate
specifically how and when the female bias develops. Crosses among geographically
separated populations and among closely related species will be used to detect
sex ratio distortion which is normally suppressed by restorers. Finally, whether
the structure of natural populations of Silene alba is consistent with other
mechanisms of selection for biased sex ratios will be determined. These results
will provide information the nature and diversity of genetic mechanisms
influencing sex ratio in natural populations. Moreover, because sex chromosome
markers and wide crosses represent unique approaches to studying sex ratio
genetics,it is expected that methods will stimulate research into mechanisms of
sex ratio bias in other species.