* 9207600
* Relationships Among Percid Fishes (Teleostei: Percidae) as Evidenced by Mitochondrial DNA Sequence Data
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Edward Wiley, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 20,000.00

The objectives of this proposal are to test the evolutionary relationships among
selected species of the genus Etheostoma and to test the monophyly of this genus
relative to its closest relatives, Percina and Crystallaria. These genera
comprise the second largest group of North American freshwater fishes and the
majority of species in the family Percidae. Etheostoma is the largest genus (114
species compared to 34 species of Percina and one species of Crystallaria).
However, the monophyly of the genus is not well established and numerous
problems exist concerning the relationships among the 18 subgenera. Polymerase
chain reaction and direct sequencing protocols will be used to amplify and
sequence parts of the 12S ribosomal gene (800 base pairs) and a segment of the
cytochrome-b genes (450 base pairs) of 15 species of Etheostoma, four species of
Percina, and two outgroups, Crystallaria asprella, and Stizostedion canadense.
This will allow me to perform a preliminary test of the monophyly of Etheostoma,
explore the possibility that some Etheostoma are actually more closely related
to Percina, and arrive at some preliminary conclusions regarding the
relationships among selected species groups of Etheostoma. Phylogenetic analysis
employing several parsimony criteria will be used to test alternate hypotheses
of relationship. Resolution of the relationships among darters will lead to a
better understanding of the origin and diversification of the North American
freshwater fish fauna and enhance our ability to study the speciation,
historical ecology, and comparative behavior of this speciose group.