* 9207843
* Touring Nuclear History
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1993
* Bryan Taylor, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/1993
* USD 15,000.00

This project promises to make a contribution to a newly developing area of
science and values studies: interpretative studies of science-as-presented in
public domains. The investigator will undertake an ethnographic study of the
Bradbury Science Museum, located at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New
Mexico. Los Alamos is a principal site in the history of nuclear science and
weapons. The Bradbury Museum is charged with preserving that history, and
furthering public understanding of how science figures in U.S. defense and
energy policies. Traditional studies of science communication adopt positivist
methods to "measure" visitor behavior, attitudes and learning. Alternately, this
study uses participant-observation and informal interviewing to study the
experiences and activities of Museum personnel and visitors as they interpret
nuclear history. This data can contribute to revisionist theories of science and
museum communication that emphasize the rhetorical dimensions of "texts," and
the complex, active nature of science learners. It also provides insight into
the cultural experience of nuclear history in the emerging, post-Cold War era.
The Bradbury Museum is a site where multiple meanings for the institutions and
legacies of nuclear science are promoted, accommodated, and challenged. This
investigation occurs as the Museum is planning to relocate to a new, downtown
Los Alamos site, which adds important historical as well as transitional
dimensions to this research.