* 9207722
* Habitat Patchiness, Dispersal and Population Structure:     Tests of Patch Dynamic and Demographic Models Using Small   Mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1995
* James Dooley, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1995
* USD 221,142.00

A recently developed class of models demonstrate that local population dynamics
can be influenced by processes that operate between spatially separated sub-
populations. In theory these models are directly applicable not only to
understanding large- scale patterns of abundance but in evaluating the degree to
which habitat fragmentation/patchiness affects species of concern. Critical
factors in gauging species responses to habitat patchiness are: i) dispersal
ability relative to patch isolation and dispersion; and ii) patch differences in
social structure that determine whether individual patches are net producers or
consumers of immigrants. Few studies, however, have examined the importance of
these factors to field populations. Here we propose to study the responses of
two small mammal species to an experimentally created landscape of habitat
patches distributed over a 36 ha area. Sub-populations within the fragmented
system would be compared to that in a continuous (unfragmented) habitat control.
Objectives include examination of the interplay between patch size, animal
dispersal ability, and how these affect--and are affected by--patch to patch
variation in population structure. This system will serve as an empirical model
for studying the importance of dispersal to populations inhabiting heterogeneous
habitats, patches, and /or habitats that are threatened with fragmentation.