* 9207160
* Mathematical Models of the Cell Division Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1993,08/31/1997
* John Tyson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 08/31/1997
* USD 165,401.00

The cell division cycle is the periodic repetition of certain events--DNA
synthesis, mitosis, and cytokinesis--that transform a single cell into two
daughter cells. Cell division must be coordinated to overall cell growth;
otherwise, cells could become arbitrarily large or vanishingly small. By
observing how cells respond to perturbations of the division cycle, cell
biologists discovered that the DNA-to-protein ratio plays an essential role in
determining the timing of mitosis and cell division. Recently, molecular studies
have revealed four classes of proteins that participate prominently in the
division control mechanism. Two proteins, (cdc2 and cyclin) combine to form a
heterodimer ("mitosis promoting factor," or MPF) that, when activated, triggers
all the major events of mitosis and cell division. The activity of MPF is, in
turn, controlled by protein kinases and protein phosphatases that determine the
phosphorylation state of MPF. The long range goal of this research is to develop
mathematical models of the cell division cycle in order to build secure,
reliable connections between hard-won molecular details of the control
mechanisms and classical observations of the behavior of the intact regulatory
system. The model will describe the regulation of MPF activity by
phosphorylation, and how the phosphorylation state of MPF is determined by the
DNA-to-protein ratio of the cell. The mathematical approach is a tool to refine
our assumptions and guide our reasoning about the essential events of cell
growth and division. %%% The goal of this research is to develop mathematical
models of the cell division cycle. The mathematical modeling will be based on
recent experimental evidence concerning the biochemical control mechanisms
involved in this fundamental life process. The mathematical models will be
useful in further refining the interpretations of experimental data and as a
guide in planning future experiments that ultimately should lead to a thorough
understanding of how the cell division cycle is regulated.