* 9207475
* Mississippian Fossil Tetrapods from Midcontinental USA and  Early-Tetrapod Phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* John Bolt, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* B. Jane Harrington
* 02/28/1994
* USD 20,000.00

The earliest history of land-living vertebrates, from 370-320 million years
before present, is represented by a very few fossils from a handful of
localities. Most of these fossils are poorly preserved and incomplete, which
makes it difficult for paleontologists to interpret the early history of
terrestrial vertebrates. Much has been learned from study of the currently-
available fossils, and more can still be learned from the few available
examples. However, further progress in understanding the earliest history of
land-living vertebrates will come primarily from the discovery of new fossils.
In 1985, a new locality containing numerous fossils of early land vertebrates
was discovered in southeastern Iowa near the town of Delta. The Delta site has
been dated by geologists at about 340 million years old, which makes it the
oldest early-land-animal locality in the United States, and one of the oldest in
the world. Over a periods of three years, more than 600 specimens including
about 50 partial skeletons, some nearly complete, were collected; most of this
collection is stored in the Field Museum of Natural History, and some at the
University of Iowa. The fossils are well-preserved and the collection represents
the largest number of good specimens of any early-land-vertebrate locality. At
least three new species are present, each very primitive. These three species
represent an increase of about 20% in the known number of such early land
vertebrates. The Delta fossils thus comprise one of the most significant
paleontological discoveries in decades. Field Museum fossil preparators have
already spent over 3,000 person-hours on Delta specimens. Support for this
research project will fund a further 700 hours of technical help. The majority
of this effort (560 hours) will be focused on preparing additional key specimens
of the most abundant species in the delta collection for scientific study. The
remainder (140 hours) will be used to produce scientific illustrations of this
species for publication.