* 9207643
* RUI:  The Archaeology of Southwestern New York State
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Lynne Sullivan, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 74,240.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Sarah Neusius and her colleagues
will continue their archaeological excavations at the Ripley Site which is
located in Chautauqua County, N.Y. Previous excavation by both Dr. Neusius and
earlier investigators has confirmed the presence of a large earthwork or
surrounding wall and rich deposits of cultural materials within. Dating of the
site is uncertain and occupation may range from between the thirteenth century
A.D. to historic times. Seven weeks of excavation are planned. The site will
first be plowed and disced to reveal the distribution of cultural materials. An
intensive systematic surface pickup will then be conducted. The material will be
plotted and on the basis of the results two types of excavation will be
undertaken. Hand excavation will be conducted in a midden area to recover
indentifable faunal and floral remains as well as carbon samples for radiocarbon
dating. Secondly mechanical stripping of the plow zone will be undertaken in
selected portions of the site. Features exposed will then be excavated by hand.
Fieldwork will be followed by analysis to accomplish five goals: 1.
reconstruction of site plan; 2. analysis of representative and provenienced
assemblages for different material classes; 3. interpretation of features,
structures and activity areas; 4. documentation of occupational history; 5.
reconstruction of subsistence strategies and seasonality. Many archaeologists
have focussed on the effects of contact between native Americans and early
colonial settlers. Through cases of such culture contact, underlying processes
of interaction and culture change can be discerned. Particular attention has
focussed on the Northeastern United States because in this region the Iroquois
confederacy had achieved a level of political organization rare in chiefly
societies. This is also a region with good historic documentation. However for
such work to succeed it is necessary to have good baseline information about
both precontact and early contact periods. Many earth circles have been found in
the Northeast yet their function is unknown. Some archaeologists have argued
that they surrounded and served to protect villages while others have maintained
that they relate not to occupation sites but rather ceremonial centers. The
answer to this question is important because it affects understanding of both
population density and social/political organization. Dr. Neusius research at
the Ripley site will address this issue. This research is important for several
reasons. It will shed new light on America's unwritten past and increase our
understanding of the process of culture contact and culture change. The grant
will also provide support to an undergraduate teaching institution and serve
both to enhance the level of teaching and training for students.