* 9207597
* Repetitive DNA Sequences in Genome Organization of          Phyllostomoid Bats:  Test of a Molecular Model for          Chromosomal Divergence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Robert Baker, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/1995
* USD 280,000.00

The design of this proposal brings strengths from molecular biology,
cytogenetics, and cladistics to test the hypothesis that rapid chromosomal
change and karyotypic stasis are primarily mediated at the molecular level by
activity of repetitive sequences. We predict that taxa with radically
reorganized karyotypes will have: 1) an abundance of copies and classes of
rapidly evolving repetitive sequences;2) tandemly repeated sequences will have
actively changed chromosomal fields among nonhomologous chromosomes; and 3)
interspersed repeated sequences will have undergone changes in sequence and copy
number due to transposition. Alternatively, lineages experiencing long periods
of karyotypic stasis will have: 1) fewer classes of tandemly repeated sequences
is low copy number; 2) tandemly repeated sequences restricted to specific
chromosomal regions; and 3) interspersed elements will evolve at a rate similar
to that of other neutral DNA, due to a lower rate of transposition. New World
leaf-nosed bats were chosen because monophyly of taxa to be studied is well
documented and they exhibit extremes in rates and types of karyotypic evolution.
Methods of examination will include phylogenetic screening of genome libraries
to determine the number and kind of rapidly evolving repetitive sequences.
Chromosomal position and movement will be documented by cladistical analysis of
data from in situ hybridization.