* 9207158
* Long-Term Effects of Reconstruction on Vulnerability as Defined by Urban Patterning and Urban Form
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Jane Preuss, Urban Regional Research
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1994
* USD 79,806.00

Area wide development patterns established during post-earthquake reconstruction
may have significant long term effects on regional patterning of vulnerability
levels. In Anchorage urban patterns that were sanctioned twenty-five years ago
during the reconstruction following the great Alaska earthquake are now an
integral part of the community's fabric. Using Anchorage, Alaska, as a case
study, this proposal examines how the reconstruction process has impacted and
continues to impact development of urban form and, thereby, the configuration of
future risk and vulnerability levels. Vulnerability encompasses location of
uses; location of building types and clusters, the distribution of critical
facilities (hospitals, fire stations, etc.); and the linkages between these
clusters. The project will analyze the implications of changes in urban patterns
and form on seismic vulnerability to damage, life loss, and system disruption,
especially during the emergency recovery period. A time series analysis of urban
form/vulnerability levels at regional and neighborhood scales focuses on the
evolution of the three basic urban form variables: building groupings and site
utilization patterns; open spaces; and linkages. Anchorage, Alaska, is used as a
case study because it lends itself to a time series analysis of development
patterns which emerged from post-earthquake reconstruction after 1964.