* 9207765
* An Anisotropic Decision Aid Model of Spatial Preference     and Choice
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* David MacKay, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 02/28/1995
* USD 81,252.00

A key characteristic of the spatial choice and behavior literature is that many
of the most frequently investigated behaviors involve choices among a discrete
set of stimuli. Frequently studied discrete choices include mode choice,
residential choice, destination choice, industrial site choice, land use policy
choice, and retail choice. Psychophysics and cognitive science research finds
that perception is probabalistic; even at the individual level there is a random
effect in how individuals perceive stimuli. This research project will develop
and evaluate a model that acknowledges the probabalistic nature of the spatial
preference and choice process by portraying stimuli as having differential
amounts of variation. The proposed model has estimation properties that allow it
to be directly used as a decision-making aid in ways that previous models
cannot. By explicitly modeling uncertainty and ambiguity, the model will allow
for the unique estimation of a single ideal stimulus or ideal decision
alternative. The proximity of existing decision alternatives to the ideal
decision alternative determines each alternative's utility. This is not possible
with existing models. The model will be tested using consumers expressing
individual preferences for residential alternatives and analysts making
consensual public policy recommendations. Probabalistic choice models were
conceived because observed behavior was too complex to be accounted for by
simpler deterministic models. This project continues this tradition by seeking
to develop a probabalistic choice model that will enhance the ability to model a
variety of complex behaviors. The resulting model will be useful in describing
individual as well as consensual decision-making. In addition to its attractive
mathematical properties, the model opens up a variety of new process models for
conceptualizing individual decision-making.