* 9207010
* Ecological Mechanisms and Scaling in Heterogeneous          Grassland Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1996
* John Wiens, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Auerbach
* 07/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

The proposed research will (a) develop theory linking the responses of
individuals to spatial variation in population and ecosystem dynamics; (b) test
such theory by experimental field studies and simulation modeling; (c) determine
how ecological features vary with spatial scale and whether "rules" can be
defined for extrapolating among scales; and (d) extend this work to systems
composed of tropically linked species. The field research, conducted in a
semiarid grassland ecosystem, will involve experimental studies of responses of
tenebrionid beetles to the spatial structure of "microlandscapes" and to
variations in spatial patterns at broader scales. Individual movement patterns
at fine scales will be coupled with long-distance movements to determine how
individual behavior translates into population distribution. Experiments with
harvester ants will be used to determine how the removal and transport of seeds
are affected by the spatial structure of ecosystems. Scaling relationships among
linked trophic levels will be investigated using horned lizard-ant and longspur-
grasshopper systems. The research bears directly on current issues in ecological
scaling and extrapolation, flows of materials across patch boundaries, empirical
testing of spatial models, and the development of an experimental and
theoretical approach to landscape ecology.