* 9207573
* Extent and Mechanisms of Gene Flow Limitation between Divergent Populations
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1996
* Sara Via, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 11/30/1996
* USD 150,000.00

Pronounced local adaptation and genetic divergence have been found between
closely adjacent pea aphid populations on alfalfa and clover. However, little is
known about the balance between selection and gene flow that currently maintains
the observed genetic differentiation of aphids on the two hosts. On both hosts,
the performance of transplanted individuals is much lower than that of
residents, indicating strong disruptive selection. Pea aphids are capable of
flying between fields of the different crops and specialist clones can
interbreed and produce viable offspring, so migration and gene flow are
physically possible. How much gene flow actually takes place? The major
questions addressed in this proposal are (1) is the host-associated divergence
maintained by selection in the face of free gene flow between crops? and (2) if,
as we expect, gene flow is restricted, by what ecological and genetic mechanisms
does this occur? First, the extent of inter- host gene flow will be determined
using both direct and indirect methods, with measures of gene flow between
fields of the same crop as a reference point. Preliminary results suggest that
populations on the two crops are neither completely isolated nor panmictic.
Various mechanisms that could act to limit gene flow between these divergent
populations will be then evaluated, including habitat choice by alate (winged)
forms, selection against migrants, phenological separations between mating
population on the two crops, and reduced fitness of hybrids due to developmental
failure and/or lack of adaptation to the parental environments. The results of
these experiments will provide a detailed view of the mechanisms by which
closely adjacent populations in different habitats remain genetically
differentiated despite the potential to interbreed. This study represents a
unique opportunity to study mechanisms of local adaptation and population
divergence. These experiments will also provide a case study of gene flow
restriction that has implications for the study of speciation, and the process
by which insect pests adapt to specific crop plants.