* 9207423
* U.S.-Philippines Cooperative Research on the History of     Explosive Volcanism and Volcaniclastic Sedimentation around Taal Caldera and Mt. Pinatubo, Philippines
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Stephen Self, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 12/31/1995
* USD 18,024.00

This award provides funds to permit Dr. Stephen Self, Department of Geology and
Geophysics, University of Hawaii, to pursue with Mr. Ronnie C. Torres and Dr.
Raymundo S. Punongbayan, Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology
(PHILVOCS), for 24 months, a program of cooperative research on the history of
explosive volcanism and volcaniclastic sedimentation around Taal Caldera and Mt.
Pinatubo, Philippines. This project will define the stratigraphy and extent of
the major volcaniclastic units and analyze their textures, facies, and
depositional characteristics of the ignimbrites and related surge and lahar
deposits. Combination of data from the reworked and primary deposits will allow
interpretation of the history of explosive volcanism and catastrophic
sedimentation, including pyroclastic flow-lahar transitions. This research will
yield data pertinent to several unusual and important problems. A by- product of
the information gained, and collaboration with PHILVOCS, will be an improved
understanding of volcanic and related hazards for the Greater Manila region. Dr.
Self has an excellent reputation for research in the field of this proposal. Mr.
Torres is an intermediate level employee of PHILVOCS with several years of
experience in studying volcanic phenomena in the Philippines. The proposed work
will form the core of his dissertation research at the University of Hawaii.
This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing
Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.
and developing country scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual interest and benefit.