* 9207753
* Evolution of Color Polymorphism Using the Hawaiian Happy    Face Spider, Theridion Grallator
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Rosemary Gillespie, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1995
* USD 69,000.00

Polymorphism refers to the occurrence of several different discontinuous forms
within a single interbreeding population, and frequently involves color. A
number of mechanisms have been advanced to explain the occurrence of such
polymorphisms, yet the explanations are seldom conclusive. The proposal here
focuses on the fact that polymorphism frequently appear in an intermittent
fashion among representatives of any given lineage. The study focuses on the
Hawaiian spider Theridion grallator which demonstrates a highly visible state of
polymorphism. The pattern of inheritance of the polymorphism in T. grallator
will be examined in order to determine: (1) why different populations appear to
exhibit modes of inheritance of the polymorphism; and (2) whether the observed
superficial similarities between T. grallator and Enoplognatha ovata, a
distantly related species, have a similar mechanism of inheritance. The study
will then examine the distribution of such similar color polymorphism within the
spider lineage, and assesses whether similarities among unrelated
representatives of the lineage are repeated independent evolutionary events or
parallel evolution. Elucidation of the mechanisms underlying the intermittent
and widespread occurrence of polymorphism in both natural and applied systems
will contribute to the knowledge of how selection operates.