* 9207724
* Inbreeding Depression and Selfing Rates in Hermaphroditic   Species of Schiedea (Caryophyllaceae):  A Comparison to     Diclinous Species
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1997
* Ann Sakai, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/1997
* USD 240,000.00

Unlike most animals which have individuals with separate male and female sexes,
plants exhibit a great range in breeding systems. Most plant species are
hermaphroditic with male and female function in the same flower, but many other
species, including a number of important crop plants, have separate male and
female flowers on the same plant or consist of populations of separate male and
female plants (dioecy). Many different hypotheses have been proposed to explain
the diversity of breeding systems in plants and the evolution of dioecy. One
major argument suggests that dioecy has evolved to avoid inbreeding depression.
Inbreeding depression occurs when closely related individuals mate and the
resulting offspring show reduced vigor and ability to reproduce. If inbreeding
depression is a factor, then one should expect to find both high levels of
inbreeding self-pollination occurring as well as high levels of inbreeding
depression in populations that are evolving dioecy. Although there have been
many theories proposed, very little empirical data on this question is
available. We are examining the role of inbreeding depression in the evolution
of dioecy in the Hawaiian plant genus Schiedea. This group is apparently
evolving dioecy and exhibits a range of breeding systems in very closely related
species. This research is of special urgency because many important intermediate
species from the fragile Hawaiian ecosystems are near extinction because of
habitat destruction, grazing introduced by herbivores and competition with
introduced plants. Knowledge of factors promoting changes in plant breeding
systems has many potential breeding applications to practical problems in
agriculture and forestry. Inbreeding depression is well known to influence yield
in many economically important crop plants, such as corn. Knowledge of factors
causing dioecy may lead to greater ability to manipulate sex ratios in plants
and is of tremendous value where yield depends upon the production of fruit or
seed by the females as is the case of many crop species. Understanding the basis
of unisexaulity will also be important in production of hybrid strains, since
female individuals are easily hybridized without the necessity of time-consuming
costly emasculation of hermaphroditic flowers.