* 9207130
* Ship Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1992,06/30/1993
* John Thompson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 06/30/1993
* USD 162,000.00

The Nutrient Enhanced Coastal Ocean Productivity program (NECOP) of NOAA will
use the R/V LONGHORN simultaneously and in collaboration with the R/V PELICAN
for 30 days in the general area of the mouth of the Mississippi River (Southwest
Pass) and the adjacent shelf waters. Several transects of stations across the
shelf will be occupied along the Louisiana shelf and intensive biological
process sampling will occur in the river plume and hypoxic areas ranging in
depth from 5 meters to 150 meters. Special sampling of river plume fronts and
other surface features will occur when encountered using standard hydrocasts
and/or underway surface mapping. A minor amount of sampling time may be
allocated to collection of samples in the lower Mississippi River, Atchafalaya
Bay, and the Mississippi shelf canyon. The ship operation will consist of
CTD/rosette hydrocasts, net tows, and sediment boxcoring. Special deployments of
in situ zooplankton samplers and moored current meter and in situ
instrumentation arrays will occur at a few selected sites near the river mouth
and nearby shelf. Immediately following the NECOP cruise, R/V LONGHORN will load
in Cocodrie, Louisiana, to begin work on the Gulf.Cet program. Gulf.Cet is a
study of the Distribution and Abundance of Marine Mammals in the North Central
and Western Gulf of Mexico by Dr. William Evans. The work is being coordinated
under contract to the Minerals Management Service with funding through the Texas
Institute of Oceanography, Texas A &amp; M University. The study area will be
covered by 14 transect legs in the Gulf of Mexico offshore from about the
Louisiana/Alabama border to the Texas/Mexico border. High powered binoculars
will be used for the visual part of the survey and a specially modified hydro
acoustic streamer will be used for acoustic detection. A cruise of fifteen days
is schedule for each quarter. The first quarter follows NECOP; the second
quarter will be in late August or early September; and the third quarter is
tentatively scheduled for November (a final quarter will fall in calendar 1993).
Two weeks in the first part of June will be devoted to work along the
Texas/Louisiana Coast for the NSF project, Stable Carbon and Nitrogen Isotopic
Compositions of Selected Organic COmpounds by Dr.s M.C. Kennicutt (Texas A &amp;
M University), S.A. Macko (U. of Virginia.), and R.R. Bidigare (U. of Hawaii.).
IN addition to boxcoring and hydrowinch work, this project will also utilize R/V
LONGHORN as a mother ship, with work taking place off Zodiacs and other small
boasts. Two or more student cruises, for The University of Texas at Austin's
Department of Marine Science, to be scheduled during the summer months,
constitutes the remainder of the schedule. Traditionally the R/V LONGHORN has
been able to respond on short notice to last minute requests for shorter cruises
within the Gulf of Mexico during open periods of her schedule. We are prepared
to schedule some additional work if requested.