* 9207346
* Patterns of Responding within Experimental Sessions
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* John Hinson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 02/28/1995
* USD 108,451.00

Responding is not constant across the experimental session when animals respond
on operant-conditioning procedures. Instead, responding often begins slowly,
increases to a peak and then decreases through the rest of the session. The
present experiments will begin to determine under what conditions these within-
session changes in responding occur. They will also begin to determine why these
changes occur. In particular, the experiments will try to separate the
contribution of factors related to reinforcement, such as satiation, from
factors related to responding, such as fatigue. They will try to separate the
contribution of central factors, such as focusing of attention, from factors at
the periphery, such as interference from competing responses. They will try to
separate the effect of factors that accumulate over the session, such as
fatigue, from the anticipation of things to come, such as the return to the home
cage at the end of the session. These experiments are theoretically important
because rate of responding averaged over the session is one of the primary
dependent variables in operant psychology. Finding systematic changes in
responding within sessions suggests that this measure ignores important changes
in behavior at a more fine-grained level. The research is methodologically
important because many experiments are not designed so that their data can be
interpreted if such within-session changes in responding occur. Improving theory
and methodology in operant psychology is important for applied reasons. Operant
techniques are used as methods for determining the effects of physiological
variables and as the basis for some forms of therapy for human behavioral
problems.