* 9207318
* Nonlinear Periodic Systems with Mode Localization and       Motion Confinement Characteristics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Alexander Vakakis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 02/29/1996
* USD 87,701.00

The principal scope of the proposed work is to show that weakly coupled,
flexible, cyclic assemblies with geometric nonlinearities due to finite-
amplitude motions, possess localized nonlinear modes, i.e., free oscillations
during which the motion is mainly confined to only one of their subsystems. This
will be achieved by using a multiple-scales averaging methodology and studying
the corresponding amplitude and phase modulation equations. The effects of
internal resonances between flexible modes on the mode localization will be
analytically investigated and the force responses of the system due to external
harmonic loads will be considered. It will be shown that weakly coupled cyclic
assemblies possess fundamental, subharmonic and superharmonic localized
resonances, during which only a limited number of their subsystems resonate.
Motion confinement of externally generated disturbances due to nonlinear mode
localization will then be investigated by numerical computations, involving
finite element and Gallerkin methodologies. The principal aim of this study is
to show that the inherent dynamics of certain weakly coupled, nonlinear cyclic
systems, lead to motion confinement of externally induced disturbances. The
controllability of such systems is then greatly improved, since in designing for
passive or active vibration isolation, one needs only consider the dynamics of a
limited number of their substructure instead of considering the response of the
whole cyclic assembly.*** //