* 9207796
* Appropriate - Technology Access to Stimulate Research in    Tropical Rain Forest Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1992,05/31/1995
* David Clark, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1995
* USD 193,267.00

The La Selva Biological Station of the Organization for Tropical Studies,
located in tropical wet forests of the Republic of Costa Rica, has become one of
the world's most active sites for research on the ecology of pristine and
altered tropical ecosystems. Recent developments at the Station have fueled a
rapid and sustained increase in research usage. Advanced laboratory facilities,
spectacular biodiversity resources, a new Geographic Information/Database
Management System, diverse habitats for observation and manipulation, excellent
infrastructure, and a welcoming socio-political environment have all contributed
to La Selva's continuing growth. A substantial to fulfilling the research and
education potential of the station, however, has been the difficulty of access
to approximately half of the reserve's area. OTS will create an appropriate-
technology, environmentally benign access system for pedestrians, bicycles, and
small electric vehicles. The Western Annex Rapid Transit system (WART) is a 6-km
long, 1.7 m wide paved path that will link laboratory/living areas to the most
distant sections of La Selva. Development of the WART concept and the
environmental and engineering criteria employed in its design are well thought
out. The project will bring immediate and substantial benefits to researchers
whose projects range from molecules to ecosystems, and in habitats from primary
lowland rain forest to abandoned pastures. Improved access is critical to
realizing La Selva's outstanding potential to advance tropical science. The
Western Annex Rapid Transit system, using technology appropriate tot he scale of
the transportation problem and applied in an environmentally-sensitive design,
will provide this access.