* 9207456
* Applications of Modern Statistical Thinking                 to the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Donald Rubin, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/1997
* USD 272,660.00

The purpose of this project is to continue the development of new statistical
tools and methods that address real issues of concern in empirical social
science research. The primary focus of the prior work was on multiple imputation
technology, which includes a family of techniques dealing with incomplete data.
These techniques have been used increasingly by government agencies such as the
Census Bureau and the Internal Revenue Service. Applications also have grown in
academic research on a wide range of topics. Incompleteness, in fact, pervades
intensively used scientific data as far ranging as social surveys and clinical
medical protocols. Four main areas are addressed in the proposed research.
First, continuing efforts will be made to hone the tools for multiple
imputation. Second, modern methods of statistical computation such as extensions
of the EM algorithm and the Gibbs sampler, will continue to be pursued. Third,
the foundations of causal inference and practical methods for drawing causal
inferences in observational studies will be further developed. And fourth, a
variety of other techniques relevant to social science research, such as meta-
analysis and mixture modelling, will be explored. The principal investigator's
statistical contributions in the broad areas covered by this project have been
impressive both in depth and volume. In addition, the many students he has
trained in this long-term research agenda are superbly equipped to disseminate
the results and to join in advancing the state of the art. The prospect of his
achieving further significant accomplishments is very high.