* 9207836
* Reasoning and Inference in Spatial Knowledge Acquisition: The Cognitive Map As An Internalized GIS
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Reginald Golledge, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1995
* USD 135,661.00

Contemporary geographical information systems (GIS) embody a number of functions
that are directly analogous to tasks humans normally perform in cognizing and
evaluating space. Since GIS have become important tools for storing and
analyzing spatially referenced information and have many practical applications
in economic, social, and environmental planning, it is important that the
configuration of knowledge in GIS accurately reflects the ways in which humans
cognize space and internally represent environments. This research project poses
the question of whether a cognitive representation of space is an internalized
geographic information system. It will determine the degree to which selected
processes involved in compiling and using GIS are similar to those involved in
compiling and using cognitive maps. Emphasis will be placed on the type of
reasoning and the inference required in both cognitive mapping and GIS and on
how such processes can be understood and interpreted by people. Experiments will
be designed to evaluate human competence in performing such activities as
recognizing adjacency, connectivity, network membership, path selection
criteria, conducting analysis and compilation of overlay and compression
procedures, and undertaking neighborhood delineation and regionalization
activities. It is not well understood how humans perform these activities nor
what types of errors arise when performing them. Interdisciplinary research on
spatial behavior by psychologists, cognitive scientists, roboticists, artificial
intelligence engineers and transport modelers is increasing rapidly. Behavioral
research into the design and use of geographic information systems and on such
topics as visualization of spatial information, development of user interfaces
and user friendly representation modes can help software and data base
developers improve communication, analysis, and understanding with GIS. This
project will identify theoretical and practical links between the processes of
spatial cognition used generally in spatial knowledge acquisition and the
spatial processing and analysis components which form the basis of many
geographical information systems.