* 9207880
* Metabolic Compartmentation of Vertebrate Glutamine          Synthetase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* James Campbell, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

Two specific objectives will be pursued during the proposed project period. The
first will be expression of the full length clone, pCGS11N, which contains the
coding information for avian liver glutamine synthetase, in expression vectors
such as pKK223 or various derivatives thereof. Of special concern will be a
characterization of the expression product, especially its conformation.
Preliminary results indicate the expression product may aggregate. Since this is
likely to render it import- incompetent, conditions that prevent aggregation and
also keep the protein in an unfolded configuration will be established. The
second major objective will be to establish an in vitro system in which
glutamine synthetase is imported into isolated mitochondria. If necessary, the
original technique of presenting isolated mitochondria with freshly translated
synthetase will be used, although the use of the pure expression product is now
preferable and is required to establish species- and tissue-specific cytosolic
import factors. %%% Seventy-five percent of land vertebrates utilize a
uricotelic-type mechanism for detoxifying ammonia formed during hepatic amino
acid catabolism. Ammonia, formed via the glutamate dehydrogenase reaction, is
converted by glutamine synthetase to the amide function of glutamine which then
exits to the cytosol where it is utilized for uric acid synthesis. In the
ureotelic mechanism, utilized by mammals and some adult amphibians, ammonia is
converted to citrulline in the mitochondria, which then exits to the cytosol to
be converted to urea. What these two pathways have in common is that in each
case, the ammonia-detoxifying mechanisms are directed toward converting ammonia
formed in the mitochondrial matrix to a form that does not bind protons during
transit of the inner mitochondrial membrane and therefore does not uncouple
oxidative phosphorylation. What is particularly interesting is that, in
ureotelic vertebrates (e.g., mammals), the enzyme glutamine synthetase is only
found in the cytosol, never in the mitochondria, whereas in the uricotelic
sauropsid vertebrates (reptiles and birds) the enzyme is localized to
mitochondria in the liver but is cytosolic in other tissues such as neural
tissue. A putative mitochondrial targeting sequence in the avian enzyme, not
present in the mammalian enzyme, has been identified. However, the primary amino
acid sequences of the avian liver (mitochondrial) and neural tissue (cytosolic)
forms are identical, raising the question of how the differential targeting
occurs. This project aims to understand the molecular events responsible for
targeting of the enzyme in sauropsids. The work is of considerable interest from
biochemical, cell biological, physiological, and evolutionary perspectives.