* 9207631
* Purification of Monoclonal Antibodies by Ion-Exchange       Displacement Chromatography
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Neville Pinto, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edgar A. O'Rear
* 02/28/1995
* USD 145,209.00

This proposal studies the purification of monoclonal antibodies (MAbs). The
effort will focus on the purification of mouse IgG1 and IgM, and a
subfractionation of mouse IgG into IgG1, IgG2a, IgG2b and IgG3. MAbs are
produced by either the collection of ascites fluid from mice which have been
injected with hybridoma cells in their peritoneal cavity, or by the collection
of the nutrient medium in which hybridoma cells are cultured in vitro. Whatever
the method, the antibody must be separated from a complex mixture of proteins.
The proposal suggests using ion exchange dispacement chromatography to effect
the purification and subfractionation. In this method, the feed is first passed
through a column, and the antibodies adsorb onto the column. Experiments will be
conducted on a preparative HPLC system using the weak anion exchanger PAE-1000
as the adsorbent. The next step is to displace the adsorbed molecules. The PI
suggests using dextran sulphates as the displacers. The PI will investigate the
potential of tailoring the molecular weight and charge of dextran sulphates in
order to vary the affinity of the sulphates to the adsorbent relative to the
antibodies. Some of this tailoring will involve synthesis since only two
molecular weight sulphates are commercially available, and each of these at only
one sulphate content and therefore charge density. Pure component isotherm
measurements will be undertaken of the MAbs, sulphates and two representative
contaminating proteins, transferrin and albumin. These isotherm measurements
will be used to determine suitable displacers, and then multicomponent isotherms
of the displacers, MAbs, transferrin and albumin will be determined. Lastly,
displacement experiments in the column will be undertaken.