* 9207142
* Uridine Nucleotide Sugar Transport into the Golgi Apparatus
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1992,03/31/2000
* Barbara Waldman, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/2000
* USD 450,509.00

The long-term goal of the proposed research is to understand the molecular
mechanisms by which nucleotide sugars are transported across intracellular
membranes and how such transport systems regulate glycoconjugate biosynthesis in
mammalian cells. The proposed research will focus on determining how uridine
nucleotide sugars are transported across the Golgi apparatus membrane. UDP-
galactose transport across the Golgi membrane will be characterized using Golgi
vesicles isolated from rat liver. This characterization will include
determination of the kinetic constants and driving force for UDP-galactose
transport. The UDP- N-acetylglucosamine and UDP-galactose transporters will be
solubilized and reconstituted into liposomes, as a first step toward the
ultimate purification of these transporter proteins. A cDNA encoding for the
UDP-galactose transporter will be isolated utilizing an expression cloning
strategy to clone by complementation analysis using a chinese hamster ovary cell
mutant which is defective in UDP-galactose transport. %%% Glycoconjugates,
including glycoproteins and glycolipids, are critical to the life of all cells.
They are synthesized by the stepwise addition of covalently linked simple sugars
to nascent structures (proteins or lipids). These reactions generally proceed by
the transfer of the sugar moiety from a biosynthetic activated precursor, or
nucleotide-sugar, to the nascent glycoconjugate. In eukaryotes, these
glycosyltransfer reactions usually take place within the lumens of intracellular
membrane-bounded compartments (e.g. endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus).
Most nucleotide sugars (e.g., UDP-galactose, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine) are
synthesized in the cytosol, and because of their ionic charge, cannot passively
diffuse across a biological membrane. Therefore, specific transporters exist in
the intracellular membranes which effect the translocation of the nucleotide
sugar precursors from the cytosol into the lumen. This project focuses on the
transport of UDP-galactose across the Golgi apparatus membrane, and in
particular on the biochemical description of the membrane transporter. The work
will lead to the eventual understanding of how this class of transport protein
operates, and also will further our understanding of the functions and
organization of the Golgi apparatus, a subcellular organelle which plays a
central role in protein sorting and secretion, and in the biosynthesis of
glycoproteins and glycolipids. The results of these studies may have practical
application in engineering cells to produce various specific glycoconjugates on
a commercial scale.