* 9207608
* Minirhizotron Imaging Equipment for the Study of Root       Dynamics in Alaskan Taiga Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1994
* Roger Ruess, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1994
* USD 39,945.00

This proposal requests funds for the implementation of minirhizotron imaging to
study the dynamics of fine root growth and turnover in relation to resource
availability and herbivory along a successional forest gradient in Alaska.
Virtually nothing is known concerning the rates of, or control over allocation
to roots in taiga ecosystems, or the contribution of root turnover to soil
carbon and nutrient pools. Such information is significant, however, given the
fact that taiga contains approximately 20% of the Earth's stored carbon.
Preliminary results show that fluxes through roots may constitute a significant
percentage of the total carbon budget of these ecosystems, thus this research
project has implications beyond the immediate questions of forest successional
dynamics, pertinent to the broader topic of dynamic ecosystem modelling and
global land-atmosphere carbon exchanges. %%% This belowground research
instrumentation to be used at the Bonanza Creek Long-term Ecological Research
site will provide new insights into the structure and function of taiga
ecosystems and serve to couple many of the research disciplines on the LTER
project. In addition, this new instrumentation will significantly enhance
instructional and research opportunities for undergraduate, raduate and
postdoctoral training.