* 9207044
* Regulation of Antifreeze Protein Production in Insects:     An In Vitro Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/1992,05/31/1997
* Kathleen Horwath, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 05/31/1997
* USD 284,989.00

The remarkable adaptability of insects is clearly demonstrated in examples of
overwintering responses. Some insects have even been known to inhabit areas
where temperatures reach -75 degrees C. Although researchers have been able to
identify many physiological and biochemical parameters that may contribute to
survival at such low temperatures, little is known about the underlying cellular
mechanisms for these responses and how they are regulated. One major obstacle
has been the lack of an in vitro model, i.e. where tissues or cells from these
insects are maintained in culture and subjected to experimental manipulation.
Recent research in my laboratory has now established a system for the long-term
culturing of fat body cells derived from cold-hardy beetles shown to produce
antifreeze proteins during the winter. The proposed study uses this system to
more directly investigate the physiological and cellular mechanisms of
antifreeze protein biosynthesis and regulation. First, it will characterize the
cell types that predominate in vitro, how they relate to intact tissues, their
degree of developmental maturation, and their ability to produce antifreeze
proteins, using very sensitive immunological and fluorescent labeling
techniques. We will then examine the cellular means by which these proteins may
be stored and then secreted, through ultrastructural immunolocalization with
electron microscopy, and by charting transport of newly synthesized antifreezes
from cells to culture media. Concurrently, we will examine how hormones and low
temperature may directly influence antifreeze protein production and secretion
by these cells. Thus, this study introduces a powerful and state-of-the-art tool
to research on insect fat body, and low temperature adaptations, and provides
the first cellular analyses of environmental and hormonal control of antifreeze
protein production and secretion.