* 9207169
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,01/31/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 01/31/1994
* USD 7,886.00

The difficulty of adequately delimiting boundaries on the basis of deficient
geographical knowledge is an acknowledged fact. A number of considerations must
be made in studies of the simultaneous mapping of a boundary by two different
agencies, raising the issues of the authority of maps, the relationship between
ground truth and interpretation, and objective reality versus subjective
elements in mapping. This project will address the role of maps and cartography
in the original U.S.-Mexican Boundary Survey of 1849-1855. Cartographic
documents have been largely overlooked while most research interest has centered
on the general political and cultural history of the boundary. A comparative
analysis of cartographic and manuscript archives in both Washington, D.C. and
Mexico City will form the basis of the research plan. Maps produced by the two
boundary commissions and the commentaries on the mapping process in the reports
of the commissioners will be compared for information bearing on the role of
maps in the making of the U.S.-Mexico boundary. Analysis should indicate the
approach of each commission to the boundary- making task as well as determine
each commission's methods of dealing with specific geographical problems. This
research should contribute toward redressing an imbalance in borderland studies
by examining the Mexican contribution to the boundary issues involved. It will
also examine the role of an abstraction, the map, in the representation of
reality, a political boundary. Finally, the research will assess the potential
of maps in boundary-making in general and on our present understanding of
international boundary issues.