* 9207276
* Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Michael Marcus, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen M. Samuels
* 11/30/1995
* USD 253,833.00

Professors Marcus and Rosen will continue their investigations of the
relationship between Gaussian processes and the local times of symmetric Markov
processes put into evidence by the Dynkin Isomorphism Theorem. A compact form of
this Theorem will be used in an attempt to obtain Borell type inequalities for
local times. Analogous to their recent work which shows the equivalence of
sample path properties of the local times of a symmetric Markov process and an
associated Gaussian process they will study the relationship between continuous
additive functionals of a symmetric Markov process indexed by measures and an
associated class of Gaussian chaoses indexed by measures. This will require an
investigation into measure indexed Gaussian processes and chaoses in general.
They will also try to extend their recent work on the law of the iterated
logarithm for the local times of symmetric Levy processes and random walks to
cover the interesting case of recurrent random walks on a two dimensional
integer lattice. Professor Marcus and Rosen will continue their investigations
of the relationship between Gaussian Processes and the local times of symmetric
Markov processes. Until recently these stochastic processes were not considered
to be related at all, except in the case of Brownian motion, a relationship was
implied by a recent isomorphism theorem of Dynkin. This isomorphism has been
exploited by Professors Marcus and Rosen to show that there are deep connections
between these two fundamental classes of stochastic processes, both of which
serve as models in countless applications to continuous time random phenomena.
This research could lead to significant new knowledge about our random
environment.