* 9207805
* Quantification of Base Cation Sources and Cycling in a      Forest Ecosystem Using Strontium Isotope Tracers and Mass   Balance Methods
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Joel Blum, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 02/29/1996
* USD 234,451.00

The proposed research is a field study designed to quantify previously
undetermined base cation cycling and weathering rates in a high-elevation
coniferous forest in the Adirondack Mountains, NY. A new and unexplored
transfer-reaction approach to the use of strontium isotope tracers will be
integrated with more traditional chemical and ecosystem mass balance methods to
obtain direct measurements of previously unquantified base cations fluxes, such
as release from mineral weathering, removal from cation exchange sites and
biocycling. The field site is on Whiteface Mountain, where the PI's has been
studying nutrient cycling for over six years. Whiteface is a unique location for
cation cycling and mineral weathering studies because the site has a pair of
research watersheds underlain by granitoid bedrock of highly contrasting
87Sr/86Sr value. The proposed project will allow the PI's to quantify the
influence of various ecosystem processes - such as atmospheric deposition,
organic matter decomposition, cation exchange, and mineral weathering - on soil
solution and stream chemistry and on the long-term contribution to total
ecosystem inventories. Comparison of present and long-term contributions of
these processes to cation cycling will provide insight into the mechanisms and
magnitude of ecosystem response to environmental change.