* 9207203
* Responses of Plants to Acute and Chronic Heat Stress in a   High-CO2 Environment:  Linking Molecular Biology with       Physiological Ecology
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Richard Hallberg, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 195,000.00

Atmospheric concentrations of CO2 and other greenhouse gases continue to rise.
This phenomenon may lead to increases in the mean global temperature as well as
in yearly, and even daily, variations in temperature. One consequence of
increasing variation in temperatures if that plants may be exposed to sudden and
severe increases in temperature (i.e, heat shocks) at a greater frequency than
they are now. The ability of plants to withstand these hyperthermic episodes is
most likely related, at least in part, to their capacity for elevating levels of
certain heat shock proteins (hsps). A great deal of information regarding the
molecular biology of these proteins in plants exist. Yet, little is known how
the physiological state of the cell or whole-plant prior to the imposition of
heat stress affect the synthesis and accumulation of hsps or the ability of
plants to survive heat stress. This void in understanding is particularly
critical because plants in natural environmental of plants may not only be
characterized by changes in temperature patterns, but will almost certainly
contain extremely high levels of air pollutants (e.g., CO2, ozone) and changing
nutrient contents in precipitation and soils. Thus, understanding the role that
plant physiological status may play in governing the heat shock response may
provide new essential data on the roles of heat shock proteins in the
acquisition and maintenance of thermotolerance in plant tissues. The overall
goal of this research is to assess the relationship between the synthesis and
accumulation of heat shock proteins at the cellular level and the overall stress
responses of whole-plants and tissues grown under distinctly different
physiological environments. Specific genotypes of corn (Zea mays) and tomato
(Lycopersicon esculentum) will be grown in environments with different
availabilities of carbon (CO2) and nitrogen resulting in plants at different
physiological states. These plants will then be exposed to heat stress or to
control conditions. The kinetics of heat shock protein synthesis and the
patterns of recovery of normal protein synthesis (molecular level); the capacity
of plants to harvest light and CO2 for photosynthesis (tissue level); and
overall plant performance (whole-plant level), will be examined simultaneously.
The results should help to clarify the biological role of hsps by linking
molecular phenomena to processes occurring at tissue and whole-plant levels.
Furthermore, how plants in both agricultural and natural systems will respond to
the predicted changes in the global climate is a critical question, and
understanding how the stress response of plants might be altered in a high CO2
environment would be an important step in solving that problem.