* 9207884
* Latent Heating Profiles in Darwin Area Squall Lines         as Investigated with a Three-Dimensional Cloud Model
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/1992,09/30/1996
* Robert Schlesinger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 136,500.00

The influence of tropical squall lines on weather ranging from local to global
is now being recognized by the meteorological community. Accordingly,
observational studies that have focussed on tropical squall lines have been held
off the north coast of Australia in recent years. The Principal Investigator
will capitalize on already collected data by using a three dimensional cloud
model to investigate the vertical latent heating profile of deep precipitating
tropical mesoscale convective systems. Several considerations lend significance
to a modeling study of latent heat release in tropical squall lines in this
area. For instance: o Tropical convective latent heat release strongly
influences both local rainfall and synoptic to global circulation features such
as the Walker cell, a zonal arm of the global circulation over the tropical
Pacific, with convection over northern Australia and the neighboring maritime
continent normally forming the upward branch; o The Darwin area is uniquely
equipped, both in geographical location and in coverage by radars and
rawinsondes, for close observation of the convection that feeds the Walker cell;
o Darwin area squall lines occur in a wide variety of kinematic and
thermodynamic environments, in terms of available buoyant energy and low-level
wind shear as well as other potentially important modulators of convective mode.