* 9207053
* Establishment and Expression of Polarity in Pelvetia        Zygotes
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1996
* Darryl Kropf, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 03/31/1996
* USD 326,000.00

This work will investigate the mechanism(s) by which polarity is established
and expressed in fertilized eggs of fucoid algae. Much of the work will focus on
the role of the cytoskeleton. Three major objectives concerning the cytoskeleton
will be pursued. (1) An in-depth characterization of the structure of
microfilament and microtubule networks, and especially interactions between
these networks. These experiments will rely on confocal microscopy. Preliminary
investigations of actin-binding proteins and microtubule-associated proteins
will be conducted using biochemical approaches and specific antibody probes. (2)
Dynamic rearrangements of cortical microfilaments and endoplasmic microtubules
will be investigated in real time by microinjecting fluorescent probes into
living cells. Inhibitors will be use to investigate the function of cytoskeletal
rearrangements in embryogenesis. (3) Mechanisms of intracellular transport will
also be examined using microinjection. Two types of intracellular transport will
be studied, pronuclear migration and secretory vesicle transport. The second
part of the research will develop the use of protoplasts as an experimental
tools in two lines of research. First, protoplasts of the rhizoid cell provide a
unique opportunity to investigate the loss of polarity, and will be investigated
as models of 'depolarization'. Second, molecular approaches to studying polarity
will be developed beginning with production and initial characterization of a
cDNA library from protoplasts.