* 9207894
* Spectroscopy and Intra-Cluster Photochemistry of Electrons  and Anions in Water Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Mark Johnson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 01/31/1996
* USD 354,000.00

In this project funded in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Mark Johnson of Yale University will continue study the spectroscopy
and dynamics of sequentially solvated anions and electrons in the gas phase. The
absorption spectra, photofragmentation dynamics, and photoelectron spectroscopy
of complexes with a well-defined composition in free molecular jets will be
monitored using tandem time-of-flight spectroscopies. The isomers postulated to
exist in the (H2O)n cluster anion system will be characterized, and the
dependence of the spatial extent of the excess electron on cluster size will be
determined in order to clarify the origin of charge transfer to solvent
transitions of aqueous anions. Photoinduced intra-cluster reactions, including
intra-cluster electron transfer and the O- + HO --&gt; OH- + OH reaction will be
examined. These systems to be studied are intermediate between the solution
phase and more traditional ion-molecule reaction studies and should provide
valuable correlations. %%% This project examines how excess charge is
accommodated in finite, homogeneous media, such as aqueous solutions. The focus
of these studies is on charged aggregates of stable molecules held together by
very weak forces which are more physical than chemical. Unlike metal systems, in
which the excess charge tends to be delocalized over the aggregate, different
molecular systems vary widely in how they accommodate the excess charge.
Insights into the behavior of dissolved species are expected to result from
these studies.