* 9207840
* Scanning Tunneling Microscopic Studies on Model Molybdenum  Sulfide Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* K. Y. Simon Ng, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 02/29/1996
* USD 245,912.00

This an investigation of the topological and electronic behavior of promoted
and unpromoted molybdenum disulfide crystals using state-of-the-art scanning
tunnelling microscopy (STM) and scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS)
techniques. Measurements are made both under ultrahigh vacuum and under
atmospheric conditions in order to follow changes in the catalyst surface. The
goals of the effort are (1) using STM, to characterize the molybdenum disulfide
single-crystal surface before and after sputtering, and to contrast this to
sulfided molybdenum(100) and molybdenum disulfide on graphite; (2) to
investigate the effect of cobalt on the morphology and on the electronic
structure of molybdenum disulfide under various loadings; (3) to study the
adsorption and dissociation characteristics of probe molecules such as
thiophene, dithiophene, and benzothiophene on molybdenum disulfide, cobalt-
promoted molybdenum disulfide, and molybdenum disulfide on graphite; and (4) to
follow the sulfidation process of molybdenum(100) and molybdenum oxide on
graphite. The data are interpreted in terms of nature of reaction sites and
reaction mechanisms in hydrodesulfurization (HDS) catalysis. This study involves
the application of a new battery of techniques (tunnelling microscopy) to a
classical problem (hydrosulfurization) with potential benefits for both.
Although there has been little advance in HDS in the last two decades,
environmental pressures are forcing it to the forefront of interest again.
Although widely practiced, the process is still poorly understood, and even
incremental improvements could have a major impact.