* 9207653
* Carotenoids and Photoprotection in Crassulacean Acid        Metabolism (CAM) Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1996
* William Adams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 126,000.00

The purpose of the proposed investigations is to characterize the response of
crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) plants to high light, with a particular
emphasis on the employment of a novel photoreceptive process that involves
several leaf carotenoids. This process, which is associated with the formation
of zeaxanthin from its precursors in the xanthophyll cycle, facilitates the safe
removal of an excess of absorbed light in photosynthetic organs. The diurnal
operation of the xanthophyll cycle will be characterized in several different
types of plants that process CAM, including platyopuntias, rosette-forming
yuccas, and two species which possess succulent leaves, Hoya australis and the
fern Pyrrossia confluens. The acclimation of the carotenoid composition, and
particularly the xanthophyll cycle, to different light environments will be
examined through a comparison of leaves which have developed in deep shade
versus those which have developed in full sunlight, In addition, this question
will be addressed by examining the acclimation of the carotenoid composition to
the gradient in the light environment that occurs within the leaves or cladodes.
The operation of the xanthophyll cycle will furthermore be characterized in
response to a combination of high light and chilling temperatures. The
utilization of the xanthophyll cycle in photoreceptive energy dissipation in
these CAM species which are found in habitats that experience high light will
then be compared with that which occurs in C3 species.