* 9207789
* Regulation of the Growth and Activity of Leaf-decomposing   Fungi by Dissolved Nutrients (N and P) in Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Keller Suberkropp, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1994
* USD 65,000.00

Fungi have been demonstrated to play key roles in mediating energy flow in the
detritus-based food chains in streams. Until recently, however, there have been
no methods available that would allow determination of instantaneous growth
rates of fungi in any environment. Consequently, quantitative data concerning
fungal production or flow of energy through the fungal community are not
available. A method for estimating instantaneous growth rates of natural fungal
communities by determining rates of incorporation of 14C-acetate into ergosterol
was recently described. The proposed studies are designed to adapt and evaluate
this method for use on the leaf-decomposing fungal communities in streams.
Laboratory studies will establish optimum conditions for the incorporation of
acetate into ergosterol and determine factors for converting incorporation rates
into growth rates of individual fungal species. Laboratory studies of individual
species growing on leaf material will be used to compare estimates of growth
rates and production determined by the 14C-acetate method with production
estimates determined independently from changes in fungal biomass, respiration
and conidium production. The method will then be used to estimate growth rates
and production of fungal communities during the decomposition of leaves in two
streams that differ in water chemistry. These results will be compared with
other measures of activity including total microbial respiration, total
microbial biomass and sporulation rates of stream fungi. These studies will
contribute to the assessment of a new method that has the potential to make a
significant impact on our understanding of fungal activities in the environment
and should contribute needed information concerning the productivity of fungi in
streams.