* 9207997
* Lignin Degradation by Phanerochaete chrysophorium:          Biochemical Characterization of Extracellular Peroxidases
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1996
* Michael Gold, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 03/31/1996
* USD 300,000.00

The aim of the proposed project is to further our understanding of manganese
peroxidase (MnP) and lignin peroxidase (LiP) from the lignin-degrading
basidiomycete Phanerochaete chrysosporium. The underlying objectives of the
proposed project are to further characterize the structure, mechanism and
function of these enzymes and to clarify their role in lignin degradation. The
binding, stoichiometry and mechanism of manganese oxidation by MnP will be
studied by kinetic methods and by optical and NMR spectroscopy. Kinetic,
spectroscopic and reactivity experiments also will be used to examine the
mechanism of oxidation of syringyl and guaiacyl free phenolic dimeric model
compounds by MnP and LiP from P. chrysosporium, and MnP and laccase form
Dichomitus squalens. The mechanism of nonphenolic model compound degradation by
D. squalens will also be examined. In addition, the mechanism of phenol
oxidation by LiP and the mechanism of phenol inhibition of nonphenolic aromatic
compound oxidation by LiP will be examined. Finally, using our P. chrysosporium
DNA transformation system, a homologous expression system will be developed for
these peroxidases. %%% Lignin is the second most abundant natural polymer in the
biosphere and the most abundant renewable aromatic material. This research
focusses on lignin degrading fungi and the structure and mechanisms of the
enzymes responsible for catalyzing the degradation. The potential utilization of
these micro organisms for transforming lignin into useful materials, chemicals
and fuels is a very significant area of research.