* 9207713
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Nonlinear Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Donald Aronson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1995
* USD 145,000.00

Work supported by this award will focus on several aspects of the behavior of
solutions to nonlinear differential equations. The first part of the project
will be concerned with solutions of the porous medium equation in more than one
space dimension. The Graveleau solution of this equation is a solution of a
radially symmetric equation which is generated by an orbit of a related first
order system of ordinary differential equations. Solutions of this type tend to
a power of the radius; this power is often referred to as the anomalous
exponent. The phenomenon occurs in many other examples as well. Recent work
suggests methods for calculating the precise value of the exponent. Knowledge of
this value measures the Holder continuity of solutions. A second line of
research concerns the stabilization in higher space dimensions for porous medium
flow with reaction. Specifically, work will be done to classify positive and
negative solutions to the equation with a cubic forcing term. Information about
these solutions is expected to play an important role in the studies of the
general case. Continuing work is also being carried out on superconducting
quantum interference devices which are used in many applications as a sensitive
detector of magnetic fields. It consists of two coupled Josephson point
junctions with a constant bias current. The dynamics are described by a pair of
ordinary differential equations. In analyzing the system one is led to a Hill
equation with three simple eigenvalues and all the rest double. In order to
understand the stability of solutions it is necessary to understand how the
double eigenvalues behave under perturbation. Work is being done in seeking
alternative expressions for the eigenvalues which may shed more light on
solution behavior.