* 9207886
* Molecular and Magnetooptical Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Paul Schatz, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 12/31/1995
* USD 358,500.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. Paul N. Schatz will study the magnetooptical spectroscopy of large
polyatomic systems, such as fullerenes and porphyrins, in low-temperature noble
gas matrices. Prof. Schatz expects to obtain basic electronic structural
information about the ground and excited states of molecular, ionic, mixed-
valent, and radical species using magnetic circular dichroism and magnetic
circularly polarized luminescence spectroscopies and their zero-field
counterparts. He will also perform theoretical analyses to fit the spectra in
order to obtain spectroscopic parameters for these systems. %%% By studying the
spectroscopy of atoms, molecules, radicals, and their respective ions captured
in very cold matrices consisting of solids made from noble-gas atoms, scientists
can learn much about their molecular structure and other important properties.
Prof. Schatz will use magnetic fields and polarized light to aid him in
understanding the electronic spectra of several chemically interesting species
and to acquire information which can not be obtained any other way. Among the
most interesting are fullerene compounds (molecules made exclusively from carbon
atoms arranged in closed geometric solids) and their positive and negative ions
as well as porphyrin systems. The former compounds are relevant to materials
science because of recent applications to areas such as high-temperature
superconductivity. The latter are important to bioinorganic chemistry and have
relevance to a number of biological sytems.