* 9207640
* Provision of a Research Microscope and a Gas Chromatography System in Support of Research at the Shannon Point Marine   Center
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Stephen Sulkin, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1995
* USD 62,300.00

Western Washington University (WWU) has established the Shannon Point Marine
Center (SPMC) as the focal point for new initiatives in research and education
in marine science. SPMC is strategically located, providing direct access to a
wide a variety of marine and estuarine habitats, including extensive protected
wetlands, macrophytes, estuarine marshes, and rocky intertidal zones. The
facilities of SPMC provide unique opportunties for research on local estuarine
processes, such as productivity of local watersheds, nutrient cycling and
regeneration, microbial ecology, and benthic metabolism; on environmental
impacts of petroleum refining; and on fish and invertebrate life histories. This
project will expand the opportunities for research in these areas by acquisition
of a light microscopy system, with dark field, phase contrast, differential
interference contrast, epifluorescence, and photomicrography. This will permit
the resolution and episluorescence technology critical to algal, protistan,
microbial, and embryological research, and will expand the capabilities of our
newly-acquired image analysis system. The project will also provide support for
a gas chromatography system that will permit analysis of hydrocarbon
contamination in sediments and tissues following analytical procedures specified
in the Puget Sound Protocols. These new facilities will be used primarily to
support research by WWU faculty and visiting investigators and also will be
employed in academic programs that incorporate research into the curriculum. **
*