* 9207281
* Mycorrhizal Fungi and Components of Plant Fitness
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1997
* Roger Koide, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1997
* USD 270,000.00

The objective of the proposed research is to determine the mechanisms by which
mycorrhizal fungi influence the major components of plant fitness. Mycorrhizal
fungi are present in nearly all terrestrial ecosystems and have been shown to
influence nutrient uptake, growth and reproductive host plants under controlled
conditions. Unfortunately, very little is known about the effects of mycorrhizal
fungi on the population biology of their host plants, particularly under field
conditions. Experiments in the laboratory have shown that mycorrhizal infection
can increase both fecundity and offspring quality. For example, it was shown
that infection of the maternal generation increased reproductive output in the
offspring generation. Therefore, the effects of infection on maternal fecundity
and offspring quality will be assessed separately in the proposed study. A
combination of field and greenhouse experiments incorporating demographic and
physiological measurements is proposed to establish the mechanistic basis for
observed phenomena. In one study, maternal generation host plants (Abutilon
theophrasti) will be grown in the field in a 3 x 2 factorial experiment (3
levels of P amendment; mycorrhizal, non-mycorrhizal). Growth, nutrient uptake,
reproductive output, leaf photosynthesis and root phosphatase activities will be
monitored for two seasons. In the second year of this study, a third factor
(natural reestablishment vs. thinning to a standard density) will be
incorporated in order to determine whether, in addition to influencing
fecundity, maternal treatments have independent effects on offspring performance
within the maternal environment. In another 2 year study, seeds collected from
mother plants (from the various maternal treatments) will be transplanted to
another location in the field to determine whether interactions between
offspring environment (M/NM x high P/low P) and maternal treatment (see above)
exists for offspring vigor. Seeds collected from mother plants will also be used
in controlled greenhouse studies in which the effects of maternal treatment on
offspring vigor mediated by seed weight will be distinguished from those
mediated by seed P content. In addition, greenhouse experiments in which
offspring from contrasting maternal treatments will be allowed to interact will
allow a determination as to whether maternal treatment can influence competitive
behavior. The results from these experiments should greatly increase the
understanding of the effect of mycorrhizal fungi on plant fitness.