* 9207870
* The Effect of Regional Hydrologic and Hydraulic Parameters  on Macrodispersion in Heterogeneous Aquifers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Sergio Serrano, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 08/31/1994
* USD 61,977.00

This is an award to provide support for research on modeling of the movement of
groundwater pollutants from their source to a location of interest. This project
is a renewal of support for research, conducted under NSF Grant No. 89- 21004,
in which the investigator focussed on fundamental methodology for modeling
groundwater flow and solutes that are derived from non- point sources. In this
renewal project, the investigator plans on improvement of the model and
conducting field experiments to verify its predictive ability for movement of
pollutants in groundwater aquifers. This project is expected to improve our
fundamental understanding of the effect that regional hydrological
characteristics and aquifer parameters have on the rate at which pollutants move
in aquifers. The investigator plans on relating the dispersion parameters of the
developed models to easily measurable variables such as the rate of aquifer
recharge, the hydraulic gradient, transmissivity, aquifer thickness and
laboratory-scale determined in laboratory-scale dispersivity. Results are
expected to be utilized in forecasting of scale-dependent factors influencing
groundwater pollution, and in the design and test of hazardous waste containment
facilities and in implementation of remedial actions for decontamination of soil
and aquifers.