* 9207311
* Monograph of Bactris (Palmae) for Flora Neotropica
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1992,06/30/1997
* Andrew Henderson, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 214,999.00

Bactris is one of the largest neotropical palm genera, and one of the most
poorly known taxonomically. The aim of the research proposed here is to provide
a taxonomic treatment of three sections, containing approximately 40 species, as
a preliminary to a revision of the whole genus for Flora Neotropica. Bactris is
widespread throughout the neotropics, from Mexico south to Bolivia, and also in
the Caribbean. The Amazon basin contains the greatest concentration of species.
Approximately 350 names exist, but there are probably nearer 120 actual species.
The genus is important for several reasons. It contains the economically
important B. gasipaes, the source of edible fruits which are grown and consumed
throughout the humid Neotropics. The ancestors of this cultivated species are
unknown, and yet are of great interest to agronomists. Other species provide a
host of minor products. The genus is important in the lowland tropical forest
ecosystems, and is a conspicuous component of the understory. Despite its large
size and economic importance, the genus is very poorly understood. A recent
phylogenetic analysis has divided the genus into four sections, three of which
will be revised in the project proposed here. The methods used for this revision
will include field collecting in critical areas and analysis of morphology,
pollen morphology, stigma morphology and leaf anatomy from herbarium specimens
and pickled material.