* 9207182
* Oral Interviews of Principals Involved in the Bletchley     Park Computer Development, 1941-1945.
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1993
* Golde Holtzman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 09/30/1993
* USD 4,150.00

Two of the major participants in the Bletchley Park work in breaking the World
War II German High Command "Enigma Codes" are present at Virginia Tech during
the Spring semester 1992. The University plans to conduct a series of four hour-
long oral interviews of Dr. I.J. Good and Dr. Donald Michie concerning their
involvement in the Bletchley Park activities, decryption and early computing
developments during World War II, and their contributions to statistics,
computing sciences and artificial intelligence since 1945. The principal
investigator has arranged for experienced writers and professionals skilled in
oral interviewing with computer pioneers to participate in this oral history
project. It is expected that the resulting collection of archival material will
result in several publications in the Communications of the ACM, the Annals of
the History of Computing and other journals associated with the intelligence and
statistics communities. Elements of the set of interviews will also be
considered for inclusion in TV and Radio series. This award is for travel funds
and subsistence during the interview period for the interviewers. Partial
support is also being provided by Virginia Tech, the Virginia Academy of
Sciences, the Association for Computing Machinery, and the American Statistical
Association.//