* 9207868
* International Workshop on Computational Electronics         May 28-29,1992 at the Beckman Institute of the University   of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1993
* Karl Hess, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 04/30/1993
* USD 10,000.00

The International Workshop on Computational Electronics will be held at the
Beckman Institute of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign on May
28-29, 1992. The workshop will cover all aspects of advanced simulation of
electronic transport in semiconductors and semiconductor devices, particularly
those which use large computational resources. Topics will include: 2-D and 3-D
standard simulations (drift- diffusion, hydrodynamic equations), Monte Carlo
device simulations, and Approaches to quantum transport. The workshop is
intended to be an international forum for the discussion on the current trends
and the future directions of computational electronics. A significant number of
invited papers presented by speakers from major universities and laboratories in
Europe an Asia will be included. Plenary sessions will be followed by poster
presentations from US groups, to stimulate and contribute to overall discussion.
The emphasis of the contributions will be on interdisciplinary aspects of
Computational Electronics, encompassing Applied Physics, Engineering and Applied
Mathematics. Active participation of graduate students, including student poster
papers, will be strongly encouraged. The results of the workshop will be
disseminated in the form of proceedings. In the past Kluwer Academic Publishers
has efficiently handled the printing of the proceedings which then where
distributed to the participants within a few months after the meeting. Attempt
to have similar arrangements with a publisher to be determined by university
procedures will be made.