* 9208257
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  A Viper-Class Sounding   Rocket Experiment to Observe the June 30, 1992 Total Solar  Eclipse
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1994
* Nebil Misconi, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/1994
* USD 14,700.00

This U.S.-Mexico award will help to support joint research between groups headed
by Prof. Nebil Misconi of the Florida Institute of Technology and Prof. Alfonso
Serrano of the Universidad Autonoma de Mexico, (UNAM) in Mexico. The purpose of
the collaboration is to pursue studies concerning the environment around the
sun. Among the objectives of the research, the investigators intend to obtain
information on the brightness of the solar corona and verify whether the sun has
dust rings or a dust shell around it. The investigators' experiment will include
the launching of a Viper-Class Sounding Rocket from the South Atlantic Ocean to
observe the forthcoming (June 30, 1992) total solar eclipse. This is one of the
longest duration total eclipses of the sun in this century. The rocket will
carry scientific instruments built by the U.S. PI with various components from
Mexico. Data from the eclipse will be transmitted to the ground and recorded on
a memory device for recovery by the U.S. Navy. The experiment will obtain
specific information on the dynamics of the dust particles orbiting the sun and
the interaction of the dust with the solar wind. This information will help to
increase our understanding of the environment around the sun and other stars.