* 9208212
* Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity of Resource Availability in the Sagebrush-steppe Ecosystem: Perception and           Exploitation by Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1998
* David Pyke, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1998
* USD 1,800,038.00

Characterization of resource heterogeneity in space (patches) and time (pulses)
at scales of days to weeks and decimeters to meters will be undertaken. In
addition to chemical and physical measures of resource heterogeneity,
assessments of how this resource variability is perceived by plants will be
pursued, including: Root and foliage characteristics that reflect local resource
availability, acquisition of resources, competition with other plants and
microbes for resources, and translation of resources gleaned from patches and
pulses into fitness and seedling recruitment. Plant response to incongruity of
resources and factors that might smoothe heterogeneity (mycorrhizae and water
efflux from roots) will also be investigated. Parameters to be measured include
nutrient pools, flux rates through nitrogen pools, microbial biomass, soil water
potential, plant nutrient acquisition, photosynthesis, root uptake kinetics,
respiration and growth, and biomass and seed production. Stable isotopes will
feature prominently in the work including new isotopic dilution procedures. Data
collected in addressing 21 hypotheses will also be applied in a new modeling
application of Ecological Field Theory and kriging interpolation. The study
features two species each of shrubs, perennial grasses and exotic annual
grasses. The current conversion of the sagebrush steppe from a perennial system
to exotic annuals is also addressed. This research will produce findings of
importance to the general ecology and ecosystem function of arid lands as well
as to the management of grazing land resources.