* 9208828
* RUI:  Microbial Assimilation of Nitrate in Disturbed        and Undisturbed Forest Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Stephen Hart, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 07/31/1996
* USD 209,987.00

A thorough understanding of the factors controlling nitrate pool sizes is
critical to minimizing such undesirable processes as nitrogen loss, nitrate
pollution of ground water, and trace N-gas production. Using recently developed
15N isotopic dilution techniques that allow measurement of gross
N-transformation rates in relatively undisturbed soil, these investigators have
provided evidence that microbial assimilation of nitrate is a significant
component in the inorganic N cycle of three forest ecosystems. Although
microbial assimilation of nitrate has generally been discounted as being
insignificant in forest soils, they believe that there is sufficient evidence
from this and other studies to indicate that microbial assimilation of nitrate
may be a primary regulator of nitrate pool sizes. This project will examine
forest sites along two transects (in Oregon and New Mexico) and determine the
effect of heterogeneity in carbon and nitrogen supply on assimilation rates; the
influence of temperature and moisture on gross rates of inorganic N assimilation
and production; the specific microbial populations responsible for nitrate
assimilation; and the role of plants as sources of carbon versus competitors for
nitrogen. This study will provide information that is necessary for the
formulation of process-based models predicting the impacts of disturbance on N
cycling as well predicting potential feedback loops that will develop as C and N
inputs to ecosystems shift during global climate change.