* 9208375
* Emotion, Regulation, and Social Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1997
* Nancy Eisenberg, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/1997
* USD 370,646.00

ABSTRACT Many behaviors in everyday social life are based on people's emotional
reactions. Thus, one can better understand both differences among people in
social behavior and the development of social competence in children by
attending to differences in individuals' emotional responding and regulation of
emotion. Currently there is some research both on aspects of emotional
responding (such as the tendency to experience negative emotions and the
intensity of people's emotional responses) and on self- regulatory and coping
behaviors. However, few researchers have studied the combined effects on social
outcomes of differences among people in both emotional reactivity and the ways
in which people regulate their emotion and emotion-based behavior (e.g.,
sympathy, anger). The purpose of the present study is to examine the relation of
individual differences in tendencies to react emotionally, emotion-regulation,
and styles of coping to vicarious emotional responding (e.g. sympathy and
empathy), social behavior (e.g., behavior when angered), popularity with peers,
and social competence at school and at home. In this research, the PI's will
take a multimethod approach, using self- report and behavioral measures, facial
reactions and physiological measures as markers of emotion, and naturalistic
observational techniques as well as laboratory studies. Participants in the
studies are preschool and school-aged children and adults. The goals of this
research are to better understand how people cope with emotions (especially
vicariously induced emotions such as sympathy and personal distress and anger),
the factor related to constructive coping with emotions, and the relation of how
one deals with emotions to socially competent and positive behavior. This
research will enhance our understanding of the development of socially competent
modes of behavior and the regulation of negative emotion, and the results could
be used to foster positive social development in children.