* 9208614
* Electrochemical Synthesis at Highly Structured Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* David Allara, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David J. Curran
* 08/31/1996
* USD 340,000.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of electrosynthesis. It is part of a joint National Science
Foundation/Electric Power Research Institute program of research on
electrochemical synthesis. During the tenure of this three-year standard grant,
Professors Natan and Allara and their students will carry out experimental
studies of the extent to which structured interfaces can be used to induce
selectivity in electrosynthetic processes. Three research thrusts will be
pursued: electrocatalysis at conducting inorganic materials, enantioselective
electrochemistry at chiral self-assembled monolayers and at chiral
semiconductors, and functionalization of gallium arsenide with organothiolate
films. In the first two thrusts, the electrode structure is tailored to function
in a highly specific way using established criteria from biological and organic
chemistry. The research on gallium arsenide is exploratory and capitalizes on
recent discoveries in the principal investigators' laboratories. All three
thrusts involve extensive characterization of the electrochemical interface
using both in situ and ex situ techniques. %%% This research should lead to an
enhanced understanding of those factors which control chiral electrosynthesis.
The successful attainment of the goals of this project could enable the design
of efficient and environmentally benign electrosynthetic routes to the
production of specialty chemicals.