* 9208955
* Molecular Genetic Studies of Neurogenesis in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Barry Yedvobnick, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/1996
* USD 273,570.00

The earliest stage of neural development relies on a decision making process
that determines whether groups of uncommitted cells are directed into a neural
pathway of development or a pathway that produces skin. This process is
fundamental and shared by a wide range of organisms, including human. In the
fruit fly, this decision is regulated by a group of genes called the neurogenic
loci whose gene products mediate intercellular communication. Molecular studies
of these loci have demonstrated that they encode membrane, cytoplasmic and
nuclear proteins. The mastermind (mam) gene, is a member of the neurogenic loci
that codes for a nuclear protein with a novel structure. It is the only member
of these loci where sequence information has not provided a clear model for
function. To understand the function of the mam gene, three strategies will be
undertaken. First, the hypothesis that mam encodes a DNA binding regulatory
protein will be tested. This will involve biochemical assays, and the use of a
new yeast selection system that may elucidate the targets of mam regulation in
the nucleus. Secondly, a screen for a temperature-sensitive mam allele will be
made in order to inactivate the mam protein at any time during development and
observe the consequences of mam elimination on neural development. Thirdly,
genetic screens for modifiers of mam function will be performed. These screens
may produce mutations in genes that interact with mam and also play a role in
early neural development. It is expected that a complete characterization of the
mam protein and interacting genes will provide new insights into neural
development that are generally relevant to many species.