* 9208021
* Use of Summer Precipitation Along a Summer Precipitation    Gradient
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* James Ehleringer, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 02/28/1997
* USD 250,000.00

This proposal is directed at understanding the ability of common arid region
plants to utilize summer precipitation events and the consequences of different
water sources for growth and for the efficiency of dry matter production.
Preliminary data indicate that several of the dominant perennial species in the
Intermountain West appear not to utilize summer precipitation, even though
summer rain is a major component of the annual water input to these ecosystems.
It is proposed to examine several hypotheses related to a plant's utilization of
summer precipitation and how this relates to the efficiency of biomass
production along a gradient of increasing summer precipitation. Research will be
centered on using stable isotope analyses to determine both water sources and
efficiency of dry matter production. Field studies will be conducted at five
sites, which range from 15% to 52% summer precipitation, but which are otherwise
similar in total precipitation and temperature. The study will focus on dominant
tree-subtree species in the ecosystem transitional between desert and temperate
forest ecosystems: Juniper (Juniperus osteosperma), pinyon pine (Pinus edulis)
and scrub oak (Quercus gambelii). There is strong potential for applied aspects
of the proposed research. Stable isotope analyses provide integrated long-term
estimates of plant parameters involving water use and efficiency of dry matter
production. The information and techniques derived from this study will be
useful in determining the kinds of characters to be used for evaluation of
forest timber and pulp species. Foresters and agronomists are already beginning
to use these stable isotope approaches for integrated analyses of different
genetic lines.