* 9208354
* US-Russia Joint Seminar on Cryopedology and Global Change;  Pushchino, Russia; November 10-16, 1992
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1992,04/30/1994
* Chien-Lu Ping, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 04/30/1994
* USD 15,000.00

Eleven U.S. researchers will participate in a two-day U.S.-Russia seminar on
Cryopedology and Global Change following the International Conference on
Cryopedology in Pushchino, Russia, 10-14 November, 1992. The seminar is being
organized by Dr. Chien-Lu Ping of the University of Alaska and Dr. G.V.
Dobrovolsky of the Institute of Soil Science and Photosynthesis of the Russian
Academy of Sciences. The specific objectives of the seminar are to (1) discuss
and examine the cryogenic processes in cold soils and identify the fundamental
controlling processes of permafrost and alpine soils; (2) design experiments for
cryopedological research to aid the interpretation of global change,
paleoecology, and resource management in the arctic and subarctic zones; (3)
compare the current classification systems of cryogenic soils in the world,
especially in the United States and Russia, and develop a common cross-reference
system for soil-based technology transfer among the circumpolar nations; and (4)
identify potential research partnerships in permafrost-dominated or cryogenic
soils. This activity fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading researchers in the United States and the former
Soviet Union to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence in the field of basic scientific research
on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.