* 9208980
* High Performance Computational Methods for Structural       Mechanics
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1994
* Charbel Farhat, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert G. Voigt
* 11/30/1994
* USD 44,000.00

Growing interest in sophisticated structures such as next generation composite
aircraft and large space structures, places increasing demands on the optimality
of the structural components used. These demands are met by improving both the
accuracy and efficiency of the computational tools used to develop and analyze
these structures. However, the computational demands of these systems are so
great, that engineers must frequently be satisfied with rather crude and
simplified models in order to speed up the design cycle time. The true potential
for execution improvement lies in improved solution algorithms and parallel
computing. This interdisciplinary research program will focus on the design of
efficient parallel computational methods for the finite element analysis of such
complex structures. The research includes three components: computational
mechanics, applied mathematics and applied computer sciences. The first
component involves the development of discrete mathematical models based on
finite elements for representing aerospace structures as assemblies of beams,
plates and shells. The second component addresses the design of domain
decomposition methods for static, transient, and vibration analyses using those
models. The last research component aims to tuning these methods to massively
parallel supercomputers.