* 9208200
* Mathematical Sciences:  The Bryn Mawr-Spelman Summer        Mathematics Program
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Rhonda Hughes, Bryn Mawr College
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/1995
* USD 84,193.00

The Bryn Mawr-Spelman Summer Mathematics Program is an eight-week summer
research program for freshman and sophomore women from Bryn Mawr, Spelman, and
area colleges, with the goal of identifying and encouraging talented women to
pursue careers in the mathematical sciences. The program would build on and be
modeled after a "pre-REU" program that has taken place at Bryn Mawr for the past
three summers and would complement the Scholars in Mathematics Program at
Spelman. Eight students would conduct research whose primary focus is
experimentation and exploration using the computer; they would be aided by
alumnae mentors who are just beginning graduate programs in the mathematical
sciences. Other features of the program include weekly roundtable discussions on
issues in mathematics research and teaching, employment as teaching assistants
in the students' respective departments during the academic year, travel to a
national AMS-MAA meeting, encouragement to participate in an REU or summer
internship program the following summer, and mentoring and advice regarding the
decision to attend graduate school as well as the choice of an appropriate
graduate program. The Summer Program will be held for the next two years on the
campus of Bryn Mawr College. The program builds on and complements existing
undergraduate programs at both Bryn Mawr and Spelman Colleges and enhances an
exchange program between the colleges that began in 1984. It is anticipated that
this program would serve as a model for other early intervention and exchange
programs at the undergraduate level.