* 9208407
* Mathematical Sciences: Hypergroups, Measure Algebras and    Polynomials in Rn
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Alan Schwartz, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 01/31/1995
* USD 40,347.00

The focus of this project is a generalized harmonic analysis involving
orthogonal functions on sets in higher dimensional Euclidean space. The novel
feature of the research is that the sets under consideration do not form a
group. This lack of algebraic structure can often be compensated for by the
existence of an adequate algebraic structure in the measure algebra supported on
the set. The structures under consideration here are referred to as hypergroups
in which the algebraic operation is convolution. If the elements of a basis of
orthogonal functions act as homomorphisms of the hypergroup, then one gets a
viable mathematical structure. For example, the initial one- dimensional work in
the area used eigenfunctions of a Sturm- Liouville problem as a basis. The
current project seeks to extend existing structure theorems for compact one-
dimensional hypergroups to the non-compact case. Other work will focus on
characterizing the compactly supported hypergroups in higher dimensions,
developing a harmonic analysis of the disk polynomials and the spheroidal wave
functions and analyzing the structure of specific families of non-hypergroup
measure algebras. The hypergroup concept, abstract as it is, has its roots in
probability theory, orthogonal polynomials and the theory of special functions.
Particular applications include the explicit representations for annular
spheroidal wave functions even though the functions cannot be given in closed
form and the development of hypergroup interpretations of characteristic
functions in probability theory.