* 9208589
* Improvements of Archaeological Collections
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Mary Adair, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1994
* USD 47,443.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Museum of Anthropology at the
University of Kansas will continue to upgrade its archaeological collections.
These prehistoric materials from the Northern and Central Plains of the United
States form the core of its archaeological holdings. The ca. 400,000 specimens
were acquired as a result of over 110 scientific field projects undertaken by
members of the Museum staff since 1945. Earlier projects focussed on the
reconstruction of the culture history of the region while more recent efforts
have been directed toward the study of Woodland and Late Archaic cultures with
an emphasis on the reconstruction of environment and settlement patterns.
Photographic records constitute an important source of archaeological
information and provide primary excavation documentation. The Kansas collection
includes ca. 10,000 photographs and these form the core of this conservation
project. The photographs will be properly curated to help stabilize the present
rate of deterioration caused by poor storage and fluctuating humidity levels.
Copies will be made of negatives of selected prints; slides used most often for
teaching will also be duplicated. A computerized inventory will also be
established to serve as a research guide. This project is important for several
reasons. It will help to preserve basic materials important to the understanding
of U.S. prehistory. It will also make this body of data more easily accessible
for scientific research.