* 9208830
* RNA Polymerase:  Mechanism of Action
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Ronald Johnson, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 100,000.00

The focus of this study will be Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (RPase). The
interaction of RPase with a wide variety of synthetic templates, native
promoters and variant promoters have been extensively studied. However, there
are aspects of the thermodynamics and kinetics of the interaction of RPase with
promoters have been extensively studied. However, there are aspects of the
thermodynamics and kinetics of the interaction of RPase with promoter sites that
have yet to be delineated. Stopped- flow kinetic studies on the interaction of a
fluorescently-labeled derivative of RPase with promoters offers the range of
temperatures. Thus, analysis of the data obtained in these studies will provide
detailed information about the molecular events that occur in the enzyme during
promoter complex formation and disscociation. Moreover, because the
fluorescently attached tag appears to be sensitive to conformational changes in
the enzyme, these studies will provide information regarding structural
alterations in the enzyme, these studies will provide information regarding
structural alterations in the enzyme during open promoter complex formation. %%%
Highly specific interactions between proteins and nucleic acids are crucial for
a wide range of biological processes such as replication, transcription and
translation. An understanding of these processes and of the reasons for their
malfunctioning requires detailed information on the structures of the protein-
nucleic complexes, as well as the thermodynamics and kinetics of their
formation.