* 9208585
* Algebraic Reasoning for Probabilistic and Real-Time         Concurrent Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1996
* Scott Smolka, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 05/31/1996
* USD 177,880.00

Real-life processes behave probabilistically and execute in real- time. This
project will develop process algebra-based techniques and software tools for
reasoning about probabilistic and real-time aspects of concurrent systems. o
Testing Preorders for Probabilistic Processes - Testing preorders for
probabilistic processes based on the natural notion of a process passing a test
with a certain probability will be extended , and o Axiomatizing Probabilistic
Processes - An extension of the process algebra ACP to the probabilistic setting
constitutes a complete axiomatization of probabilistic bisimulation for finite
process. Work will continue by considering recursion in the language, a weak
version of probabilistic bisimulation in which internal actions are abstracted
away, and the stratified model of probabilistic processes. o Integrated Models
of Probabilistic and Real-Time Processes - The research will follow a dual
approach to developing techniques for analyzing probabilistic and real-time
systems by introducing time, in an integrated manner, into probabilistic testing
preorders and into probabilistic extension of ACP. A major outgrowth will be a
suite of design tools for analyzing algebraically the reliability and
performance of systems. One can use this design environment to apply the
methodology to substantive realistic examples, such as communication protocols
and distributed resource allocation algorithms.