* 9208648
* H-Exchange Rates and Hydrogen Bonding of Individual Peptide NH Protons in Alpha-Helices
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Robert Baldwin, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1996
* USD 264,000.00

Dr. Baldwin proposes to measure, for the first time, exchange rates of
individual peptide NH protons within single, isolated alpha- helices. A nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) technique will be used, based on 15N spectral editing
of the one-dimensional proton spectrum. A single peptide NH will be 15N-labeled
by chemical synthesis of the peptide, and 15N spin echo difference spectroscopy
will be used to give the 1H spectrum of the single 15N-labeled peptide NH. A
trial experiment demonstrating the feasibility of this approach has been made.
The new method will be used to test the basic assumptions of helix-random coil
transition theory, and also to provide background information about exchange
rates of amide protons in single alpha-helices, for use in interpreting data on
protein folding intermediates. %%% The proposed experiments will provide a new
technique for obtaining structural information about short peptides, for
example, when the peptide is complexed with a specific receptor. Currently there
is wide interest in " peptide libraries", both in the biotechnology field and in
biomedical science generally. Methodologies have been developed for synthesizing
astronomical numbers of different short peptide sequences and then for selecting
a small number of sequences that can bind specifically to a receptor in a signal
transduction pathway. This method will provide an important tool for
characterizing the structure of a peptide in a peptide-receptor complex. As
pointed out above, the method also has direct application to the problem of
characterizing structures of kinetic intermediates on the pathway of protein
folding.