* 9208377
* A Colloquium on Compatible Solutes and Macromolecular       Stability
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1993
* John Crowe, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 08/31/1993
* USD 5,000.00

Five years ago the University of California's Bodega Marine Laboratory
instituted a series of colloquia, during which experts in timely fields were
assembled for an exchange of ideas on current research and to participate in
extensive public discussions on the topic of the colloquium. The colloquia are
widely advertised and have been well attended by participants from all over the
world. This proposal is for partial support for the fifth colloquium in this
series. Previous colloquia have been published, a practice which the organizers
of the proposed one intend to continue. We will assemble many of the world
leaders whose research focuses on the stabilization of macromolecules under a
variety of conditions. The focus of the meeting is specifically on "compatible
solutes" and their roles in stabilization. The speakers are chosen from far-
flung fields, including food science, biochemistry, biophysics, animal and plant
physiology, physics and chemistry. Because this subject has clear applications
in "the real world", participants from industry and Federal government are
included in the program. Being an interdisciplinary meeting, many of the
participants have never met and may not even be aware of each other's work. It
is unlikely that the scientists chosen to participate in this colloquium would
be assembled at a regular scientific meeting. Thus, a major aim is to generate
discussion and interaction that would not likely otherwise occur, on a topic of
basic and applied importance.