* 9208524
* Low Frequency Isolation Systems for Gravitational Wave      Interferometers
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* James Faller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 12/31/1995
* USD 620,000.00

Laser interferometer gravitational wave detectors have their end mirrors
mounted on pendulums to isolate them from disturbances. Research will be carried
out on methods for very strongly isolating the support points for the pendulums
from ground motions at frequencies of 1 to 10 Hz. A preliminary isolation stage
is now being constructed, and two additional stages with much lower noise will
be designed, built and tested. With all three stages operating together, the
final isolated platform will have lower displacement and tilt noise than ever
has been achieved before. Then, the final platform will be used to suspend two
pendulums so that the effects of thermally generated noise in the pendulum
support wires can be measured directly. The goal of this research is to find
practical ways of supporting the mirrors in gravitational wave detectors so that
the noise in the mirror separation at frequencies of 1 to 10 Hz can be reduced
to the unavoidable effects of locally generated gravitational fields from
density fluctuations in the ground and the air. This will aid in detecting
gravitational wave signals from astronomical sources which do not radiate
strongly at higher frequencies. The low frequency isolation methods developed
are likely to be useful in industry and in other scientific measurements.