* 9208319
* Flexilbe Collaborative Software Engineering
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Prasun Dewan, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 01/31/1994
* USD 56,094.00

This is collaborative research with John Riedl, University of Minnesota
(IRI-9208546). Much of software engineering-design, programming, debugging,
testing, code reviews, program demonstrations, and program management-requires
collaboration among multiple users, possibly geographically dispersed. In this
project the researchers propose to investigate flexible support for the
activities of cooperating software engineers. In particular they propose to
investigate an approach that offers (i) a wide range of concurrency control
mechanisms including serializable transactions and interactive transactions;
(ii) fine-grain access control for collaborative applications that allows a user
to recover from other users' mistakes and explore various alternatives with
them, (iv) a multidimensional inheritance model that allows collaboration
parameters to be specified independently in hierarchies of groups of objects and
groups of users; and (v) multimedia support integrated with concurrency control,
access control, and undo/redo. The unique features of this research are its
focus on the relationships of these five goals, on flexible mechanisms for
achieving each of the goals, and on structured specification of options by end-
users. The researchers will use results from previous research done in flexible
coupling, long transactions, adaptive concurrency control systems. inheritance,
single-user undo/redo, capability-based protection, collaborative tools, and
software engineering tools, They plan to implement the approach by extending an
existing system developed at Purdue and Minnesota. They will evaluate the
performance of the various collaboration methods and study how a particular
method can be automatically chosen by the systems based on a minimum performance
level requested by the user. In addition to an understanding of the
applicability of collaborative technology to software engineering, the research
will produce prototype software engineering tools to demonstrate the novel
aspects of the research.