* 9208914
* Gravitational Radiation from the Dynamics of Compact Objects
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1998
* Joan Centrella, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 12/31/1998
* USD 408,858.00

One of the most exciting frontiers in general relativity is the direct
detection of gravitational radiation from astrophysical sources. A number of
detector systems are currently in various stages of planning and development
both here and abroad. Notable among these is the LIGO detector, recently funded
by Congress, which is expected to be operational before the end of this decade.
On the theoretical side, much activity is focused on calculating the
gravitational waveforms expected from various sources. Understanding many of the
most interesting sources is believed to require large scale numerical
simulations. This research will develop two 3-D hydrodynamical codes and apply
them to calculate the gravitational waveforms emitted from several astrophysical
sources. The Eulerian code will study stellar collapse and rotational
instabilities, while the fully Lagrangian code will model the collision and
coalescence of neutron stars. Both codes will use Newtonian and post-Newtonian
gravity including gravitational radiation reaction. The development of two
independent codes will allow cross-checking and intercomparison of results; this
is important to verify that the codes produce the correct physical behavior. The
resulting waveforms are expected to be of considerable interest with regard to
the experimental efforts to detect gravitational waves.