* 9208896
* Heterogeneity and Aggregate Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Ricardo Caballero, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 105,313.00

This project starts from the premise that microeconomic units do not adjust
continuously to the information and shocks they perceive, and that when they do
adjust their actions typically involve relatively large changes. Recent
literature has developed both the microeconomic justification for such behavior
and the implications of such an environment for aggregate dynamics. This project
is mostly a continuation of the latter. The project has two parts. The first
provides methods for the empirical implementation of models of aggregate
dynamics under heterogeneous and discontinuous microeconomic adjustment, and
develops several applications. On the methodological side, its purpose is to
show (i) how to recover from aggregate data different forms of microeconomic
adjustment policies, (ii) the implications of such policies for aggregate
dynamics, (iii) the empirical relevance of these, and (iv) how to integrate
microeconomic and aggregate data to improve the descriptive and predictive power
of aggregate dynamic models. These techniques will be used to study dynamic
labor demands, price and wage dynamics, and business as well as residential
investment. The second part of the project is more specific and is aimed at
studying the dynamic and medium run implications of the presence of costs of
creating new production units in a growing economy. The interaction between
adjustment costs and growth yields a productive structure where heterogeneous
units operate simultaneously, with continuous entry of new and efficient units
and scrapping of old and outdated ones. The purpose of this part of the project
is to describe and study the efficiency of dynamic unemployment and wage
determination under this "cleansing" view of both trends and cycles. This
apparatus will be used to study U.S. and European business cycles, as well as
the impact and optimal policy design in the face of structural reforms.