* 9208707
* Salvage and Curation of St. Augustine Archaeological        Collections
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Kathleen Deagan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1994
* USD 93,917.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kathleen Deagan acquire for the
Florida Museum of Natural History and curate approximately 800,000 to 1,000,000
objects excavated from the site of St. Augustine, Florida. These materials are
currently held by the Historic St. Augustine Preservation Board. A severe and
destructive flood in 1990 in the Board's basement artifact repository along with
the loss in 1991 of its only archaeological collections manager position have
made it impossible for the Board to continue to adequately care for this
artifact collection. The materials are packed in closed cardboard boxes, stored
in a variety of rooms, hallways and closets and are totally inaccessible to
researchers. Dr. Deagan and colleagues will transfer these materials to the
Florida Museum of Natural History at the University of Florida where a second
large collection of materials from the site is currently housed. They will
inventory, accession and computer catalogue the new materials and rehouse them
in inert specimen boxes and closed cabinets. The associated records will be
organized and duplicated and a survey conducted of immediate conservation needs.
In this way the collection will be made available for scientific research. (NSF
support provides funds for both transport and curation. No purchase fee is
involved.) St. Augustine, the oldest city in the United States, was first
occupied ca. 1566. It has been the focus of intensive archaeological study and
excavations have been conducted at 28 domestic, religious, military and
commercial sites. The ca. 1,500,000 objects recovered include ceramic, metal,
shell, bone, glass and stone artifacts as well as soil, floral, charcoal,
malacological and other environmental samples. Together they permit
anthropologists to ask a wide range of questions not only about human behavior
but also about environmental interaction and change. The materials are also
relevant for studies of historical ecology, cultural evolution, social history,
materials sciences and post-1500 technology. They provide one of the primary
foundations for our understanding of Euro-American adaptation, acculturation,
the demise of Native American society and the emergence of Euro-American
culture. While the Florida State Museum materials have been widely used, the
Preservation Board collection is inaccessible for scientific study. Dr. Deagan's
project is important because it will curate this valuable body of data and make
it available for study.