* 9208398
* Mixed Metal Precursors for Organo-Transition Metal CVD of   Stable Metal/Compound Semiconductor Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1997
* Herbert Kaesz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 01/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

This award is made by the Office of Special Projects in the Chemistry Division
under the Materials Synthesis and Processing Initiative. Organometallic
complexes combining transition metals and main group metals will be synthesized
to serve as precursors for Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) of thermodynamically
stable and lattice-matched semiconductor interfaces for III-V compound
semiconductors. Such interfaces are essential in forming active Schottky
barriers or Ohmic contacts in solid-state circuits. The research will consist of
organometallic synthesis, followed by CVD screening and characterization of the
composition and structure of the film and the interface region. Electrical
properties will also be determined. Deposition of intermetallic films will also
be attempted from the joined gas streams of separate single metal precursors.
The composition of the films will be controlled by selective deposition of
intermediate molecular addition compounds with Group III acceptor molecules. %%%
This research will provide fundamental new information on the formation and
decomposition of mixed-metal organometallic complexes while also providing new
routes to thermodynamically stable mixed-metal films on compound semiconductors.