* 9208545
* Synthesis and Processing of Carbon Black Macromonomers for  Design of Advanced Separation Systems for Adsorption and/or Filtration of Trace Contaminants
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1998
* James Economy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/1998
* USD 468,000.00

The goals of this project are to design reaction moldable, carbon black
macromonomers which can selectively and quantitatively remove a wide range of
trace contaminants from the environment and would also permit for recovery and
reuse. This will be accomplished by first controlling the chemical nature of
both high and low surface area carbon black particles to provide a range of
acidic, basic, neutral or high polar surfaces in the pores. The investigator
will then introduce a variety of reactive units onto the surface of the carbon
black to make it behave as a polymerizable macromonomer. This will be done
through 1) chemical reactions, 2) reaction of surface sites with oligomeric
units such as resoles, or 3) through coating with very thin polymeric films,
such as polyacrylic acid. These macromonomers will then be reaction molded to
specific shapes through crosslinking of the reactive groups on the surface. This
new approach to environmental control could address most of the limitations
associated with the activated carbon systems typically in use today. Features to
be investigated in depth include: 1) the surface area changes associated with
different chemical treatments, 2) the determination of mechanical properties of
the reaction molded macromonomers and the feasibility for reactivation of these
molded shapes through electrical resistance heating, 3) the selective adsorption
of trace contaminants using the various chemically treated systems, 4) the
design of graded depth filters for particulate filtration in the range of
50-500A, and 5) separation of ionic aggregates where the surface of the
interstitial opening is designed to display a specific ionic character.