* 9208170
* Topics in Computational Complexity and Computational        Learning Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Gyorgy Turan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 12/31/1996
* USD 88,000.00

The project focuses on determining the computation power of models of
computation over the real numbers such as: (a) linear decision trees; (b)
branching programs with linear tests; and (c) combinational circuits of bounded
and unbounded fan-in with gates computing real functions, for the computation of
Boolean functions. The latter models are also examined from the aspect of
approximate and exact computation of real functions. The goal is to prove lower
bounds for explicitly defined functions and to study the relations between
different complexity measures for these models. This research could lead to new
lower bound arguments and it could contribute to the understanding of the
interaction between discrete and continuous aspects of computation. In
computational learning theory, extensions of previous work on concept learning
in on-line learning models are studied, as well as the approximate learning of
real functions belonging to classes defined by smoothness or structural
properties. In addition, concept learning in structures of first-order logic is
examined. These investigations are related to results and methods in PAC
learning, information based complexity and finite model theory. Finally, another
goal of this project is to extend these formal learnability results to areas
often investigated in artificial intelligence.