* 9208620
* Scientific Workstations for Research in Computationally-    Intensive Econometric Methods
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1992,09/30/1993
* Lung-fei Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 09/30/1993
* USD 24,706.00

Dramatic increases in the capacity of computers to store and process
information has resulted in a reorientation of microeconomic analyses. Computer-
intensive methods increasingly have been used to explore larger and more complex
databases and to sharpen the inferences based on those analyses. Innovation has
been especially significant with respect to the improvement of semiparametric
and nonparametric estimation procedures. To address this problem, a group of
leading economists, all of whom are experienced and productive scientists in
their own rights, have developed a network to collectively address remaining
problems in the development of estimation and other computational networks.
Those investigators have begun development of an integrated network of computer
workstations. Through this network, they will exchange data and programs in
order to further stimulate development and testing of new methods. This award
provides funds to enable an investigator at the University of Michigan to
acquire a workstation and link it into this network. The workstation will be
used by the investigator and his faculty colleagues and graduate students to
improve computational approaches and to test those approaches through analyses
of microeconomic data related to a broad range of issues. This award will enable
a group of researchers led by a nationally recognized leader in advancements of
computational methods for microeconomic analysis to accelerate the pace and
expand the scope of their inquiries. These researchers will make valuable
advances of both general and more focused benefit regarding computational
methodologies, and through their involvement in a network of other leading
economists, they will stimulate research in other settings.