* 9208188
* Mathematical Sciences: "Partial Differential Equations"
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Joseph Kohn, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 287,000.00

This award supports three investigators working on various aspects of problems
combining several complex variables and partial differential equations. One
primary focus will be continuing research on the regularity of two first order
differential operators, the complex derivative d-bar which measures the degree
to which a function is holomorphic and the associated operator restricted to
manifolds or domain boundaries called the d-bar-b operator. The study of
regularity is governed by sub-elliptic inequalities. Regularity is analyzed both
locally and globally through these inequalities, and will be considered both in
the analytic sense as well as that of infinite differentiability. Related to
regularity, and possibly one of the strongest motivations for studying it, is
the question of how smooth the boundary values of a function remain after
projection onto the space of holomorphic functions on a domain. A concrete
expression for the projection is given by integration against the Bergman
kernel. A second thrust of this project is to understand the boundary behavior
of the Bergman kernel on various kinds of domains, especially those of finite
type. A third, somewhat more geometric line of work concerns the regularity
theory of level surfaces, problems of crystal growth and degenerate equations.
Level surfaces of solutions of differential equations, expecially those which
analyze the level sets of viscosity solutions of heat equations will be studied.
Among the most fundamental questions to be considered is one due to De Giorgi,
which seeks the regularity of the surfaces as a function of a parameter in the
differential equation. Partial differential equations form the backbone of
mathematical modeling in the physical sciences. Phenomena which involve
continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials and energy are known to
obey certain general laws which are expressible in terms of the interactions and
relationships between partial derivatives. The key role of mathematics is not to
state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative and quantitative
meaning from them.