* 9208864
* Antarctic Meteorological Research Center
* O/D,OPP
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1996
* John Young, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 12/31/1996
* USD 764,813.00

The Antarctic Meteorological Research Center (AMRC), one of three research
centers in the Science and Engineering Technology Center at McMurdo, is a
resource for meteorological research and a test bed for improving operational
synoptic forecasting. The Man- Computer Interactive Data Access System (McIDAS),
a versatile computer-based system for organizing, manipulating, and integrating
antarctic environmental data will form the basis of AMRC. It will capture the
flow of meteorological information from polar orbiting satellites, automatic
weather stations, operational station synoptic observations, and research
project data. It will also receive environmental data products, such as weather
forecasts, from outside Antarctica, and will act as a repository for existing
archived data bases. Phase I, to begin in the 1992-93 summer season, consists of
the installation and operation of work stations that can manipulate and display
AVHRR data based on the existing satellite imagery acquisition system. Phase II
will consist of the acquisition and integration of a system that will provide
data collection, data display and archiving, scientific applications, network
communi- cations, and remote user access. The McIDAS system, developed at the
University of Wisconsin in the mid-1970's, ingests meteorological data from
various sources: standard synoptic observations, radiosonde profiles, satellite-
based visible and infra-red imagery, atmospheric profiles inverted from multi-
spectral scanning sensors, and non-standard data such as TOMS ozone data, SAR
sea ice information, and the AWS network observations. The system automatically
registers, calibrates, and locates (by geographical coordinates) the ingested
information and allows a user at a work station to manipulate the data base. The
manipulations include sectorization, false color, enhancements, brightness
stretching, overlays, looping, differencing, and are quite definitely keyed to
synoptic meteorological research and weather forecasting. The antarctic system
is based primarily on data streams provided by polar orbiters (AVHRR/HRPT and
DMSP), since the look angles from geostationary satellites are so extremely low.
The full utilization of McIDAS capabilities in producing meteorological data
products useful in both forecasting and research will include a data transfer
and communications capability to, for example, the Australian Bureau of
Meteorology (ABOM), the University of Wisconsin Space Science and Engineering
Center (SSEC), the Fleet Numerical Oceanography Center (FNOC), Monterey, and the
European Center for Medium Range Weather Forecasts (ECMRWF), Reading, U.K.