* 9208954
* Studies in Dynamic Economies with Boundedly Rational Agents
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* David Kreps, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1995
* USD 213,306.00

Four specific topics will be covered in this research. (1) Axiomatic models of
choice in the face of unforeseen contingencies will be developed, with emphasis
given to models of dynamic choice and choice in multiperson settings. The
objective would be to establish axioms that represent rational preferences when
the decisionmaker is unsure of what future contingencies are even possible, much
less which will occur. (2) Efficient contractual forms in the presence of
unforeseen contingencies will be analyzed, emphasizing how bilateral, relational
contracts will change with changes in the knowledge the parties have about each
other's preferences and future contingencies. (3) The impact of unforeseen
contingencies on liability insurance will be studied, emphasizing the second
best form of liability insurance in the face of limited liability laws. (4) The
creation of a notion of similarity between different situations through the use
of cheap talk will be investigated, where one party simply declares one
situation to be similar to others. The questions are when such declarations will
be credible and whether such a situation can arise naturally through a heuristic
learning process. An important general theme of this research, more apparent in
the first three topics than in the fourth, is how individuals adapt and
equilibria are constructed in contexts where the individuals are constantly
confronted with situations that their earlier plans did not anticipate. This is
a hallmark of global, as well as more local, change; how do individuals,
economies, and societies adapt to an environment in which the rules and
conditions are always changing? How, for example, should we proceed in the face
of the greenhouse effect, where there is honest controversy as to what the
eventual consequences of various actions (or inactions) will be? How should
national economies construct their trade relations, a context in which there are
clear choices to be made between bilateral and tri- or multi-lateral contracting
forms, and the different countries are constantly working out the nature of
their relationships in the face of changing conditions? Some of the tools
developed and the paradigmatic forms of research employed in this project will
be useful in providing answers to specific questions such as those posed above.