* 9208766
* Development of a High Resolution X-Ray Analysis Facility forAdvanced Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Mark Goorsky, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1994
* USD 98,800.00

X-ray measurements provide non-destructive structural information for many
materials systems. High resolution diffraction measurements determine sample
perfection, compositional and strain modulation, and interface abruptness over a
few atomic planes. X- ray reflectivity measurements address electron density
modulations and interface roughness in thin film systems. Such issues are highly
relevant to the growth and processing of semiconductor epitaxial
heterostructures, device structures, and bulk materials. Physical information,
including the effect of strain and materials perfection on optical and
electronic properties, are also quantitatively determined. In other fields,
these techniques enhance the study of coherency strains in superalloys and of
ceramic thin films deposited by sol-gel methods. In this project, we will
develop a high resolution x-ray diffraction/scattering characterization facility
with both high and low temperature stages. The facility shall include wafer
mapping capabilities and simulation software. Major research proposals involving
Si1icon- germanium multi-layers and device structures, the growth kinetics and
structural properties of HgCdTe, the relationship between strain and optical and
transport properties in III-V multi-layers, and misfit strain in precipitation
hardened superalloys are presented.