* 9208926
* Particulate Heterojunction Photocatalysts: Correlation of Charge Carrier Separation Distances and Dynamics with Catalytic Activity
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Boris Levy, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 02/29/1996
* USD 329,996.00

Particulate and quantum-size heterojunctions are used as a means of promoting
charge-carrier separation to specific spatially separated regions on a host
titania photoconductor. Quantum yields for the mineralization of a model
reactant mixture consisting of trichloroethylene, water, oxygen, and inert
carrier gas on titania heterojunction photocatalysts, with the reactants
delivered as vapors or gases, are correlated with the charge-carrier separation
distances; the charge-carrier separation distance, in turn is a function of the
composition and configuration of the heterojunction. Transport properties of
optically generated charge carriers in particulate or colloidal catalysts are
thought to be important in determining reaction pathways and kinetics.
Separation of photoelectrons from photoholes over distances exceeding simple
charge transfer to adjacent atoms is frequently suggested as a way to prevent
recombination and thusly increase quantum yields; this is the first direct test
of such a concept. Time-resolved photocharge (TRPC) measurements, time-resolved
microwave photoconductivity (TRMC) determinations, time- resolved absorption and
desorption, and diffuse reflectance spectroscopy are used. This work has
applications to heterogeneous photocatalysis, photographic imaging, photovoltaic
energy conversion, photoelectronic devices, environmental control, and water
purification, including the specific system being investigated, namely the
photocatalyzed oxidative degradation of organic pollutants on particulate or
colloidal semiconductors. //