* 9208271
* US-Poland Research on Elucidating Mechanisms of HeterogenousChemical Reactions of Environmental Importance
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* A. Castleman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 02/29/1996
* USD 34,490.00

The objective of this US-Poland research project between Dr. A. W. Castleman of
the Pennsylvania State University and Dr. H. Wincel of the Institute of Physical
Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw is to investigate mechanisms of
heterogenous chemical reactions of environmental importance and to underdtand
the coupling between cycles involving both natural atmospheric constituents and
pollutants introduced through various industrial processes. The researchers will
investigate: (1) cluster distributions, and studies to unravel the dynamics of
formation and the growth of clusters; (2) the stability and reaction energetics
of cluster ions through measurements of their thermochemical properties; (3) the
reactivity of clusters of varying size to elucidate the reaction mechanisms as
influenced by various chemical constituents and degrees of
aggregation/solvation; and (4) photostability and photodissociation, which
complement studies on the thermodynamic stability of ion clusters and elicit
some spectroscopic information as well as information on the influence of light
on pollutant conversion reactions. During the course of the work, the
researchers will intend to probe directly the spectroscopy of clusters via
multiphoton ionization, so that the effects of clustering on electronic states
can be determined. The results will provide further insight into the nature and
strength of cluster bonds, energy transfer following photoabsorption, and hence
reactivity. This project in atmospheric science fulfills the program obvjective
of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United
States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents andn pool resources
in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.