* 9208958
* Human Capital and Wage Inequality: Analysis of Recent       Changes
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Jacob Mincer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 127,464.00

In sharp contrast to the past, the American economy has experienced stagnation
in the growth of average, real wages over almost two decades now. This stagnant
growth covers an equally unprecedented divergence in the trend of real wages
between high and low wage earners, which became apparent in the 1980's. The more
skilled and educated workers continued to experience significant growth in real
wages, while wages of the less educated and skilled remained the same or even
declined. Consequently, as the average standard of living has barely increased
in almost two decades, wage and income inequality has risen. Looking at this
situation form the vantage point of the labor market, two basic hypotheses
emerge to explain this growing income inequality. One is that the growth of
information and new technologies and the globalization of economic activity has
led to increased demand for a well educated and flexible work force. The other
is that there is a growing gap between desired labor force quality and its
actual supply, and that the quality of worker performance may have actually
deteriorated. The purpose of this research is to analyze earnings inequality
from 1967 through 1990 using micro data from the Current Population Survey in
order to shed light on which hypotheses or combination explains the increase in
earnings inequality. Annual changes in wage inequality of men will be studied by
means of human capital analysis. The exhaustive and computable factors in this
analysis are: (1) changes in levels and dispersion of human capital across
workers; (2) changes in rates of returns on human capital investments; and (3)
changes in dispersion of rates of return. The analysis also distinguishes
between effects of schooling and of job market investments, as well as between
annual and life-time inequality. A more complete understanding of the
developments of and prospects for earnings inequality requires the analyses of
supply responses to changes in the wage structure and in job market investment
costs. An attempt will also be made to identify, directly or indirectly,
obstacles to supply adjustments which may affect the future course of earnings
inequality.