* 9208269
* Phylogeny and Revision of the Hawaiian Carabidae: Platynini Beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* James Liebherr, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 02/29/1996
* USD 162,481.00

Field work necessary for taxonomic revision of the Hawaiian carabid beetles
(Coleoptera: Carabidae) is underway, permitting accurate characterization of the
fauna and establishing baseline diversity data for use in monitoring the status
of endangered habitats. Hawaiian species of tribe Platynini will be revised,
with over 20 new species described among the over 135 species. Identification
keys and illustration permitting identification of all Hawaiian carabid genera
and Hawaiian species of Platynini will be developed. A cladistic hypothesis of
platynine species based on parsimony analysis of a comprehensive set of adult
morphological characters will be used to investigate speciation patterns in the
group. Outgroup analysis using Pacific and Asian outgroups allows identification
of the source of Hawaiian platynines. Characters are examined in the context of
the cladistic hypothesis, providing information on their underlying evolutionary
basis. A comprehensive survey of adult morphological characters will be
undertaken for Hawaiian species of tribe Psydrini, the second and other major
radiation of Carabidae on the islands. This survey forms the basis for a
cladistic hypothesis for the group, and permits parallel tests of evolutionary
process as accomplished for Platynini.