* 9208881
* Numerical Study of Stellar Collapse Neutron Star Collision, Heavy Ion Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* James Wilson, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 12/31/1995
* USD 13,500.00

Dr. Wilson's research objectives are divided into three major categories:
supernovae, heavy ion collisions and neutron star collisions. Research in
supernovae includes the clarification of the nature of the supernova explosion
mechanism utilizing a numerical computer model, surveying the implications to
particle physics of supernova events and providing theoretical and design
support for a prototype supernovae neutrino observatory now being constructed.
Interesting results are expected from all these projects, in particular,
restraints on massive neutrino models (with their associated oscillation
properties) and axion mass limits. The heavy ion collision project is based on
modeling the collision of heavy ions by a hydrodynamical approximation for the
baryons and a mean field model for the pions. From comparison of the model with
heavy ion collision experiments at low energies (about one GeV per nucleon)
important information for supernovae equations of state will be derived. At
higher collision energies, the issue of nuclear transparency will be addressed.
A numerical program to study the collisions of neutron stars has almost been
completed. The frequency and total energy emitted in gravitational radiation
will be computed as well as the neutrino signal expected during the final
spiraling inward and coalescence of a neutron star pair.