* 9208596
* Anomalous Electrodeposition of Alloys
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Jan Talbot, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 02/28/1995
* USD 124,761.00

Anomalous deposition of alloys is defined by the less noble metal depositing
preferentially to the more noble metal under certain conditions. This project
aims to understand the mechanism of anomalous codeposition in plating processes
using experiments and mathematical modelling. Previous work on the codeposition
of nickel-iron suggests that change transfer in the monohydroxide species causes
the anomaly; this work ascertains whether or not this mechanism can be extended
to explain anomalous codeposition of the mutual alloys of nickel iron, cobalt,
and zinc. The effect of buffering the pH of the plating bath is also
investigated. Mathematical modelling consists of two parts: equilibrium
calculations and one- dimensional diffusion modelling which includes the effects
of buffering and of hydrolysis reactions. This phenomenon is most commonly
encountered with the mutual alloys of iron, cobalt, nickel, and zinc. These
alloys are widely used in electroplated films because of their high strength,
hardness, and magnetic properties. Electrodeposited zinc-nickel provides
corrosion protection for steel; high-iron nickel-iron (such as Invar) is used
where low thermal expansion is required including microwave guides. optics.
laser housings, and printed circuit boards; ferromagnetic alloys such as cobalt-
nickel, iron-cobalt, and nickel-iron are widely used in electronic and magnetic
devices including computer memory, magnetic shielding, and magnetic recording
heads.