* 9208364
* Dissertation Research: The Hominid Temporal Bone: Ontogeny  and Phylogenetic Implications
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Steven Ward, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 12/31/1993
* USD 9,750.00

The primary objective of this project is to study the growth and development of
the temporal bone in humans and non-human primates. This will provide the
background for interpreting the data from the hominid fossil record thereby
allowing for further understanding of the evolutionary history of humans. The
temporal bone, the bone of the skull housing the ear, is important to
anthropologists for two reasons: 1) It is a highly complex structure and thus
has a high information density. Aside from containing the organs for hearing and
balance, the temporal bone serves as the portion of the skull that articulates
with the mandible and thus plays a major role in chewing and diet. This
complexity leads to a high degree of variability among species. Therefore the
temporal bone is crucial to our understanding of the relationships of fossil
specimens. 2) The petrous portion of the temporal bone is one of the densest
areas of the body. This part of the skeleton is thus one of the likliest to
fossilize and thereby be represented in the fossil record. The examination of
development of this bone and its concomitant structures will provide an
additional dimension of information to the hominid fossil record beyond that
provided by examination of the adult forms.