* 9208684
* Mathematical Sciences:  Adaptive Numerical Methods for      Singularly-Perturbed Reaction-Diffusion Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Donald Estep, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 11/30/1995
* USD 37,132.00

Estep proposes to analyze and implement adaptive finite element methods for
systems of singularly-perturbed reaction-diffusion equations and dissipative
ordinary differential equations. Solutions of such problems typically evolve on
multiple scales, and to be useful, numerical results need to be uniformly
accurate for the physically meaningful range of the parameters. He is attempting
to overcome these difficulties by constructing a theory of adaptive error
control based on a posteriori and a priori error analyses. A posteriori results
measure the error in terms of the regularity of the approximation and the
stability of the solution and provide a basis for adapting the discretization. A
priori results bound the error in terms of the regularity of the solution and
the stability of the scheme and guarantee convergence. Estep is also examining
the dynamical properties of numerical schemes in the context of producing
approximations with the correct dynamical behavior. Finally, he is studying the
implementation of adaptive error control in finite element codes for parallel
computers. The ultimate goal of this project is the public release of a parallel
code that can solve systems of reaction-diffusion equations in two and three
dimensions with minimal user interface. Many models in applied science result in
nonlinear reaction-diffusion differential equations that contain source terms
balanced against terms that diffuse energy. This balance is usually delicate and
difficult to handle mathematically, consequently numerical approximation is an
important tool. Yet, solutions of such problems typically evolve on several
scales, i.e. some interesting behavior occurs in very localized regions in
space-time while other behavior evolves over long times and over larger regions
in space. The use of a uniform numerical discretization for a real application
results in huge computations that tax even the largest computers. Estep's goal
is to produce numerical schemes that adapt themselves to the localized behavior
of the target solution so as to make the computations both as accurate as
desired and as efficient as possible. Mathematically, he is trying to understand
how to use the information provided by an approximation to adapt the
discretization, that is, make the computations self-governing. He is also
working on the implementation of this theory into a parallel code that solves
very general problems with minimum user input. Success of this project will lead
to the public release of the code, to the great benefit of the engineering and
scientific communities.