* 9208590
* Aqueous Two-Phase Extraction:  Theory and Experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* VIJAY T JOHN
* 02/28/1997
* USD 278,153.00

When two aqueous solutions of water soluble polymer such as PEG and dextran are
mixed together, above critical concentrations, a liquid-liquid phase separation
occurs. A similar situation occurs when PEG and salt are mixed together.
Proteins or enzymes added to either of the resulting two phase mixtures will
tend to partition unequally between the two phases, thus allowing for the
extraction of a particular protein. Over the past three years, in collaboration
with Professor Kula of the Institute for Enzymetechnology in Julich, West
Germany, and under the auspices of an NSF grant (CBT-872084), the PI has been
developing a statistical mechanical theory for aqueous two phase partitioning,
and has been undertaking complementary experiments on the phase behavior of the
PEG/Dx system. The experimentation involved the careful assemblage of phase
equilibria diagrams, and the identification of the interfacial tension between
the two phases as a sensitive indicator of composition. Theoretically, simple
models of polymer-polymer, polymer-protein, ion-ion, protein-protein, protein-
ion and polymer-ion interactions have been developed which can be used to
calculate potentials of mean force in water. The proposed research suggests
additional theoretical work along the same lines. The mean force potentials
which have been developed are to be used to obtain the radial distribution
function via the closure postulation of the integral equation technique. From
the radial distribution function, thermodynamic properties can be obtained, and
phase separations behavior identified. These calculations will be supplemented
by Gibbs Monte-Carlo computer simulations of the phase equilibria. These
simulations will allow verification of the equilibria obtained by the integral
equation route, and will provide a method for obtaining phase equilibria for
which the integral equation approach proves inadequate. Simulations and integral
phase equilibria calculations will be carried out to develop theories capable of
predicting phase equilibria in polymer/polymer and polymer/salt mixtures, and
the segregation g of proteins including multiple protein partitioning and
possibly the effect of affinity ligands attached to the polymer molecule..
Complementary experiments on protein partitioning will also be undertaken.