* 9208395
* Soil-stream Interfaces as Control-Points for Speciation and Transformations of Nitrogen in a Heterogeneous Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Nathaniel Ostrom, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1995
* USD 98,179.00

This project focuses on the role of soil-stream interfaces as control-points for
the speciation (NO3-vs. NO2-vs. NH4+vs. DON vs. N2O) and flux of N in a
heterogeneous landscape. Biogeochemical transformations of N at the soil-stream
interface may have important effects on both the quantity and quality
(speciation) of N lost to downstream ecosystems, and may modify the extent to
which h the chemistry of watershed streams are affected by watershed processes.
A mechanistic understanding of such N transformations along soil-stream
flowpaths may therefore be critical in order to predict how watershed
disturbances (both short-term and chronic) will affect surface-water chemistry.
Preliminary studies from the Augusta Creek Watershed have pointed to soil-stream
interfaces as potential control-points for downstream speciation and flux of N.
The work outlined in this project seeks to provide an understanding of rates and
mechanisms of N transformations along explicit soil-stream hydrologic flowpaths
in the watershed. The principal investigators will use both descriptive and
experimental approaches, including the use of tracers of hydrologic flowpaths
(LiBr) and tracers for specific biogeochemical reactions (stable N isotopes).
The main goal is to understand how patterns of N transformations at soil-stream
interfaces vary in space, time,and as a function of hydrology.