* 9208295
* Ecomorphology and the Evolution of Phenotypic Divergence in Sunfish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Timothy Ehlinger, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 08/31/1994
* USD 46,000.00

A successful individual must function trophically (i.e. to eat but not be
eaten) as well as reproductively (i.e. to mate and produce successful
offspring). These strong and sometimes divergent pressures can create trade-offs
between the optimal phenotypes for foraging versus reproduction. However, it is
seldom possible to study the concurrent effects of sexual and trophic selection
on the evolution of morphology. Recent laboratory and comparative studies show
that morphological variation in bluegill sunfish , Lepomis macrochirus, is
intimately related to both reproductive and foraging success. The data suggest
that females adapt morphologically to the demands of the foraging niches of
lakes whereas the morphology of nesting males responds to changes in the
intensity of intrasexual selection. The proposed research investigates the
interaction between selection on trophic morphology and sexual morphology in
bluegill. Morphological and behavioral comparisons among populations collected
from different lake types will correlate phenotypic variation in feeding and
reproductive abilities. Experimental crosses and common garden rearing of young
will attempt to identify a genetic basis for phenotypic variation. A
manipulation of nesting male density in a natural lake will assess the degree of
behavioral and morphological flexibility of individual males, and quantify the
relationship between phenotype and nesting success under different social
conditions. This research may eventually address critical questions about the
relative importance of sexual selection and trophic radiation in the evolution
of the genus lepomis.