* 9208709
* Discontinuous Synchrony in Visual Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Jonathan Copeland, Georgia Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1994
* USD 25,000.00

This field project will investigate an unusual type of synchronous flashing in
Southeast Asian fireflies. The Borneo "silent counter," a firefly that flashes
continuously, pauses, and then flashes continuously again, will be studied using
innovative modern technologies. Dr. Copeland and his colleagues will attempt to
demonstrate unequivocally that this firefly is a synchronizer and will focus on
the activity of the pacemaker oscillator during the dark ("silent") period. The
oscillator- like flash behavior of three other closely related species will also
be studied, including two continuously synchronic (no pause) fireflies and a
non-synchronic firefly. Since all four species look alike and have been
classified as Pteroptyx malaccae, some of the fireflies whose flashes have been
recorded will be preserved so that their DNA can later be subjected to
restriction-enzyme analysis, to provide a biochemical taxonomic identifier for
the behavioral and morphological key to this complex of fireflies. Synchronously
flashing fireflies live in the fragile tropical environment of Southeast Asia.
Logging and industrial development are rapidly destroying the habitat of this
unique type of animal. This research, then, will document an unusual variety of
synchronic behavior in fireflies before it becomes extinct. Further, it is
important to understand the mechanisms underlying synchrony because synchrony
occurs in so few organisms. Other than fireflies, synchronous behavior has been
demonstrated only in crickets and humans. Thus, this research could yield
insights into the human ability to perform in rhythmic unison. In addition, the
modern technologies used in this study will provide, for the first time,
quantitative data on synchronous flashing on the same time scale as
neurophysiological data that will be obtained in future studies. Thus, this
project is valuable as a guide for future neurophysiological studies with
implications for human biology. Finally, combining this behavioral study with
morphological and DNA studies will clarify the taxonomy of these organisms and,
thus, how to preserve them better as their natural habitat shrinks.