* 9208663
* Curation of Archaeological Collections from the Lower       Columbia River Region
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1994
* Julie Stein, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1994
* USD 85,217.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Stein and colleagues will curate
large archeological collections which derive from sites in the Lower Columbia
River area of Washington State. The region from which the controlled excavations
were conducted is now inundated as the result of dam construction and the
collections therefore constitute a unique resource. The materials include not
only lithic artifacts, but also faunal remains and soil samples which permit
environmental reconstruction. The material is presently stored in cardboard
trays and cardboard curation boxes. The trays are open and bending under the
weight of their own contents. Within trays artifacts are piled in open
containers with large numbers of lithics stored together. Materials, including
excavation notes are jumbled together. Dr. Stein and colleagues will take these
materials from their paper and cardboard containers, clean them, place them in
archival-quality plastic bags with labels, catalog them using a computer
cataloging program (ARGUS) and place them in enameled- metal specimen cabinets.
Federal funds will compliment those provided by the University of Washington.
This project is important for several reasons. Native American groups in the
Northwest region reached a level of cultural complexity unique among hunting and
gathering peoples and anthropologists wish to understand how societies could be
sustained on such a subsistence base. It is also clear that interaction occurred
between coastal and inland groups but the intensity and effect of these contacts
are not known. The Lower Columbia River sites provide crucial data to answer
this question. These collections constitute not only a part of America's
cultural heritage but also important scientific data which are virtually
unusable at the present time. This project will help to remedy this situation.