* 9208527
* Self-Organization in Tethered Polymer Layers
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Thomas Witten, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/1995
* USD 240,000.00

A new physical state of long-chain polymers is becoming increasingly important
in technology. In this state the ends of the polymer chains are forced to crowd
together at a surface, thus causing them to elongate one another. The resulting
stored elastic energy gives rise to striking spatial patterns and mechanical
responses which have not been explained. Recently we have developed a new
theoretical method for treating this mutually elongated state of 'end-confined"
or "tethered" polymers. We will apply the method to understand the layer of end-
grafted polymers often used to stabilize colloidal particles. We will calculate
the functional form of the osmotic-pressure corona around such particles
responsible for steric stabilization. End-confined polymers in, for instance, a
lamellar stack of copolymer layers flow in a distinctive way because their
entanglements are quite different from those in simple polymer liquids. We will
calculate the relaxation of stress with time in this state using recent theories
of entangled-polymer motion. We will explore the distinctive local elastic
properties of the layer by calculating the linear response of the pressure to a
nearby perturbation of the density. Finally, we will calculate the interaction
energy induced by bridging of surfaces, for instance by triblock polymers. %%%
Theoretical research will be undertaken on the properties of polymers which are
attached at one end to a surface. This attachment causes the polymers to
interact in a way which produces unusual properties which will be explored in
this research. The results of this work will produce a deeper understanding of
this class of polymers and provide a foundation for commercial application.