* 9208525
* Development of the Central-Union Theory in Cooperative      Sidepayment n-Person Games
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* H. Andrew Michener, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/1994
* USD 72,000.00

Systems of human social interaction can be studied from various perspectives,
one of which is rational action. Under this approach, individuals are viewed as
decision-makers who try to maximize their utility through choices among
behavioral options. These decisions are based on limited information about other
people and events in the environment. This project focuses on n-person games,
that is, on multi-person decisions where each of the participants (or players)
have interests that need not coincide with those of others. The primary goal of
the project is to expand a new theory, called the central union theory, that
predicts outcomes in a large class of n-person games with a high degree of
accuracy. An examples of an outcome predicted by the theory are the probability
that a certain coalition structure comes into place. The prediction of the
theory will be tested on a large amount of empirical data from laboratory
experimental studies of n-person games. This highly theoretical and mathematical
project will expand and test a promising new theory about n-person cooperative
games. A very valuable aspect of the project is its emphasis on the ability of
the theory to predict empirical outcomes, rather than examining them only at the
abstract level.