* 9208165
* RIA:  Clock Distribution Design and Register Allocation in  Pipelined Systems with Application to Behavioral Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Eby Friedman, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 01/31/1996
* USD 90,000.00

In this research effort, the effects of pipelining on the performance of a high
speed synchronous digital system are investigated. Pipelining, coupled with the
design of the clock distribution network synchronizing the signal flow between
each data path, can significantly effect system performance. Timing
characteristics of the clock distribution network are analyzed in terms of how
system performance can be either enhanced or degraded. A graphical design
paradigm relating latency and clock frequency as a function of the level of
pipelining are enhanced to further study the performance of a synchronous
system. Specifically, the following areas are investigated: 1) the application
of localized clock waveform lead/lag relationships to pipelined data paths so as
to demonstrate the utility of these relationships and to understand their
limitations for increasing clock frequency in deeply pipelined systems, 2) the
investigation of the effects of retiming and register allocation/scheduling on
pipelined systems for application to behavioral synthesis and analysis, 3) the
application of the aforementioned graphical approach to the analysis of clock
frequency/latency tradeoffs in structures containing feedback, thereby providing
a structured theoretical basis for designing and implementing recursive circuit
structures, and 4) the investigation of the effects of process parameter
variations on system level performance.