* 9208552
* US-Czechoslovakia Research: Identification and              Utilization of Critical Conditions for Polymer              Characterizations
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1996
* David Hunkeler, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 11/30/1996
* USD 32,250.00

This U.S.-Czechoslovakia research project in chemistry is between Dr. David
Hunkeler of Vanderbilt University and Dr. Dusan Berek of the Polymer Institute,
Slovak Academy of Science. The researchers will use the concept of
chromotographic invisibility to identify critical conditions where the retention
volume of a polymer in a mixed element is independent of molecular weight. They
will compare two approaches for generating critical conditions: (1) Belenki's
method where the elution strength of the binary mixture is varied to control the
adsorption and exclusion of the macromolecules and (2) the Hunkeler-Macko-Berek
technique where the thermodynamic quality of the mobile phase is varied to
balance the free energy of adsorption and precipitation with that of
redissolution and exclusion. The influence of temperature, pressure and sample
concentration on the behavior of selected polymers at their critical conditions
will also be evaluated. The critical conditions will be correlated with
properties which characterize the macromolecule in solution. The identified
critical conditions will then be applied to the separation and identification of
polymer blends and block and graft copolymers according to their molecular
weight and composition. This project in polymer research fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the
United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.