* 9208818
* Mathematical Sciences: Theory and Applications of Functionaland Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Kenneth Cooke, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 01/31/1995
* USD 50,767.00

This project continues research on theoretical and applied problems involving
functional and partial differential equations. Work will be done investigating
the stability and Hopf bifurcation problems for a general class of functional
differential equations with state-dependent bounded delay. Another line of study
concerns singularly perturbed nonlinear differential difference equations where
the goal is to show the existence of a pulse-like periodic solutions. Several
problems involving the existence of distributional solutions of classes of
partial differential equations. Closer to immediate applications, work will be
done on the dynamics of population models. It includes a generalization of
Volterra's population equation to include spatially distributed population and
delay in the birth process. Models for disease transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases will also be analyzed. Here the additional element in the
model incorporates risk-behavior change. Differential equations form the
backbone of mathematical modeling in the biological sciences. Phenomena which
involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials and energy are
known to obey certain general laws which are expressible in terms of the
interactions and relationships between partial derivatives. The key role of
mathematics is not only to state the relationships, but also to extract
qualitative and quantitative meaning from them.