* 9208743
* Interoperability in Heterogeneous Database System:  A       Workshop, Boulder, Colorado, February 10-12, 1992
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1993
* Marek Rusinkiewicz, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 01/31/1993
* USD 13,997.00

The workshop investigates application and research issues of interoperating data
and knowledge bases. Multidatabase interoperability and resolution of semantic
heterogeneity constitute enabling technologies for the development of complex
applications requiring access to multiple information resources. The main
objective is to bring together researchers from industry and academia to discuss
how the basic research addresses problems encountered by applications in the
heterogeneous database environment. Participants have an opportunity to study
real user problems identified by the industry representatives. The collaboration
between basic and application researchers can then be based on a solid
foundation created by basic research. The main topics to be discussed include:
semantic integration of information from diverse sources; methods to resolve
semantic incompatibilities; query optimization techniques and distributed
transaction processing in multidatabase environments; descriptive modeling of
asynchronous data processing; and incorporation of emerging technologies (such
as active and object-oriented databases) into multidatabase systems. It is
expected that the results of the workshop will be summarized in a final report
to be published later. The report will evaluate the progress made in
multidatabase interoperability and identify areas in need of further research.