* 9208001
* IUCRC "Self-Sufficient Partnership for Research" at the     Optical Circuitry Cooperative
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Nasser Peyghambarian, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Tapan K. Mukherjee
* 02/29/1996
* USD 275,000.00

This award is for a "Self-Sufficient Partnership for Research Program" to be
established at the University of Arizona's Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Optical Circuitry. Optical circuitry is an emerging
technology that has the potential for making major, if not revolutionary,
contributions to signal processing, communication and computing. The I/UCRC on
optical circuitry also called the optical circuitry cooperative was founded in
1984 and is presently engaged in the study of optical nonlinearities of
semiconductors and organic compound; fabrication and characterization of fast
optical switching elements; growth of novel MBE structures; theoretical and
experimental studies of semiconductor lasers; investigation of optical
interconnect systems with free space diffractive elements and optical neural
networks. At the present time 7 professors, 4 post doctoral fellows and
approximately 10 graduate students are involved in this research. The Center has
presently five members and will add a new DoD member this year. The Center also
plans to support a woman undergraduate student who will be working on the
measurement of optical nonlinearities of fullerene materials. Additonal funding
is provided by the U.S. Department of Airforce to obtain a membership in the
Center. The Program Manager recommends the University of Arizona be awarded
$50,000 for the first year of a three-year continuing award and $5,000 for one
year with funds provided by the Women, Minorities, and Disabled Engineering
Research Assistants Program, and $50,000 for one year with funds provided by
U.S. Department of Airforce. Near the end of each 12-month period, the Program
Manager and/or the Division of Director of the Engineering Education Centers
Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of renewal criteria,
including the following: 1) the extent to which the university-industry
interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the support base is
developing; 3) the extent to which a robust research program is developing. If
the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend support for the
next period of this continuing award.