* 9208031
* Environmental Heterogeneity and Woody Species Diversity in  Low-elevation Tropical Secondary Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1997
* Donald Stone, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez
* 06/30/1997
* USD 812,401.00

This study addresses basic ecological processes that influence the nature and
diversity of tree regeneration during secondary forest succession in low-
elevation tropical forest. It is hypothesized that seedling recruitment during
succession is strongly dependent on both resource availability and
heterogeneity. Specifically, it is suggested that changes in canopy and gap
structure, as successional forests age, increase both light availability and
light heterogeneity at ground level. It is expected that species richness of the
regeneration pool is enhanced by both overall light availability and the
diversity of light environments represented in older, structurally heterogeneous
stands. Seedling recruitment is further enhanced by availability of patches of
disturbed soil associated with gaps or animal activity. This interdisciplinary
approach integrates ecosystem-level studies of the patterns of tropical forest
succession with detailed analyses of within-stand processes producing those
patterns and studies of physiological and growth responses of representative
species. Changes in forest composition and structure with be documented in the
species richness of seedlings, and in within-stand environmental heterogeneity
in a chronosequence of secondary and old-growth premontane rain forests of
northeastern Costa Rica. Detailed measurements of the spatial variation of light
availability, soil disturbance, and litter cover in selected forests will be
performed along this chronosequence. The influence of distance to seed sources
on propagule diversity will be assessed in these stands by sampling soil seed
stocks in the study sites and by comparing the diversity of seedlings and
saplings as a function of distance from seed sources. Investigators will
experimentally examine the effects of resource availability and heterogeneity on
seedling establishment and growth by manipulating light availability and soil
disturbance in a series of 15-25 year old stands. Light will be manipulated by
creating large and small canopy gaps and removing understory shrubs in a
replicated single-factor (4 treatments) design in which we will assess the
effects on natural seedling recruitment and species richness. Additional
manipulative studies in gaps and closed-canopy sites will examine the
interactive effects of light and soil disturbance on natural seedling
recruitment and the germination and survival of seeds of selected species.
Experimental and observational field data will be used to model the effects of
stand structure and light availability of seedling abundance and diversity using
a spatial, mechanistic, simulation model of forest dynamics. To evaluate the
role of species-specific differences in canopy light transmission within
secondary forest, a comparative study of canopy structure and light transmission
will be conducted for five abundant canopy tree species in the stands. The model
will also simulate the effect of spatial heterogeneity on the diversity of
seedling regeneration, based on measured ecophysiological and growth responses
of selected species. Model inputs will be based on field data from
representative stands within the chronosequence. This modelling effort will
integrate measured organismal responses in the context of stand-level changes in
resource availability in tropical forests. Project results will contribute to
basic ecological research on the maintenance of biological diversity in moist
tropical forests, with direct applicability to studies of tropical forest
restoration, secondary forest management, and sustainable tropical forestry.