* 9208433
* Systematics and Phylogeny of Arabidopsis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Ihsan Al-Shehbaz, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1995
* USD 223,130.00

Arabidopsis thaliana, or commonly known as mouse-ear cress, a small European
weed of the mustard family, to which the cabbages, Brussel sprouts, broccoli,
cauliflower, and radishes belong, has become the model flowering plant in basic
studies of classical and molecular biology. Thousands of biologists are working
on this organism to understand many fundamental biological processes. Worldwide
interest in mouse-ear cress stems from the fact that this organism has the
smallest and simplest genome among flowering plants, has a generation time of
four to six weeks, and has a small size to 30 cm high (because of its small
size, dozens can be grown in a small pot and several hundred thousands in a
small room). These and several other attributes make the plant ideal for basic
studies in biology. Yet the very basic information on Arabidopsis, especially on
its nearest relatives, limits, number of species, and various aspects of its
individual species is almost non-existent. To understand the origin of this
organism, basic systematic studies on the genus are urgently needed, and living
material of all taxa should be made available. The proposed research is designed
to address these very problems. Intensive field work will be done in central
Asia, especially the adjacent portions of China, Pakistan, India, Afghanistan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan, which represent the center of greatest
diversity of the genus. Seed collections will be deposited at the Arabidopsis
Biological Resource Center at Ohio State, where they will be made available to
botanists worldwide. Extensive systematic studies based on herbarium material
from more than 80 herbaria will be conducted, and detailed studies on the
morphology, reproductive biology, cytology, seed anatomy, and chemistry of
Arabidopsis and its relatives will be done. The proposed two-year grant will
result in a systematic study of Arabidopsis and will provide the scientific
community with much needed living material of the various species including
mouse-ear cress.