* 9208182
* Mathematical Sciences:  Spectral Geometry and Index Theory  on Foliated Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/1992,04/30/1997
* Franz Kamber, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James Glazebrook
* 04/30/1997
* USD 65,000.00

This project continues mathematical research on foliation theory. The main
emphasis will be the application of the methods of algebraic topology (secondary
characteristic classes) and spectral geometry. Work will be done investigating
the index and spectrum of transversal Dirac operators on a foliated space,
associated Cheeger-Chern-Simons classes, eta invariant and families of
transversal Dirac operators parametrized by suitable moduli spaces. Applications
to mathematical physics, in particular to gauge theory on foliated spaces, and
global chiral anomalies will be further pursued. The overall objective of the
project is to establish via heat equation methods and the theory of spectral
asymptotics on singular spaces, an index theorem for transversally elliptic
operators on the basic section of a Riemannian Foliation. The main requirement
is that the theorem and its extensions would be explicitly given in terms of
data relative to the transversal geometry of the foliation and of the spectral
properties of the associated zeta-function. The study of foliations in geometric
analysis is a natural generalization of domains for differential operators.
These operators can be shown to act in particularly simple ways on sets which
decompose domains in a layer fashion. On the layers it is possible to analyze
many operators using analogues of some of the fundamental tools applied to the
study of differential equations.