* 9208024
* Molecular Systematics of Ascaridoid Nematodes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Steven Nadler, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 185,000.00

Nucleotide sequence data will be used to estimate phylogenetic relationships
among ascaridoid nematodes. This parasite phylogeny then will serve as a
framework for testing hypotheses concerning the evolution of morphological
characters and life history attributes. Initial research involving direct
sequencing of ribosomal-RNA and maximum parsimony analysis of these data
indicates that ribosomal-RNA sequences provide a large number of informative
characters and a robust phylogenetic hypothesis for ascaridoid nematodes. A more
inclusive phylogeny of ascaridoids will be useful for testing competing
hypotheses for the evolution of morphological characters and life cycle
attributes. Analysis of evolutionary patterns for characters and attributes will
be performed by applying Farris optimization to map these characters on the
species cladogram inferred from the sequence data. An independent phylogenetic
hypothesis based on cladistic analysis of documented morphological characters
will also be developed. In addition, the molecular and morphological data sets
will be used for a combined (and unweighted) phylogenetic analysis. The
implications of the morphologically based and "combined" phylogenetic hypotheses
for the evolution of life history attributes will also be explored by mapping.
Finally, specific area of congruence and dissimilarity between the molecular and
morphological data sets will be identified and examined, and the relative
efficiency of phylogenetic hypotheses proposed by other researchers will be
assessed independently for each data base (morphological, molecular, and
combined).