* 9208296
* Mathematical Sciences: Regularity Problems in Nonlinear     Potential Theory and Quasiregular Mappings
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Tadeusz Iwaniec, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 02/28/1995
* USD 40,000.00

This project continues mathematical research aimed at exploiting newly
discovered relationships between the classical theory of quasiregular mappings
and nonlinear elliptic systems of variational equations. Quasiregular mappings
first appeared as a modest branch of complex function theory (quasiconformal
mapping). The mappings are characterized geometrically by the property that they
carry infinitesimal spheres into infinitesimal ellipsoids. In the second half of
this century it was discovered that these mappings proved to be fundamental
objects in geometry, such a Teichmuller theory, as well as to other areas of
analysis. The present work focuses on how the Donaldson - Sullivan work on
quasiconformal four-manifolds has led to new techniques applicable to questions
in nonlinear partial differential equations. One of the first objectives of this
work is to understand what, if any, distinctions arise in the study of
quasiregular mappings defined on even and odd dimensional spaces. Some of the
deeper new discoveries are only known in the even dimensional case. Arguments
based on Hodge decompositions and Cacciappoli type inequalities may yield
additional information about odd dimensions. A second application of
quasiregular mappings relates to vector-valued analogues of singular integral
transformations consisting of matrices whose elements are Riesz transforms. It
is believed that the p-norms of these operators do not depend on the dimension
of the underlying space. Although it may be impossible to achieve exact values
for the norms, work will be done in showing that the bounds are dimension-free.
To achieve this, a new technique called the complex method of rotation has been
introduced which applies to a broad class of integral operators in estimating
their mapping norms. Finally work of a more geometric nature will continue on
the questions of the maximum dimension of removable sets for quasiregular
mapping and how Hausdorff dimension is distorted under such maps.