* 9208169
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Stanley Herwitz, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 12/31/1993
* USD 5,261.00

Open-canopied jack pine and jack spruce stands, in which reindeer lichens
comprise a significant component of the ground cover, occur on dry, nutrient-
poor sites throughout northwestern Ontario. These lichen woodlands are
predominantly fire produced. With the suppression of forest fire and the
continued northward movement of logging activity in northwestern Ontario, timber
harvest is replacing fire as the most prevalent cause of large- scale
disturbance in the lichen rich forests of the region. Although the effects of
forest fire on reindeer lichens and patterns of terrestrial lichen succession
are well-documented, little is known about how timber harvest affects reindeer
lichens or about post-harvest reindeer lichen regeneration. This study will
examine changes in biomass, percent cover, species composition, and growth rates
of reindeer lichens that survive timber harvest in lichen woodlands and those
that colonize harvested sites on two soil types in several regions of
northwestern Ontario. Sampling will cover five time-since- disturbance classes
for different sites. Data will be statistically analyzed for differences in
biomass, percent cover, growth rates and species compositions of reindeer
lichens on sites of various age classes, disturbance types, and soil types.
Results of this research will provide an increased understanding of the rate at
which reindeer lichens survive timber harvest, the rate of recovery of lichen
biomass on harvested sites, and the roles of lichens that survive and colonize
harvested sites in post-harvest recovery. The effect of timber harvest on lichen
abundance is significant because of the importance of reindeer lichens to
woodland caribou. Woodland caribou winter in lichen woodlands and feed on the
reindeer lichens. Destruction of habitat and the associated decrease in reindeer
lichen availability has been proposed as a cause of the decline in caribou
numbers. The findings from this study will elucidate some of the processes in
reindeer lichen recovery following fire and harvest, and they will inform
management policy of woodland caribou for whom reindeer lichen are the primary
winter fodder.