* 9209693
* Understanding Dispersal Polymorphisms in Insects
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* James Ott, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/29/1996
* USD 95,000.00

Dispersal polymorphism (the occurrence of migratory and flightless forms in the
same population) is a widespread phenomenon among insects. For most insects
including planthoppers (Homoptera: Delphacidae), there is a reproductive cost
associated with dispersal ability as evidenced by the reduced fecundity and
delayed oviposition of migratory compared to flightless females. Corresponding
information for males on the relationship between dispersal ability and
reproductive success is virtually absent. As a result, our understanding of the
evolution, maintenance, and population consequences of variation in dispersal
capability is based almost exclusively on females. Failure to establish fitness
differences between male wing forms challenges our current knowledge of the
ecological and evolutionary basis for the existence of dispersal polymorphisms.
Several characteristics of planthopper mating systems suggest the presence of
costs associated with migratory ability in males and that migratory and
flightless males contribute differentially to population dynamics at different
densities. The research outlined herein seeks to elucidate intrinsic differences
between migratory and flightless males of the planthopper Prokelisia dolus in
their 1) competitive ability (male / male interactions, ability to locate mates,
attractiveness to females, 2) survivorship, propensity to disperse, ability to
inseminate mates, and 3) mating success and contribution to population growth
across a range of density conditions. This research will supply the empirical
basis for the development of more general hypotheses (which include both male
and females) to examine the widespread phenomenon of dispersal polymorphism in
insects.