* 9209783
* Improving Expert Elicitation Through Studies of Climate     Change and Its Possible Impacts
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1997
* M. Granger Morgan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 03/31/1997
* USD 105,002.00

The science of global climate change and its impacts is dominated by
uncertainty. Public policy decisions require near term scientific judgments,
since the scientific facts will not be known for years. This study conducts
research on the elicitation of expert judgment in the context of the global
ecological impacts of climate change. The study generalizes elicitation methods
by asking experts to structure the issues, propose a model, and the give
judgments about the important parameters of their model. This approach gives the
experts more latitude to express their views compared to prior work in expert
judgment. A two-stage elicitation process is used to elicit the expert's views
about: (1) the structure, the metric(s), and the value of key uncertain
coefficients that should be used in framing the problem; (2) the reliability of
key findings in their field of expertise and in other fields upon which their
work depends (including the reliability of consensus reports); (3) their
sensitivity to and ability to identify the potential sources of surprise; and
(4) the amount of reduction in uncertainty (in their field of expertise and in
other climate change related issues) that could be achieved with various amounts
of research investment. These elicitations will help us to define the character
of uncertainties dominating climate change issues better, shed light on how the
reliability of knowledge and research is gauged within the scientific community,
and provide guidance on research allocations.