* 9209345
* Processor Allocation in Partitionable Parallel Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Bhagirath Narahari, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 11/30/1995
* USD 90,000.00

A partitionable parallel architecture allows the simultaneous execution of a
number of tasks, where each task can be executed on a number of processors. This
model introduces the problem of how many processors to allocate to each task.
The processor allocation process must (1) determine the number of processors
required to process each task and (2) allocate and schedule these tasks on the
processors in the system. The objective is to minimize the time to complete all
the tasks. In most cases at the current time, the number of processors assigned
to each task is determined manually thereby leading to under-utilization of the
processors. This project considers the design of efficient processor allocation
algorithms for a large class of partitionable parallel architectures. The
conventional scheduling problems, where each job runs on one processor, differ
significantly from the processor allocation problem and thus their solutions
cannot be expected to perform adequately for this processor allocation problem.
The objectives of this project are to study the processor allocation problem,
under different computation and architecture models, and design and evaluate
algorithms for processor assignment and processor scheduling. These algorithms
are tested, through both a simulation and their application to real problems.
The performance gains made by the algorithms, and the overheads incurred by the
operating system, are measured through experiments performed on different
parallel architectures. The results from this research are expected to provide a
definite step forward in understanding resource allocation and scheduling
problems in partitionable architectures, and consequently lead to a better
utilization of parallel architectures.