* 9209394
* Rational Machine Learning for AI Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/1993,10/31/1997
* Gerald DeJong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 10/31/1997
* USD 216,168.00

This research seeks to build a theoretical framework for when to learn. Machine
learning, which studies the automatic acquisition of new concepts, has largely
focussed on developing mechanisms for learning. Questions such as "How can an AI
computer system come to form a general concept in response to a relatively few
observed training examples?" and "What prior knowledge is required to support
such concept acquisition?" have dominated the field. However, it has become
clear that the unbridled acquisition of concepts (even correct concepts) can
degrade the performance of the AI system that they are intended to help. In
sophisticated applications, such as arise in AI planning, a performance penalty
for learning can be the rule rather than the exception. Thus, machine learning
mechanisms cannot be successful unless suitably restrained. Unfortunately, the
judgement of when to learn is itself complex. The benefit of a new concept
depends on features of the performance system as well as the machine learning
mechanism. It can also be strongly influenced by the expected profile of tasks
to be given to the performance system and by the concepts that have previously
been acquired. The proposed research is intended to produce a fist theory of
rational learning. The learning component of an AI system is a rational learner
if the AI system's behavior is guaranteed, on average, to be improved by the
acquisition of any new concepts. Such a theory must provide a general framework
for the interactions between a machine learning system, the performance system
that employs the acquired concepts, and characteristics of the estimated
distribution of tasks. The research will explore both empirical and analytic
approaches to estimating expected concept utility. The area of planning will
serve as a vehicle for the work, but the results will likely be applicable to
other performance systems. Explanation-based methods form the nucleus of
learning methods since it, more than the inductive approach, seems liable to the
phenomenon of detrimental learning. The benefits of the research will include an
enumeration and taxonomy of the types of rational learning. It will shed light
on which machine learning mechanisms may be most useful to which type of AI
systems, and represents some first steps towards making machine learning a
service area for the rest of AI.