* 9209444
* A Study of Sequential &amp; Parallel Approaches to the Solution of Nonlinear Equations Arising in Circuit and Device        Simulation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Paul Lanzkron, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 12/31/1995
* USD 74,244.00

This project focuses on the general problem of solving the non-linear equations
arising from semiconductor device simulation and circuit simulation. Both
sequential and parallel issues arising in the solution of these equations will
be examined. Work has already been done on the solution of the linear equation
arising from the Newton iteration in a one- dimensional device simulation. Work
will continue for a two-dimensional code. The main ideas are (1) replacing the
continuation methods currently in use with a multilevel method; and (2)
developing a parallel solver for the 2D code. This entails either showing that
the classical iterative method has speed-up large enough to overcome the
sequential slowness of the algorithm, or generating a good MIMD preconditioner
for a Krylov subspace method. With respect to circuit simulation, the
investigation will be done in four areas. (1) Continue the work on a taxonomy of
circuits for which simulation cannot fail. (2) Improve the non-linear solver in
the circuit simulator CAzM. (3) Generate a parallel solver for large circuits.
(4) Work on blocking methods for sparsely connected circuits. The project seeks
to make a significant contribution to both the speed and the theory behind the
solution of non- linear equations arising from circuit and device simulation.