* 9209877
* Use of Direct Numerical Simulation and Lagrangian Methods inTurbulent Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Thomas Hanratty, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/29/1996
* USD 289,196.00

The proposal is aimed at obtaining a unified treatment of turbulent mixing and
of turbulent transfer to a wall of molecular species, and of spherical
particles. Theory in this area has not advanced significantly over the past
forty years. However, the recent availability of direct numerical simulations
opens the possibility of making considerable progress. A main objective of this
proposal is to exploit this opportunity. Results on the simultaneous three-
dimensional time-dependent velocity and temperature fields will be obtained for
a wide range of Prandtl numbers for turbulent flow in a channel and for
turbulent Couette flow. Present theories will be evaluated. However, special
emphasis will be placed on the relation of the structure of the temperature
field to the structure of the velocity field and on how turbulent transport is
modified by molecular transport. Lagrangian methods will be explored as a means
to obtained better physical understanding. The temperature field is viewed as
resulting from a distribution of wall sources. The exploitation of this approach
has been opened up because of the possibility of studying, on the computer, the
behavior of wall sources. The transport of spherical particles differs from
transport of molecular species because of extraneous contributions to transport
by gravity, turbophoresis and lift. These effects will be studied both in
computer and in laboratory experiments. Particular attention will be given to
obtaining much needed information about inertial free flight to the wall. We
will also continue recent work in which we exploit Lagrangian methods to analyze
sediment transport.