* 9209475
* Molecular Genetic Techniques: Testing Reproductive  Success (Career Advancement Award)
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1992,09/30/1994
* Naida Zucker, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 09/30/1994
* USD 49,477.00

One of the most exciting recent advances in the field of behavioral ecology is
the application of molecular genetic techniques to answer critical questions
concerning relative reproductive success of various classes of individuals in
populations. Evolutionary interpretations of results of early studies have had
to rely on various assumptions about mating patterns, some of which have
subsequently been shown to be erroneous using these new techniques. I propose to
learn to use these techniques (especially DNA fingerprinting) so that I may
answer questions of paternity for studies on the behavioral ecology of lizards,
a group of organisms currently under-represented in the behavioral ecology
literature yet well-suited to such studies. Reptiles are an important group to
include in comparative studies of the evolution of mating systems and social
behavior since they represent a bridge between the ectothermic vertebrates and
the reproductively terrestrial vertebrates. After learning these techniques at
the Genetics Laboratory of the National Zoo, I plan to undertake a behavioral
study on alternative mating tactics, followed by paternity analysis. The
paternity analysis would take place in the common-use Laboratory of Evolutionary
and Ecological Genetics, currently under development in Biology at NMSU, and
would test my ability.