* 9209873
* Software Development Environment Supporting Formal Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Betty Cheng, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 12/31/1996
* USD 89,789.00

Research into the development of software tools that support formal methods is
aimed at simplifying and providing assistance during the development of correct
software. Using a formal specification language to describe a problem
facilitates the verification of software correctness through automated reasoning
techniques. In earlier work, the principal investigator developed the SEED
system that used formal methods to synthesize a correct program from a formal
specification. The objective is to develop tools to support the use of formal
methods in all phases of software engineering including design, specification,
implementation, and maintenance. In order to address the correct development of
complex and large systems, the project focuses on the development of object-
oriented software using formal methods. The project comprises three parts.
First, developing a tool that decomposes an informal problem description into
formal specifications with user assistance. Next, investigating the development
of a graphical browser that applies algorithms to formal specifications to
determine reuse. Finally, addressing the issues of incorporating the benefits of
formal methods to existing code through the development of a tool that abstracts
formal specifications from program code. The tools will be integrated into a
software development environment that supports formal methods, thus,
facilitating the construction of large, correct software systems.