* 9209646
* Neural Basis of Contextual Fear Conditioning
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Joseph LeDoux, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymon Glantz
* 02/29/1996
* USD 219,207.00

When exposed to a painful or threatening stimulus, our brains form neural
associations that link the painful or threatening stimulus to other innocuous
environmental cues that are present and that might later serve as warning
signals. The process of forming such associations is referred to as fear
conditioning. Some of the innocuous cues that get conditioned are in the
foreground and are closely associated with the pain or threat, whereas others
are in the background. The neural system underlying the conditioning of fear
responses to specific foreground cues, such as a tone paired with footshock, is
well understood and involve the amygdala. However, until recently, little was
known about how fear reactions come to be coupled to background or contextual
stimuli. In recent studies Dr. LeDoux found that lesions of hippocampus or
amygdala interfered with contextual conditioning. The purpose of the proposed
studies is to use state-of-the-art anatomical, physiological, and behavioral
methods to understand how neural interactions between amygdala and hippocampus
might contribute to contextual fear conditioning. Specifically, Dr. LeDoux will
explore the anatomical connections (afferents and efferents) underlying the
contribution of the hippocampal formation to contextual fear conditioning. These
studies are likely to be important in understanding a host of complex emotional
learning phenomena.*** //