* 9209441
* A Laboratory Experimental Investigation of Institutional    Influences on Political Economic Processes
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Charles Plott, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1996
* USD 329,700.00

This project continues the development and application of laboratory
experimental methods in the broad field of political economy and on the
principles that govern the behavior of interdependent and changing systems begun
under earlier NSF grants. There will be an intensified focus on the
interdependence and dynamic behavior of complicated systems, and on new
institutional arrangements that facilitate the efficient use of information and
the reduction of uncertainty. This project will play a leadership role in using
experimental methods as testbeds for the types of institutional changes
currently under consideration as a response to the challenges posed by global
environmental change. This project will also contribute to our understanding of
the way decisions are made under uncertainty with irreversibilities and
potentially catastrophic consequences for future generations. Research projects
can be grouped into five categories: 1) those that focus primarily on the
interdependence of activities of economic processes; 2) those in which
information plays a central role; 3) those that focus more narrowly on the
properties of equilibria that occur in markets; 4) those that involve the
"testbedding" of new institutions; and 5) experimental technology development.
The research on experimental technology development is especially exciting
because it will make a sophisticated experimental system capable of supporting a
very wide range of experiments freely available for a broad audience of
researchers. Under the previous grant a manual and diskette were produced and
disseminated for a computerized laboratory market system. The package included
programs for creating and executing experiments, programs for viewing and
processing data, and programs for training subjects. The technology development
effort will now turn to processes with political elements. Since politics is
frequently about the choices of institutions and processes, any new software
should be capable of facilitating experiments in which institutional evolution
can take place.