* 9209929
* Neural Plasticity Induced by Early Olfactory Learning
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Donald Wilson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karen Sigvardt
* 08/31/1994
* USD 71,375.00

The goal of Dr. Wilson's research is to understand neural mechanisms of
associative learning. Specifically, the proposed research will investigate the
neural substrates of postnatal olfactory learning in newborn vertebrates. This
early learning is associated with specific changes in neural structure and
function in the olfactory bulb, the first central relay for olfactory
information processing. Dr. Wilson's previous work has demonstrated the output
neurons in the olfactory bulb, mitral/tufted cells, modify their response
patterns to odors learned during the early postnatal period. Furthermore, Dr.
Wilson has found that mitral/tufted cells receive convergent information about
both odor stimuli and reward stimuli. Importantly, both the behavioral and
neural consequences of early learning are morepinephrine dependent, as is at
least one component of mitral/tufted cell response to reward. The proposed
experiments will examine how mitral/tufted cells are modified during olfactory
associative learning and uses a combination of neurophysiological and
neuropharmacological techniques to further explore the neural substrates of the
descending reward input to the olfactory bulb. Based on his preliminary data, a
specific circuit is proposed for convergence of odor and reward information in
the bulb involving the primary olfactory nerve and norepinephrine centrifugal
inputs to the bulb. Norepinephrine agonists and antagonists will be infused into
the olfactory bulb during odor-reward associative conditioning. Response
patterns of mitral/tufted cells to the conditioned odor will be examined over
the course of the training. The results will provide important information
regarding the neural pathways and pharmacology involved in a critical form of
learning expressed soon after birth in many animals including humans.***//