* 9209940
* Collaborative Research in Decision, Risk, and Management    Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Cynthia Atman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/1995
* USD 63,162.00

Effective risk management often requires effective risk communication. Risk
communicators cannot afford to assume that those who receive their communication
do so with a tabula rasa. Readers use their prior knowledge to organize and
understand new information. Both the contents and organization of readers' prior
knowledge affect how they interpret new information. Therefore risk
communication should be more effective if it (1) addresses prior misconceptions,
and (2) takes into account the readers' goals, prior knowledge, and cognitive
limitations in processing new information. In the context of risk communication,
these propositions have not been adequately evaluated. This project attempts to
fill this gap. The first study examines several designs for dispelling
misconceptions about global climate change and 60 Hertz electric and magnetic
fields. The second study examines the influence of text structure and text
comprehension aids on risk communication effectiveness. The third study
integrates the results of the first two into two complete risk communications
that differ structurally. Multiple measures are proposed to evaluate risk
communication effectiveness in all studies, including performance on recall,
recognition, and problem-solving tasks. The project will produce empirically
tested documents and evaluation instruments as well as practical guidelines for
risk communicators. Contributions to risk perception, risk communication and
risk communication evaluation research are anticipated.