* 9209267
* Human Capital, Social Partitions, Cities and Growth
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Roland Benabou, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 67,849.00

This project will study how human capital externalities lead individuals to
coalesce into groups and will show that this self- partitioning sheds light on a
number of important issues: economic segregation, the effectiveness and costs of
education, the organization of cities, ghettos, labor productivity and long term
growth. The project consists of three parts. The first one will develop a model
of a city composed of several communities, formalizing the links between
residential choice, skills acquisition, and overall productivity. It will show
how local externalities in human capital investment induce self- segregation by
occupation, and how this affects the composition of the labor force. In
particular it can lead other areas to drop out of the labor force and become
unproductive "ghettos." The analysis will show that underemployment is more
extensive, the easier it is for high-skilled workers to isolate themselves from
others, but that at the same time their attempts to do so may be self-
defeating. The second part will extend the analysis to two other issues
concerning the structure and productivity of cities. The first is the value of
local diversity in land uses and its tendency to self- destruct under market
pressures. The second is the recent exodus of firms, hence jobs and taxes, out
of central cities into suburbs, and its implications for employment and income
distribution. The third part will study the implications of group formation for
long term macroeconomic growth. It will add to recent models of endogenous
growth by recognizing that individuals can choose the group from which they
receive human capital spillovers (school, neighborhood, city, state), although
at a price: land and other rents on non-reproducible factors reflect the quality
of the externality which group membership confers.