* 9209364
* Conductance of Poly-3-hydroxybutyrate/calcium Polyphosphate Complexes in Planar Bilayers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Rosetta Reusch, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal is to study the properties of complexed poly-
hydroxybutyrate/calcium polyphosphate and non-covalently associated proteins in
planar lipid bilayers. There is preliminary evidence that this membrane domain
may be involved in calcium regulation, based on spectrofluorometric studies in
cell cultures and single cells. The complex is widespread in prokaryotes and may
be present in mitochondria of eukaryotes. It is hypothesized to act by solvating
polyanionic salts and forming ion-conducting complexes which could result in the
removal of calcium from the cell, with simultaneous removal of phosphate. The
voltage-dependent calcium conductance of the complex from E. coli will be
studied in planar lipid bilayers. The cation selectivity and the action of
channel blocking agents will also be determined. %%% Bacteria contain large
amounts of a complex of polyhydroxybutyrate and calcium polyphosphate. The
composition of this complex suggests that the polyhydroxybutyrate could solvate
polyanionic (negatively charged) complexes and allow them to move through the
helical channel which is thought to be formed, thus removing calcium and
polyphosphate from the interior to the exterior. This possibility can be
examined by putting the complex into a planar lipid bilayer, which can be used
as a model of the plasma membrane of cells, and changing the conditions in the
environment. The ionic composition and the electrical charge applied will both
be varied, and the effects of these variations will be assessed. It seems likely
that this complex is also present in higher organisms, and may function in
regulation of calcium. Since calcium concentration is very important in cellular
function, these studies should be useful in understanding a new mechanism for
varying intracellular calcium.