* 9209414
* U.S.- U.K. Joint Workshop:  Environmental Regulation of     Biological Production in the Irish Sea, Dublin, Ireland,    November 1992
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Gary Kleppel, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1994
* USD 8,250.00

This award supports a U.S.-U.K. project development workshop in biological
oceanography. The organizers are Gary Kleppel of the Nova University
Oceanographic Center, Dania, Florida and Keith Brander of the Fisheries
Laboratory, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food of the United Kingdom.
Scientists from other parts of the United Kingdom (Wales and Scotland) and
Ireland will also participate. The purpose of the workshop is to synthesize the
current state of knowledge on environmental regulation of productivity in the
Irish Sea, and to identify data gaps and research objectives for a future
regional cooperative research effort. The Irish Sea is a shallow body of water
bordered by Scotland, England, Wales, the Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland,
and the Island of Man. Although it has been the site of many traditional
biological investigations, questions involving the links between natural
environmental variability and productivity (including fish production) in the
Irish Sea remain unanswered. The workshop will focus on problems concerning the
relationships between organisms and their physical environments, pelagic food
webs, and the factors limiting larval fish survival. While work on the Irish Sea
benefits local regional and scientific interests in the British Isles, it also
augments current research on these same questions in the U.S. and in other
countries. The workshop provides an opportunity for participants to plan a
regional study on the issues of immediate interest to the region and on the
broader issue of global climate change and its impact on marine food webs and
production.