* 9209071
* Regional Influences on Local Stream Fish Diversity in the   Southeastern U.S.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 02/28/1997
* USD 152,285.00

Studies of stream fish ecology emphasize the long-standing view that local
factors determine local diversity. However, a growing body of evidence form
studies of other groups of organisms suggests that local diversity is strongly
influenced by diversity at broader spatial and temporal scales. The local
determinism hypothesis predicts that local communities are in equilibrium with
the local environment, and thus, are only as complex as local habitat. The
regional enrichment hypothesis predicts increases in local diversity with
increases in regional diversity, regardless of habitat complexity, and local
adjustments in niche breath and niche overlap to accommodate the added
diversity. A three-year study of local and regional influences on stream fish
diversity in the southeastern U.S. is proposed to test predictions of the above
hypotheses. Fishes will by sampled, and data on habitat variability gathered,
from small, upland streams in five southeastern drainage basins differing in
diversity. The effects of differences in basin-scale diversity on local species-
abundance relationships and habitat utilization patterns will be analyzed to
determine how basin level diversity is accommodated locally. The goal of this
research is demonstrate the degree to which diversity in small local areas
depends on processes operating outside of the areas. The results should have
special relevance for biological conservation efforts.