* 9209671
* Systematic Methods for the Design and Scheduling            of Flexible Multiproduct Continuous Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/1992,03/31/1996
* Ignacio Grossmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/1996
* USD 216,087.00

A trend in the chemical industry is the design of smaller flexible multiproduct
plants that are located close to the markets of consumption. The motivation in
building such plants lies not only in the reduction of transportation and
inventory costs, but also for increasing the capability to provide a steady
supply of products, and for responding more quickly to demand changes in each
market. Thus, flexible multiproduct plants offer the possibility of improving
the competitiveness of chemical companies. Multiproduct plants can operate in
batch or continuous mode, or with a combination of the two. Typical examples of
the former include plants for manufacturing pharmaceuticals, food and specialty
chemicals; examples of the latter include plants for manufacturing a number of
polymer products, paper mills and petroleum refineries. The main difference that
arises in multiproduct plants compared to large scale dedicated continuous
plants is that scheduling and production planning play a major role in the
operation of these plants. Another issue is that uncertainties and fluctuations
in the product demands tend to be much greater in multiproduct plants. This
research deals with the development of systematic methods for the design and
scheduling of various types of flexible multiproduct chemical processes that
operate in the continuous mode. The work involves the development of models and
solution techniques for the simultaneous design and scheduling of plants that
consist of a sequence of stages and that are interconnected by intermediate
inventory tanks. The basic objective is to determine optimal trade-offs arising
from the selection of design variables, operating conditions, sequencing of
operations, length of production cycles and inventory levels. Both rigorous and
simplified models will be investigated, as well as methods for assessing and
optimizing the flexibility of the designs in the face of uncertain demands.