* 9209277
* On the Foundation of Interactive Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Mordecai Kurz, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1996
* USD 68,422.00

Formal knowledge theory for a single person has been extensively developed
starting some thirty years ago. During the last ten to fifteen years it has
become increasingly clear that these issues are of great importance to the
interactive social sciences and in related areas; and that when there is more
than one person, new problems arise which require treatment going beyond the
one- person treatment. Roughly, these problems have to do with what the
protagonists know about each other's knowledge and about the system as a whole,
and what can and cannot be said about these matters within the system. These
problems manifest themselves in various ways, depending on the formal model
being used. For example within the standard "partition" model of knowledge, the
problem is usually posed by asking, where do the particular partitions that are
assumed come from, and does each player "know" the partitions of the others.
This project explores these matters systematically and in detail. The concepts
of subjective probability and rationality in multi-person contexts will also be
treated. Applications to the foundations of interactive decision making, game
theory, computer science and biology will be considered. The results of this
research will be presented in a monograph. The monograph will be divided into
three or four parts. The first part is devoted to the partition model of
interactive knowledge theory. A syntactical or propositional approach to
knowledge partitions is adopted by the investigator in contrast to the usual
hierarchical method. The second part applies the same approach used for pure
knowledge systems to probablistic "belief" systems. In addition to elementary
propositions, propositional connectives, and knowledge operators, probability
operators will be used. The rest of the monograph includes the following:
irrationality, and/or lack of common knowledge of rationality; applications to
equilibrium analysis in normal as well as extensive form games; games played by
Turing machines; and applications to computer systems and biological systems,
where the term "knowledge" needs to be properly interpreted.