* 9209327
* Mathematical Sciences: Wavelets and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Ingrid Daubechies, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1995
* USD 50,000.00

Wavelet analysis is based on the existence of single functions whose dilations
and translates form bases for function spaces used in various areas of
mathematics. The theory as developed over the past decade has proved its worth
through important applications to problems in signal processing, data
compression, and seismic exploration, to name a few. The advantages of wavelet
decompositions of functions over more traditional harmonic analysis techniques
lies in the ability of properly chosen wavelets to remain local in time and
frequency: a function and its Fourier transform have representations whose
coefficients depend only on the values of the function in small neighborhoods
distributed throughout space. Most wavelet analysis focuses on the
representation or approximation of functions defined on the entire line or
throughout space. There is a need to develop wavelet analyses for functions
restricted to intervals. That is one of the primary goals of this project. One
cannot take a wavelet theory and simply restrict it to an interval. The end
points create obstacles which preclude the use of a single wavelet. At issue
then is how efficiently can a wavelet theory be built on intervals in the sense
of using the minimal number of auxiliary functions and maintaining the same
qualities of the wavelet theory. One drawback of wavelets is their lack of
symmetry. This shortcoming can be overcome by using a construction of dual Riesz
bases of symmetric wavelets (one forfeits the use of a single wavelet to do all
the work and replaces it by two). The adaptation of wavelets to finite intervals
also opens the possibility for the construction of dual bases in this context.
Very little work has been done in this direction to date, although applications
to image processing appear to be very promising. One simple approach to this
dual basis construction is to consider truncations of existing infinitely
supported wavelets used in various applications and truncating them. These may
provide interesting dual bases but they will only be of value if their
conditioning numbers can be held close to unity. Work will be done investigating
various examples.