* 9209528
* Socioendocrinology of Behavior
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Jeffrey French, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Continuing grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 02/28/1995
* USD 100,000.00

The relationship between hormones and behavior is no longer viewed as a simple
unidirectional effect of hormones on behavior. Rather, the view emerging from
studies on animals observed in complex physical and social situations is that
there is a sophisticated interplay between social contexts and hormonal status
in the production of behavioral interactions. The present studies will further
illuminate these relationships in callitrichid primates (marmosets and
tamarins). Dr. French has previously shown that social relationships within
mated pairs are extremely important in regulating the influence of hormones on
behavior. The current studies will evaluate the effects of other social factors
in modulating hormones effects on behavior. Specifically, Dr. French will assess
whether or not responses of tamarins to unfamiliar intruders differ as a
function of the intruding or resident female's reproductive status, will assess
whether or not reproductively suppressed subordinate females are capable of
expressing patterns of reproductive behavior when removed from the social
context that produces suppression, and will evaluate the influence of visual
access to unfamiliar pairs on patterns of reproductive behavior across the
ovarian cycle. These studies are important in a number of ways. First, the work
is relevant to propagation of endangered species. All marmosets and tamarins are
considered threatened or endangered, and for some species (e.g., lion tamarins)
there are more individuals in captivity than in the wild. It is highly likely
that information critical for the enhancement of the propagation of these
species in captivity will be the direct result of these studies. Hence, this
research may have a profound impact on the maintenance of the biodiversity of
tropical animals. Second,these studies will show how complex social settings can
influence (reduce or magnify) the effects of internal physiological functions on
behavior. These findings as a whole will contribute to a more complex and
realistic view of hormones and behavior. Finally, these studies will evaluate
hormone-behavior relationships in species of primates that have a social system
with many common features of human societies (e.g., high degree of cooperative
behavior, joint rearing of offspring, residence of older offspring in family or
social groups).