* 9209643
* RUI: Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone Neuronal Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Linda Muske, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 03/31/1995
* USD 148,500.00

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is a decapeptide that was isolated from
brain in 1971. This hormone is released from neurons of the anterior basal
forebrain which project through the ventral hypothalamus to the median eminence
and act upon the pituitary to regulate the control of luteinizing hormone and
follicle stimulating hormones. Thus, GnRH plays a pivotal role in ovulation and
testosterone production. However, with the development of sensitive and specific
antibody techniques, it has now become clear that GnRH neuronal network is a
complex, heterogenous system, comprising three or more discrete neuronal groups
and spanning vastly different regions of the brain. Projecting to targets within
and outside the brain, GnRH serves as both a hormone and a neurotransmitter, and
has multiple actions, on reproductive physiology and on species-typical
behaviors associated with reproduction. Moreover, the GnRH peptides occur in at
least five different molecular forms. Dr. Muske will examine a newly discovered
population of GnRH neurons in the periventricular areas of the diencephalon.
Using state-of-the-art neuroanatomical techniques, she will identify the targets
and projections of the periventricular GnRH neurons for each of the different
molecular forms. Dr. Muske will determine whether the periventricular GnRH
neurons constitute an unique system, with independent embryonic origins and
developmental history. Finally, she will assess the functional role of this
system in the regulation of reproductive behavior and physiology. The results
will provide new insights into the organization, function and mechanisms of
action of the GnRH systems lying outside the endocrine hypothalamus. Moreover,
many reproductive dysfunctions in humans result from a disorder in the GnRH
system. For example, Kallman's Syndrome, a congenital disorder characterized by
sterility and anosmia, is caused by a defect in the migration of GnRH neurons
and hypogonadism, characterized by delayed puberty and sterility, results from
GnRH deficiency. Fundamental information gained from this work may help
facilitate the development of effective treatments for patients suffering from
GnRH dysfunctions.