* 9209899
* Modeling and Characterization of Chain                      Polymerization Reactions for Multifunctional                Monomers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Christopher Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1995
* USD 110,000.00

The formation of highly crosslinked polymers from multifunctional monomers is
typically accompanied by heterogeneity of the polymer structure,
autoacceleration and autodeceleration of the reaction kinetics, formation of a
glassy polymer, a delay in volume shrinkage with respect of equilibrium, and the
attainment of a maximum functional group conversion. Polymers of multifunctional
monomers afford a number of advantages in that they form a highly crosslinked
polymer with high mechanical and thermal integrity as well as low solvent (i.e.
moisture) absorption. Many of these materials are also transparent to light over
a large wavelength range. These polymer properties make these materials
desirable for applications as optical fiber coating, laser video disc coatings,
aspherical lenses, dental materials, printing inks, and nonlinear optical
materials. This work addresses, from both a theoretical and an experimental
basis, the relationship between cure conditions such as temperature, monomer
functionality and type, and initiation rate and type to the final properties of
the polymer after curing. Because the polymer behavior is strongly dependent on
the polymer structure and properties, models will be developed to provide a
framework, applicable to curing processes involving chain polymerization. This
framework will predict the effect of reaction conditions such as temperature,
initiation rate and type, and monomer characteristics and functionality on the
reaction and on the polymer structure and properties. Current models coupling
the volume relaxation and reaction kinetics will be modified to predict
temperature dependence, depolymerization, ionic polymerizations, and termination
by reaction diffusion. A kinetic gelation simulation will be developed and used
to predict the polymer structure including the molecular weight distribution,
the gel point conversion, the cyclization tendency, and the heterogeneity as a
function of the reaction conditions. Finally, experimental characterization of
the reaction progress and the polymer structure will be done using free radical
polymerizations of multi(meth)acrylates initiated both thermally and by
ultraviolet radiation. In this way the models will be verified.