* 9209061
* Vertical Clingers and Leapers - A Biomechanical and         Allometric Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1995
* John Fleagle, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/1995
* USD 61,154.00

The primary goal of this research is to better understand the relationships
between locomotor behavior, body size and the structural adaptations of the
musculoskeletal system in a group of highly endangered primates. The
investigators will study a unique positional behavior of prosimians, "vertical
clinging and leaping." It is characterized by clinging postures on and
progression by leaps from vertical substrates. Over the years, a great
morphological diversity has been demonstrated within the locomotor category --
much of which appears to be size related. Corresponding behavioral differences
remain to be explored, in large part because adequate data on the larger-bodied
representatives are not available. This project will analyze locomotion and
postures of larger-bodied vertical clingers and leapers. Data collection will
include videotaping and "force pole" recordings of take-off and landing forces.
A theoretical biomechanical framework will serve to elucidate the form-function
interface and generate testable hypotheses about morphological adaptations of
different-sized animals to this locomotor mode. We expect the study to
contribute to a better understanding of the morphological diversity within the
locomotor category, including the fossil record of locomotor design.