* 9209726
* Fast And Accurate Parallel Solutions for Recursive Least    Squares Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Haesun Park, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 01/31/1995
* USD 104,405.00

The goal of this research is to develop fast and accurate solution techniques
for recursive least squares problems and analyze them through theoretical and
experimental studies. These techniques will be based on accurate downdating
algorithms, fast rotations, and robust direction-of-arrival estimation
algorithms. The preliminary investigations on the full rank downdating problems
show that the existing algorithms vary greatly in their stability and speed. The
stability and complexity analysis will be an essential part in developing the
improved algorithms and the algorithm development will utilize techniques such
as fast rotations and iterative refinement. The results will be extended to
design block algorithms that can efficiently handle multiple updating and
downdating simultaneously. Although the singular value decomposition (SVD)
produces excellent solutions for rank deficient problems, it is costly to
calculate and modify the SVD. The research will extend the recently developed
rank revealing orthogonal decomposition, which can provide fast solutions to
rank deficient recursive problems. The results will be applied to the design of
novel adaptive direction-of- arrival estimation algorithms, which are expected
to produce significantly faster and accurate algorithms. Parallel implementation
of the algorithms will be conducted on the CM-5 computer to establish their
practical values in real time applications.