* 9209677
* Ecology of a Model Hot Spring Microbial Community:          Relevance  of Cultivated and Uncultivated Species
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1999
* David Ward, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1999
* USD 460,000.00

This proposal addresses a fundamental problem limiting progress in microbial
ecology--the poor correlation between cultivated and naturally occurring
microorganisms. This paradox has been revealed using small-subunit ribosomal RNA
(SSU rRNA) sequences to characterize a model hot spring cyanobacterial mat
community. Because the isolates come mainly from the model community, the model
is particularly well-suited for investigating the basis for this discrepancy.
rRNA-based hybridization probe studies of cultivated and uncultivated
phototrophic microorganisms of the mat provide a more focused view of the
boundaries of the model community, and permit formulation of several hypotheses
that are likely to explain the failure to detect SSU rRNAs of cultivated
species. Hypotheses are based on how trophic structure affects abundance and how
culture procedures select for microorganisms not adapted hypotheses, (a) a more
streamlined search for SSU rRNAs of natural community members, (b) a
comprehensive probe study to determine the distributions and numeric relevance
of all cultivated and uncultivated species, and (c) the cultivation of more
relevant species using more ecologically sound approaches will be undertaken.
The results are essential for future studies as well as parallel studies of the
mat as a model for ancient microbial communities.