* 9209347
* RIA: An Adaptive Spectral Element Method for the Solution ofTransient Partial Differential Equations in Complex         Geometries
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Catherine Mavriplis, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 08/31/1996
* USD 105,000.00

The main objective of this research initiation project (RIA) element algorithm
for the solution of time dependent partial differential equations to simulate
physical phenomena in complex geometries. The adaptive method will ensure
optimal allocation of computer resources in terms of storage and cpu time by
automatically refining, coarsening or reconstructing the geometric mesh used to
discretize the equations in space throughout the calculation. The method wil be
developed ina general way, in that the innovations will be independent of the
geometry and equations to be simulated. This approach will benefit the many
fields in which the application of high order spectral methods can be used for
simulation of complex physical phenomena. THe main tasks are the construction of
a rule-based system for refinement, the development of a scheme for dynamic
allocation of space for the changing mesh connectivity information, the
development of a mesh optimization criterion, ensuring that the mesh alteration
is time-accurate and conservative and finally improving the current error
estimators and preconditioners. The research entails theoretical and
computational work and will include a number of test and novel simulations. The
adaptive formulation of the spectral element method is aimed at increasing the
flexibility and range of capabilities of high order methods in general. High
order methods provide highly accurate simulations with very fast rates of
convergence and are typically used in the direct simulation of basic physical
phenomena. The proposed research will allow high order methods to deal with
"real" engineering problems, rather than idealized research problems, by
reducing the needed computer resources by one to two orders of magnitude.//