* 9209305
* Marine Species Protection Policies, Consequences for Trade  and the Environment
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Nancy Bockstael, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1995
* USD 92,553.00

Societies in many developed nations are exhibiting strong preferences, through
domestic legislation and international conventions, for the protection of marine
mammals and endangered marine species. The effectiveness of these policies is
unclear given that other parts of the world, notably the developing countries
and Japan, have quite different valuations for these global environmental
resources relative to income. The consequences of effective protection policies
are also not well understood. Policies that protect these species at the expense
of considerable restrictions on the commercial harvest of fish have secondary
implications. Substitution to terrestrial-based protein sources can have severe
environmental effects. Additionally, many developing countries rely heavily on
fish for protein and foreign exchange. Restrictions in their harvests could have
serious welfare implications for poor coastal nations. This project has two
objectives. The first is a qualitative assessment of the effectiveness of U. S.
and international policies regarding marine mammals and endangered marine
species that ultimately restrict commercial fishing for other non threatened
species, with the objective of determining the impact both on the protected
species and on commercial harvests. The second is a quantitative analysis of
consumption and international trade in commercial fishery products potentially
affected by the above policies, and their interrelation with consumption and
trade in substitute protein sources. The purpose of this analysis is to
determine the magnitude of the secondary effects on the environment and the
welfare of poor coastal nations.