* 9209943
* The Timing of Control of Stock Externalities in the         Presence of Learning with an Application to Global Warming
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Charles Kolstad, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1995
* USD 77,376.00

This project has two objectives. One is to develop a theoretical understanding
of a generic environmental problem of which global warming and acid deposition
are two examples. That problem is the optimal tradeoff between acting to control
environmental externalities versus delaying control when faced with uncertainty
coupled with learning. The second objective is to apply one or more of these
theoretical models to the global warming problem, addressing the policy question
of the extent to which the U.S. and other countries should control greenhouse
gas emissions now versus waiting until more is known about the problem before
controlling. This is one of the key issues in the public policy debate on global
warming and, thus, results of this project may be very significant. The two
driving features of the models developed will be learning that occurs over time
reducing uncertainty and the stock feature of externalities such as global
warming, whereby the stock causes damage but only the flow can be controlled.
The approach of the theoretical part of the project is to develop a stochastic
optimal control problem and to investigate the comparative static properties of
the resulting model. The empirical portion of the project will numerically
implement one of the theoretical models to the extent necessary to develop
policy conclusions. This will involve adapting an empirical model developed
elsewhere, perhaps the Nordhaus model, rather than developing a totally new one.