* 9209699
* Workshop: Advanced Study Institute on Computational Methods for Engineering Analysis and Design, Madras, August 2-11,   1993, Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Junuthula Reddy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1994
* USD 16,500.00

Description: This proposal requests support for the travel of six U.S.
scientists to the Advanced Study Institute on Computational Methods for
Engineering Analysis and Design, at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT),
Madras, August 2-11, 1993. The organizers are C.S. Krishnamoorthy, of IIT and
J.N. Reddy, of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. India's
Department of Science and Technology is a key sponsor and will support all
invited speakers from within India. The purpose is to have a detailed exchange
of information among prominent scientists on the most recent advances in
computational methods for the analysis and design of engineering systems in
aerospace, civil, mechanical, and manufacturing. Advances such as the
development of powerful numerical tools, the application of artificial
intelligence to design, and the use of special modeling techniques have
contributed to the emergence of engineering design as an area of specializa-
tion. In research, too, increasing attention is devoted to developing design
theory and models for design processes. The workshop aims at synthesizing and
presenting state-of-the art computational methods required for analysis and
design of engineering systems. Scope: The workshop should lead to a meaningful
exchange of knowledge and expertise in the areas of analytical modeling,
advanced comput- ational methods and software for use in practical designs in
several disciplines of engineering. High level academics and practicing
engineers in India and the U.S. will review developments in the field, identify
future research and development activities and formulate collaborative research
projects of mutual interest to the U.S. and India. The proceedings of the
workshop will be a state-of- the-art publication that can be expected to be of
immense value to researchers and practitioners in academia and industry, and to
students engaged in analysis and design of engineering systems.