* 9209746
* Effect of Global Warming Feedback on Energy Production      Strategies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Sree Sreenath, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Arthur R. Bergen
* 08/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

Global Climate Change often abbreviated as Global Change is burdened with
complexity and uncertainty. To overcome this obstacle, substantial and
increasing human resources are dedicated to the advancement of the understanding
of Global Change, and are expected to result in a comparatively rapid increase
in knowledge. This, however, will take time. While there is genuine and
legitimate disagreement as to when to initiate the mitigative action and what
kind of alternative strategies (with no action being one of the alternatives)
have to be formulated and a basis for this comparative evaluation has to be
established. In this respect, we propose a multivalued index called the Energy
Production Index (EPI) that accounts for physical (climatic, biological, etc.)
and economic factors. EPI replaces the traditionally used Global Warming
Potential (GWP) which is far to simplistic and inadequate leaving out many
critical factors such as transition dynamics and global warming dynamics.
Methodologies based on systems approaches will be used to develop tools to
evaluate EPI and therefore the impact of energy production policy on global
change. Suspected global warming processes will be accounted for and their
effect compared. Computer-aided tools to be generated can potentially be used
for policy formulation, evaluation and negotiation processes.