* 9209206
* CAA:  Development of Research Initiatives for Integration ofSuccession Theory with Plant Community Restoration and      Management
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Diane DeSteven, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1994
* USD 32,132.00

Conservation of biological diversity is now a global concern. The newly
developing science of conservation biology seeks to enhance the connections
between basic ecological theory and its application to conservation, thus
providing sound principles for guiding conservation practice. Support from a
Career Advancement Award will provide training to enable the Principal
Investigator to direct future research on applied problems in the conservation
and management of plant communities. Basic theory on plant succession (i.e., the
growth and recovery of plant communities following disturbance) will be
considered for its applicability to issues of plant community conservation and
management. Research time during a one-year sabbatical leave will be divided
between two locations: 1) The Institute of Ecology, University of Georgia, which
has a growing program in conservation ecolgy, and 2) The Savannah River Ecology
Laboratory, which has an established record of research on plant succession and
the recovery of disturbed plant communities, particularly wetlands. Specific
objectives will include: 1) literature research on the existing theory of
conservation and restoration in order to identify those areas most in need of
futher research, 2) training in methods of analyzing ecological landscapes, and
3) practical experience in plant community restoration.