* 9209141
* Research Initiation Award:  Scan Welding;  Process Modeling and Adaptive Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Charalabos Doumanidis, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jay Lee
* 02/29/1996
* USD 95,589.00

Traditional welding methods with a sequentially moving, localized heat input,
offer limited simultaneous control over the multiple features of weld quality
and productivity. This research will focus on the invention of a novel parallel
technique, scan welding, implemented by fast repetitive cycling of the torch
along the weld surface to provide a regulated continuous heat distribution. This
new method will produce the full bead length simultaneously, and yield
longitudinally uniform thermal properties of the weld. The dynamics of scan
welding will be studied by analytical and numerical modeling of its temperature,
phase and stress-strain field. On this basis, a distributed adaptive control
system with in-process parameter identification will be designed to modulate the
torch power and motion, so as to obtain the specified thermal field. Scan
welding will also be implemented on a robotic plasma welding system with thermal
feedback from an infrared pyrometer, and experiments will be performed for model
verification and comparison of scan welding to conventional techniques. The
expected advantages include high process speed and efficiency, elimination of
preheat and annealing requirements, and close simultaneous control of weld bead
geometry, material microstructure and properties, and residual stresses and
distortions of the joint. These benefits provide the potential for optimization
of the welding productivity and quality, especially in critical and highly
demanding applications.