* 9209130
* Mathematical Sciences: Exploiting Hidden Sparsity in        Statistical Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* David Donoho, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 01/31/1996
* USD 381,519.00

The aim of this project is to develop new methods for recovering curves,
spectra, signals and images from indirect, noisy observations. This work is
based on the discovery that the minimax principle requires one to act as if the
object to be recovered is sparse - mostly zero - when viewed in the appropriate
transform domain, so that nonlinear methods derived from the minimax principle
can exploit this sparsity much better than traditional linear methods. The basic
theory of recovering sparse sequences in noise will be expanded and applications
to specific scientific settings will be developed using the wavelet transform,
Fourier transform and wavelet-vaguelette decomposition. Results are expected for
tomography, inversion of Abel transforms and time series spectral analysis; also
foundational arguments for the white noise model will be constructed, with
particular reference to nonlinearity. When data are recorded for high
dimensions, as for example in the form of pictures or images, recovering an
exact description or identifying the parameters of the process that produced the
data can be exceedingly difficult. This work will consider some remarkable new
mathematical and statistical techniques which should enable such a
reconstruction efficiently and with as much accuracy as the quality of the data
permit. Both the mathematical theory and the practical implementation will be
undertaken as part of this project.