* 9209815
* Parallel Numerical Methods For Initial Value Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Andrew Lumsdaine, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 06/30/1996
* USD 72,460.00

This project will explore theoretical and practical aspects of newly-developed
waveform conjugate-direction methods for parallel solution of initial value
problems (IVPs). Waveform relaxation (WR), a waveform-based iterative technique,
is an increasingly popular parallel solution approach for IVPs. Conjugate-
direction waveform methods have dramatically improved the convergence properties
of WR for transient simulation of MOS devices. The project will establish the
basis for broader application of these methods by developing refined convergence
estimates and by building and testing a parallel implementation. New convergence
results will be sought for conjugate-direction waveform methods applied to
linear and nonlinear systems of ODEs and DAEs. The effects of discretization and
multirate integration will also be studied. Pointwise and waveform-based IVP
solvers will be implemented on ASIM, the Alewife simulator, and on the Alewife
parallel computer. Their behavior for a variety of ODE and DAE problems on
various hardware configuration will be compared. Waveform conjugate-direction
methods appear to be an efficient and practical class of parallel techniques for
a variety of applications. Together, the theoretical results and practical
implementations will demonstrate their value and applicability.