* 9209784
* Optical Analysis of Synaptic Integration in Cerebellar      Purkinje Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* William Ross, New York Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 08/31/1996
* USD 206,934.00

This application makes use of state-of-the-art imaging techniques to spatially
and temporally resolve the propagation of specific ionic transients. Dr. Ross
will investigate this problem by using a relatively noninvasive high speed
imaging system which can examine all parts of the cell simultaneously, This
optical technique can give information about specific ion concentration changes
and voltage changes. The signals can be interpreted in terms of the spatial
distribution and propagation of dendritic events and the distribution of
specific membrane channels. Dr. Ross will inject individual Purkinje cells in
cerebellar slices with fluorescent ion indicators and high speed images,
correlated with simultaneous electrical measurements made under various
conditions. The special imaging technology will be specifically used for
measuring intracellular calcium and sodium concentration transients in fine
dendritic processes. These experiments will attempt to define those factors
(intrinsic membrane conductances, synaptic interactions, and neuromodulators)
which influence the generation of local intracellular calcium changes and the
propagation of regenerative potentials. Because it is essential to have
information about the way synaptic inputs are integrated and processed in a
neuron results from this study will ultimately help to better understand the
cellular mechanisms of learning and memory.***