* 9209265
* Towards an Integrated Connectionist/Symbolic Theory of      Higher Cognition (REU Supplement)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Paul Smolensky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1995
* USD 117,000.00

ABSTRACT This project develops a research program, the Sub-Symbolic Paradigm
(SSP), which exploits connectionist computation as a bridge between numerical
neural computation and symbolic mental computation, and forges an integration in
which the latter is an approximate higher-level description of the former. While
much of connectionist research has addressed problems and data from cognitive
psychology, SSP has focused on complementary data and problems in higher
cognition that are centrally located in linguistics and the foundations of
cognitive science. SSP has already made significant progress, including (a)
mathematical techniques for representing symbolic structures as lower-level
distributed patterns of activity and for (b) performing massively parallel
structure-sensitive processing on such representations; (c) the analysis of
connectionist computation as maximizing Harmony, a well-formedness measure on
representations; (d) contributions to theoretical linguistics in the areas of
syntax/semantics and phonology that rely on using Harmony to measure the well-
formedness of linguistic structures; and (e) contributions to the foundations of
cognitive science deriving from the interpretation of the preceding results. The
new research to be supported by the present grant will build on (d), expanding
the theory of grammar as a well-formedness optimizing system, and on (e),
systematically developing a typology of strategies for connectionist-grounded
explanations of the striking productivity of human higher cognition. SSP is
contributing to the development of a new methodology for cognitive science which
is more than just the sum of those of its sister disciplines, a methodology
capable of yielding results which are beyond the reach of all the other
disciplines proceeding individually. By integrating linguistic, philosophical,
and mathematical analysis, computer simulation, and techniques from both
discrete and continuous computation, this new methodology can develop more
powerful connectionist systems, innovative symbolic formalisms, and general
cognitive principles that constitute real progress towards the unification of
connectionist and symbolic theories of brain and mind.