* 9209212
* Feature Group Utility in Model-Based 3D Object Recognition  Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Patrick Flynn, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Howard Moraff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 103,981.00

One of the most demanding applications in computer vision is model-based 3D
object recognition. Such systems often use correspondence techniques to identify
objects in an image; sets of bindings are formed between groups of scene
features (e.g., points, curves, surfaces, or volumes) and compatible groups of
model features. The discrimination ability ( or utility) of individual features
(e.g. points, curves, surfaces, or volumes) and compatible groups of model
features. The discrimination ability (or utility) of individual feature groups
in these systems is a challenging and important problem in computer vision
research. When recognition systems are expected to select the correct model(s)
out of a database of hundreds or thousands, indexing methods (which quickly
reject a subset of the model database from further consideration by the system)
are useful or often essential if objects are to be recognized efficiently, and
the use of feature groups offers a promising technique for performing this
indexing task. This research investigates two facets of the feature group
utility concept: saliency of feature groups extracted from the input image, and
symmetric arrangements of features arising from inherent symmetries of the
object models in the database. Preliminary experimental results are also
described. Specific goals of the proposed research are to (a) place both the
saliency and symmetry concepts on a firm theoretical basis, (b) generalize
existing techniques for identifying salient and symmetric feature groups out of
their current domain (of polyhedral or quadric surfaces into more expressive and
generic classes of features, and (c) expand a current database of over 100
object models to include additional, more realistic objects.