* 9209001
* H-infinity Design in Interconnected and Slowly Time-varying Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Le Yi Wang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/29/1996
* USD 100,000.00

This project is concerned with the problem of system design in an Hoo sense for
interconnected and slowly time-varying systems. The project starts with the
modification of the Hoo method so that the effect of interaction among coupled
subsystems can be incorporated into the design. In particular, we will develop a
design strategy which exploits the available design freedom contained in Hoo
method to achieve coordination of subsystems. Furthermore, we will investigate
the design tradeoff and limits on achievable performance in Hoo design of
interconnected systems. The project continues to study the problem of
stabilization and optimization in continuous-time slowly time-varying (possibly
unstable) systems containing possibly time-varying delay terms. The frozen-time
approach will be employed to derive practical design procedures, and will be
examined for its limitations. The local- global double algebra framework
developed by the Principal Investigator and Zames will be used to study
rigorously the issues of stabilization and optimization in slowly time-varying
systems. We will concentrate on the following fundamental issues in Hoo design
problems for slowly time-varying systems: (1) the development of analysis tools
for robust stability and performance, (2) the construction of feedback
controllers, (3) the power of adaptation as compared with general time- varying
system design, and (4) the limits of achievable performance imposed by plant
dynamics. The project will be of practical importance in providing constructive
design tools, and of theoretical significance in giving a better understanding
of the limitations of the frozen-time approach and adaptation, and the
relationships between modeling and design.