* 9209349
* Special Matrix Problems in Signals, Systems and Control
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Paul Van Dooren, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 12/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

During the last few decades linear algebra has played a fundamental role in
advances being made in the area of signals, systems and control. The most
profound impact has been in the computational and implementational aspects,
where numerical linear algebraic algorithms have strongly influenced the ways in
which problems are being solved. The advent of special computing architectures
such as vector processors and distributed processor arrays has also emphasized
parallel and real-time processing of basic linear algebra modules for these
application areas. This project is about numerical linear algebra and
applications in signals, systems and control, with special emphasis on
implementation aspects on parallel architectures. The focus is on "special
matrix" problems, i.e. matrices which are either sparse, patterned or
structured. For such matrices appropriate definitions of numerical stability and
sensitivity have recently been introduced. Numerical methods for the above
application areas ought to be numerically stable in this restricted sense and at
the same time ought to exploit the structure of the matrices to improve
computational complexity and parallelizability. This will be applied to
challenging problems in these areas such as target tracking, robust control and
model reduction of large scale plants.