* 9209317
* Collaborative Research:  The Design of Bankruptcy Procedures
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Artur Raviv, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 102,615.00

A key factor in determining investment policy, liquidation policy, and the
consequences of financial distress is the set of rules governing bankruptcy.
Bankruptcy rules affect firms in financial distress in two ways. First, it is
obvious that they affect the outcome of the bankruptcy proceeding. Second, they
establish the alternative to an out-of-bankruptcy settlement and so affect the
nature of such settlements. The likely outcomes of both informal bargaining and
formal bankruptcy, in turn, affect the availability of funds for investment and
the types of investments equity holders will pursue. More specifically, poorly
conceived bankruptcy rules may make it impossible for investors to earn a fair
return, even in situations where the investment is economically viable. Also,
bankruptcy rules may encourage or discourage inefficient investments. Finally
the bankruptcy regime affects the extent to which firms are forced to liquidate
assets even when the "going concern" value of the assets is higher than the
outstanding debt. The purpose of the research is to guide the policy debate
surrounding bankruptcy by suggesting some features of an optimal bankruptcy law
based on these considerations. The research method is novel in how it regards
optimal bankruptcy law as one element in the broader problem of designing
optimal financial contracts. Such contracts specify how resources are to be
allocated between investors and firms. Actual financial contracts usually
stipulate only (possibly contingent) payments to investors. The rules governing
the breach of stipulated promises are, in fact, typically not specified in the
contract explicitly. They are generally contained in the legal system and are
implicitly a part of every contract. For example, debt contracts specify the
debtholder's investment, the specific payments to which he is entitled, and
covenants restricting the debtor's behavior. Bankruptcy law provides a procedure
to be followed if the promised payments are not made or if the covenants are
violated. In view of this concern, security design will be examined as including
both explicit promises and the procedures to be followed in case of breach, and
optimal bankruptcy rules will be derived as part of an overall contract design
problem.