* 9209481
* Sino-Tibetan Etymological Dictionary and Thesaurus
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1992,11/30/1995
* James Matisoff, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 11/30/1995
* USD 225,000.00

ABSTRACT This project, begun in 1987, is producing a multi-volume Etymological
Dictionary and Thesaurus of Proto-Sino-Tibetan (PST), the ancestor language,
spoken perhaps 6000 years ago, from which Chinese and its hundreds of relatives
in the Tibeto-Burman (TB) family descend. The organization of STEDT is by
semantic fields, so as ultimately to constitute a thesaurus of the proto-
lexicon. The Sino-Tibetan (ST)languages (typically monosyllabic and tonal) are
of unusual cultural importance and theoretical interest. Lexical data, of uneven
quality, is now available for hundreds of TB languages and dialects. This
project has already created a vast quality-controlled database of historically
significant lexical material, incorporating some 200 published and unpublished
sources (some solicited by questionnaire), now totalling over 130,000 records
and occupying over 60 megabytes of disk space. Priority has been given to the
profusion of new information furnished by Chinese and Indian linguists. To this
Lexical Database is joined an Etymological Database, where all etymologies
previously proposed for any taxonomic level of ST or its subgroups are
collatable for analysis and evaluation. Yet most of the reconstructed roots in
this database are quite new, and have only been attainable because of the
massive amount of data brought together by this project. The first semantic area
to be covered now comprises close to 1000 roots and root variants, to be
included in the first volume of STEDT, Bodypart Nomenclature, which will come to
roughly one thousand pages. Production of subsequent volumes will proceed at an
accelerated rate during the new grant period. The STEDT will constitute the most
comprehensive and accurate documentation of the Sino-Tibetan language family
ever produced, and will be an important resource for historical linguistic
research and theories of language change in general.