* 9209575
* Research on Age-Earnings Profiles and Age Discrimination
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1992,04/30/1996
* David Neumark, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/1996
* USD 79,905.00

The Age Discrimination in Employment Act was originally enacted in 1968. It was
strengthened in 1979 by transferring enforcement authority to the EEOC, and in
1986 by eliminating mandatory retirement (for most workers). The Age
Discrimination in Employment Act, in particular its abolition of mandatory
retirement, has been criticized by some economists as impairing the formation of
long-term incentive contracts in labor markets. In the current accepted model,
such contracts require the institution of mandatory retirement. This critique
emphasizes the point that economists' understanding of age discrimination and
the Age Discrimination in Employment Act hinges critically on the underlying
reasons for the observed positive relationship between age and earnings, over
much of the life cycle. The proposed research will conduct numerous empirical
tests of alternative explanations of this relationship, including: the human
capital model; the long-term incentive-contract model; and the hypothesis that
workers prefer rising wage profiles. The research explores theoretical
restrictions implied by the alternative explanations, as well as data sets
uniquely suited to distinguishing between them. The research draws on these
empirical tests, as well as other theoretical and empirical results, to provide
an economic assessment of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.