* 9209695
* Cytoplasmic Imcompatibility in Flour Beetles:  A Model of   Host-Parasite Coevolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Mary Tierney, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1997
* USD 220,000.00

Parasites are ubiquitous and can exert powerful long-term selection on hosts.
Host-parasite interactions may promote species diversity, alter host behavior,
contribute to speciation and perhaps foster and maintain sex. My research uses a
common arthropod parasite to investigate host-parasite coevolution. The parasite
is a cytoplasmically transmitted bacterium that causes reproductive
incompatability. Crosses between infected males and uninfected females are
sterile. By "sterilizing" females not transmitting the parasite, infected males
increase the frequency of infection and the parasite should spread until all
individuals are infected. Two questions about host-parasite coevolution are
addressed. Is there genetic variation for parasite-induced affects on host
reproductive success? A genetic analysis measures the heritability of the
parasite's effect on the host reproductive success. The response to selection
(R) depends on selection (S) and heritability (h2), R=S*h2. Thus this experiment
elucidates the potential of the host-parasite system to evolve. The second
question is: How does parasite virulence evolve? Novel parasite strains will be
introduced into different host genetic backgrounds. The parasite's effects on
the host will be measured over long and short term. This experiment is an
important test of models of parasite virulance. Together, these experiments
provide important information on host-parasite coevolution.