* 9209709
* Investigations in Robust Analysis of Variance
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Frederick Mosteller, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 02/29/1996
* USD 150,000.00

Designed experiments in the social and behavioral sciences (and other fields as
well) customarily are handled by techniques associated with the analysis of
variance (ANOVA). When the data may not be well behaved, applied statisticians
and other practitioners should be able to obtain robust estimates of individual
effects, accompanied by suitable summaries and aggregate measures of
variability. By adding substantially to the limited number of available small-
sample results that apply to the summaries and aggregates required for robust
ANOVA, this project aims to provide the basis (including critical tables) for a
unified body of basic inferential techniques for one-way and two-way layouts.
For data that fail to satisfy the standard assumptions (for example, by
containing some anomalous observations or by having heavy tails), ANOVA-like
procedures are needed that perform well across a broad range of underlying
distributions. A number of proposed robust procedures for the more general class
of linear models, which also includes regression, may be applied in ANOVA
situations, but evidence on their performance in small samples is still too
limited to permit choice of a preferred technique or to make the necessary
components (including estimates of effects and their standard errors,
corresponding tests of hypotheses, and detailed critical tables) available for
statistical applications. The proposed research will investigate several
procedures for robust ANOVA, mainly based on M-estimation, using large-sample
results and Monte Carlo to establish their properties in small samples. The work
will at first emphasize the most widely used designs: two-way and one-way
layouts. Previous work by Bickel, Draper, Fellner, Hampel, Hettmansperger,
Hoaglin, Huber, Johnson, Kafadar, Lehmann, Mosteller, Rocke, Ronchetti,
Rousseeuw, Schrader, Stahel, Tukey, Yohai, and Zamar will provide the main
starting points. The research proposed by Mosteller and his associates will
continue a line of work long supported by the Division of Social and Economic
Science that has over the years produced many of the most innovative
developments in statistical methods for making sense of social science data. The
Principal Investigator has a most distinguished reputation among both social
scientists and statisticians because of remarkable production of both technical
and more accessible textbook materials describing and illustrating methods that
continue to be developed.