* 9209711
* Mathematical Sciences: Compact Hausdorff Spaces and Set-Theoretic Topology
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Peter Nyikos, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 01/31/1995
* USD 48,300.00

Over the last three decades there has been a revolution in general topology and
the theory of Boolean algebras, brought about by powerful new techniques in set
theory, including the method of forcing pioneered by Paul J. Cohen, and by deep
studies in the structure of inner models of set theory and large cardinals. At
the same time, there has been striking progress in the theory of compact
Hausdorff spaces, and it is not always easy to see in advance whether extra set-
theoretic assumptions are required. The investigator intends to continue his
research on compact Hausdorff spaces, including the application of special set-
theoretic tools. Other classes of spaces receiving attention will be the related
classes of countably compact and sequentially compact spaces, Moore spaces, non-
metrizable manifolds, Frechet-Urysohn topological groups and topological vector
spaces, countably metacompact spaces, and weak and weak* compact subsets of
Banach spaces. Finite group actions on normal spaces will also receive some
attention. General topology is more of a foundational subject than the rest of
topology, concerning itself with very abstract spaces and with the impact on
topology of the adoption of variants of the axioms of set theory. Although
analogies to familiar objects of geometry are valuable heuristics, the plastic,
intuitive kind of geometry involving low-dimensional manifolds is a far cry from
the study of subsets of a Banach space, the latter being more closely related to
classical analysis than to geometry, in spite of the geometric terminology
employed. One major result of general topology in which Nyikos was involved a
decade ago was the discovery that a famous unproved conjecture concerning Moore
spaces was actually independent of the usual basic axioms of set theory.
Moreover, it was shown to be inconsistent with the Cantor Continuum Hypothesis,
a far more familiar proposition that most working mathematicians would be likely
to choose if they had to make a choice. This result suggests the flavor of the
best general topology.