* 9209559
* Socialization and Temperament in the Development of         Conscience in Early Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Grazyna Kochanska, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/1996
* USD 155,011.00

ABSTRACT The development of conscience is an ultimate hallmark and goal of
socialization. Conscience assures that we adhere to standards of conduct and
restrain antisocial impulses even in the absence of surveillance. In the second
year of life, parents begin to lay foundations for children's conscience by
setting and enforcing standards of desired behavior. Different child rearing
patterns have been associated with varying outcomes in children's conscience
development. However, children's individual temperamental characteristics, such
as vulnerability to anxiety and fearfulness, and impulsivity and inhibitory
control may affect their ability to experience guilt and remorse and the
capacity to suppress forbidden impulses. Thus, they may be strongly related to
aspects of conscience development, and they may also moderate the effects of
parental socialization. Nevertheless, individual differences have been almost
entirely neglected in the developmental research on conscience. This short term
cross-sectional/follow-up study will examine maternal socialization and child
temperament as contributors to the early formation of conscience at two points
critical for its development; at Time 1, at 29.40 months (recently proposed as
the period of the emergence of the "moral self") and at Time 2, at 45-55 months
(on the verge of the transition to broad social systems, when internal standards
of conduct take on a particular developmental significance). Specifically,
mothers' disciplinary styles, children's fearfulness/anxiety and
impulsivity/inhibitory control, and apsects of children's conscience development
will be measured at both times of assessment with a rich combination of methods;
naturalistic behavioral observations in multiple context, standardized
laboratory procedures, parental reports, and semi-projective measures. The study
will provide unique insights into the complex interplay of socialization and
temperament in the early development of conscience.