* 9209564
* NBER Summer Institute to be held in Cambridge, MA           July-August, 1992-93
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Geoffrey Carliner, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1995
* USD 253,900.00

The National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute brings together
economists from universities, government and international organizations for a
few days or a weeks of seminars, workshops, conferences, and collaborative
research. Last year's Summer Institute included 709 economists from 179
universities. A similar number is expected to attend this summer. Special
efforts are made to include younger and less well known economists. The Summer
Institute is organized into 12 programs: economic fluctuations, monetary
economics, corporate finance, asset pricing, industrial organization, health and
aging, international studies, labor studies, productivity, and taxation. Each
program has its own group of participants and its own structure. Although there
is considerable variation among the programs, a typical Summer Institute will
last for one to three weeks, with seminars each morning and afternoons devoted
to individual research. Programs may include a variety of subjects or they may
be organized around specific topics. The Institute provides a unique opportunity
for economists to work closely with others in their areas of specialty for
extended and intense periods research. Although numerous conferences permit
researchers a few hours in which to exchange ideas, only this institute lasts
long enough to allow for serious collaboration among economists from different
institutions. While research nearing completion is presented, the major emphasis
is placed on testing new ideas by presenting preliminary research and developing
ideas and plans for joint or coordinated research efforts.