* 9209462
* Slow Excitatory Phenomena - Interaction of Excitatory Amino Acids and Neuropeptides
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Mirjana Randic, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/29/1996
* USD 190,816.00

The perception of pain requires excitatory synaptic transmission from primary
afferent sensory fibers to secondary projection neurons in the dorsal horn of
the spinal cord. Two groups of neurotransmitter candidates are thought to
mediate this initial excitatory step in the pain pathway: one being excitatory
amino acids (EAA: glutamate, asparate), and another are peptides (including
tachykinins such as substance P and neurokinin A). These peptides may be
colocalized with an excitatory amino acid(s) in the same neurons. Chemical
signal transfer via such neurons presents new aspects and complexities of
presynaptic (synaptic efficacy) and postsynaptic (membrane excitability)
regulation which have not previously been considered and may have important
implications for the performance of the somatosensory, especially of pain
pathways. Dr. Randic has recently found that substance P and excitatory amino
acids interact to produce neurophysiological signs of hyperalgesia i.e. a
prolonged enhancement of responses to excitatory manipulation. However, the
sites and the molecular mechanisms by which the peptide signals produce enhanced
EAA responses have yet to be elucidated. Dr. Randic will examine the hypothesis
that the activation of distinct neurokinin receptors causes modulation of the
responses of freshly isolated spinal dorsal horn neurons to EAAs, especially to
N-methyl-D-aspartic- acid (NMDA). To gain understanding of molecular
mechanism(s) underlying interactions between EAAs, and tachykinins possible
involvement of glycine allosteric site of NMDA receptor channel complex, guanine
nucleotide-binding proteins (G-proteins) or change in Ca++-sensitive second
messenger systems, will be investigated. Whole-cell voltage-clamp recording of
EAA responses will be utilized in this study. Delineating the cellular
mechanism(s) of peptide actions on dorsal horn neurons is an important step
toward understanding anatomical and neurochemical organization of the spinal
dorsal horn.***//