* 9209402
* RIA: Performance Analysis of Wormhole-Routed                Interprocessor Communication Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1996
* Richard Enbody, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 05/31/1996
* USD 95,611.00

The second generation of interprocessor communication networks for
multicomputers, the wormhole-routed network, is currently in production. Initial
experience indicates that long communication paths are no longer a problem with
these machines. However, resources such as network channels are reserved for
communication, and the resulting contention can degrade performance. Our tests
on a production machine indicate that the problem becomes more severe as the
number of nodes increases. We are interested in the effect of this contention on
the programmer. Clearly, the old technique of mapping problems onto
multicomputers using distance as a metric no longer applies. The research is on
the development of new metrics that consider contention. We propose a metric
which has been shown to be effective for static mapping of homogeneous tasks. We
are investigating an improved metric which can handle inhomogeneous tasks. Our
ultimate goal is a metric which can be useful for both static and dynamic
mappings. In order to handle the latter case, a metric must be simple enough to
be calculated, or recalculated, quickly. Our metric fits that requirement. We
also develop load balancing techniques using our metric for computational
physics problems. Applying our techniques to real problems on real machines
ensure that our research is useful to the computing community.