* 9209885
* Studies on De Novo Purine Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Carol Caperelli, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 07/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal is to study the enzymes involved in de novo purine biosynthesis
and their regulation. There is now genetic evidence that three enzyme activities
of de novo purine biosynthesis reside on a single polypeptide chain. The protein
has been isolated from a murine lymphoma cell line in low yield and
characterized as to size, formyl group donor, trifunctionality, and kinetic
mechanism of glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase (GART). The studies will
now be extended to use molecular biology techniques to prepare the human
trifunctional protein in high yield from bacteria, to prepare an expression
vector to obtain only the GART domain from bacteria and then do site-directed
mutagenesis of it, and to try to crystallize both the trifunctional protein and
the GART domain to do structural studies in the presence of substrate analogs
which are dead-end inhibitors. These carbocyclic nucleotide analogs are being
synthesized at present, and will be used to analyze the mechanism of conversion
of IMP, the product of the de novo purine synthesis, to AMP and GMP. The
activity of AMP and GMP analogs and their 2-deoxy analogs will be used to study
the mechanisms of ribonucleotide reductase, RNA polymerase, and DNA polymerase.
%%% Synthesis of purines de novo is very important metabolically. While most
enzymes catalyze only a single reaction, it appears that three successive
reactions, involving transfer of two formyl groups, are catalyzed by the same
protein. This protein has been isolated from mouse lymphoma cells, but the yield
was very low. Molecular biology techniques will be used to prepare both the
trifunctional protein and the GART domain. Residues thought to be important in
the GART catalytic activity will be changed to other, known residues, to see
their importance. Attempts will be made to crystallize both the entire protein
and the GART domain, and studies using substrate analogs will be carried out to
determine what the protein and protein fragment look like when they are in their
active forms.