* 9209570
* Integrated Framework for Power System Security Assessment   Using Energy Methods
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Thomas Overbye, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Chanan Singh
* 02/29/1996
* USD 100,000.00

As electrical power high voltage transmission systems become more heavily loaded
due to increased electric loads and larger transfers of power between utilities,
efficient system operation is becoming threatened due to static security,
transient stability, and more recently voltage stability constraints. The
objective of the research proposed here is to use energy function methods to
develop a unified measure of power system security. To date energy functions
techniques have been applied successfully to the transient stability and maximum
stable loadability problems; however, little work has been done to access
dynamic voltage stability. Such a measure of system voltage security is
essential for economic and reliable operations. Research is to be performed in
four areas. The first area will be an investigation of the modeling detail
required to adequately capture the dynamics associated with voltage instability.
More detailed models are anticipated for generators, loads, transformers and
static var compensators (SVCs). Second, research will be done on the development
of integrated energy function security framework, which will require a modified
energy function, along with a new paradigm to incorporate the varying time
scales of the voltage dynamics (from seconds to tens of minutes). Third, the
relationship of the voltage stability unstable equilibrium points (UEPs) with
the transient stability UEPs will be investigated; also work on the efficient
calculation of the UEPs will also be done. Lastly, integration of energy methods
into existing control center applications will be explored.