* 9209902
* RIA:  Alternate Representations of Stochastic Processes and Perturbation Analysis of Discrete-Event Dynamic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Stephen Strickland, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/1995
* USD 104,984.00

The goal of this research is to extend the method of infinitesimal perturbation
analysis (IPA) to large new classes of discrete-event dynamic systems (DEDS),
and thus make it a practical tool for analysis and control of DEDS. The current
consensus of the research community is that IPA is an effective tool, but quite
limited in the range of systems to which it can be applied. For example, it is
generally inapplicable to systems with multiple classes of customers or systems
with finite-capacity buffers. But these features are central in many
applications. Thus IPA is widely regarded as an interesting technique, but not
practically useful. We claim that this is incorrect and that IPA can be applied
quite generally. We have developed theoretical support for this claim; the
purpose of this research is to translate this theory into a practical
"machinery" for implementing IPA. Our approach is based on constructing
continuous measure-changing mappings on the sample path space using an
appropriate representation (construction) of the process. A key element is that
we require continuity only for the performance measure of interest, rather than
an entire class of performance measures. This allows a substantial weakening of
the existing conditions for the applicability of IPA. The success of this
research will represent a breakthrough in the performance- oriented analysis and
control of DEDS, and contribute substantially toward practical success in this
area.