* 9209577
* RIA: Extensions of Learning Models and Applications         to Signal Processing and Geometric Reconstruction
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Sanjeev Kulkarni, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 12/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

Recently there has been a great deal of work on formal models of machine
learning such as the probably approximately correct (or PAC learning model. This
model is a precise framework attempting to capture the notion of learning from
examples. Recent progress in machine learning and statistical inference on
paradigms such as the PAC model has provided fundamental results on the amount
of data needed for function approximation in a completely nonparametric setting.
The applicability of these paradigms is limited by the assumptions on the data
gathering mechanisms and the performance criteria. Some of these assumptions
will be relaxed to allow the extended learning paradigm to be applied to areas
such as signal/image processing and geometric reconstruction. The approach is to
place mild assumptions on the function classes while allowing more flexibility
in the sampling and error criteria. Specifically, the extensions proposed are to
allow deterministic sampling strategies, sampling over noncompact domains, and
learning with respect to general performance criterion. The extended model will
be applied to a variety of problems in signal processing and geometric
reconstruction to provide information complexity results for some classical and
new reconstruction/estimation problems. In the area of signal processing, the
framework will be applied to problems dealing with tomographic image
reconstruction, multiresolution signal processing, and classical sampling
theorems. In the area of geometric reconstruction, applications to stochastic
geometry and shape form probing problems. The approach will provide results on
the fundamental capabilities and limitations of reconstruction as well as sample
size bounds for these applications.