* 9210439
* RIA: Data Reduction and New Visualization Techniques for    Three-Dimensional Data Sets
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Bernd Hamann, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert G. Voigt
* 02/29/1996
* USD 115,000.00

This research is concerned with data reduction and general visualization
techniques for scalar-valued 3D data sets. Many practical applications deal with
3D data sets where points in space, with associated function values, are given.
Such data sets occur in medicine (tomography), geosciences and physical sciences
(temperature, pressure, radiation), and several other sciences and disciplines
of engineering measurements or mathematical simulations. Generally, such data
sets are huge, aggravating the tasks of data storage, interactive data
manipulation, and real-time data visualization. Discrete scalar-valued data sets
can be reduced by considering derivative information at the given data points.
Curvature information of graphs of functions locally approximating the data can
be used to define a measure of the significance of single data points can be
weighted and removed iteratively form the 3D point set. The proposed methods for
3D points, and 3D retriangulation strategies. The result of reduction algorithm
is a data set consisting of scattered 3D points and an associated triangulation
(tetrahedra). Common visualization techniques require structured data sets,
points typically being organized in a rectilinear ("cuberille") grid. This
research will introduce visualization methodologies allowing discretized scalar
fields, with arbitrarily located data points, to be rendered.