* 9210331
* RIA: Dynamic Loosening and Tightening of Threaded           Fasteners by Vibration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Daniel Hess, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 08/31/1995
* USD 79,224.00

Threaded fasteners have found ubiquitous use in many systems and structures.
Although frequently overlooked, fasteners represent a complex and often critical
design element. To some extent, all fasteners are subjected to unsteady loading.
Yet the behavior of threaded fasteners under such conditions is still poorly
understood. Existing analyses of threaded fasteners under vibration are based on
static equilibrium conditions with supporting data limited to only low-frequency
conditions. Such analyses suggest that only a net loosening action can occur.
However, preliminary experiments show that when a broad range of vibratory
conditions are considered, alternate ranges of frequencies are found in which
either a loosening or a tightening action occurs. The goals of this research are
to perform well- controlled measurements of the dynamic forces and motions of
threaded fasteners under a wide range of dynamic conditions and to develop
appropriate nonlinear dynamic models of threaded fasteners which capture and
explain the dynamic loosening and tightening motions. The models will
accommodate the interaction of friction and vibration as well as the dynamic
constraints and nonlinearities inherent to threaded components. The results of
the work are expected to be of fundamental engineering interest and have
immediate use in the design of joints in many critical applications.***//