* 9210462
* RPG:  Millennial-Scale Paleoclimatic Cycles Expressed in    Paleozoic Basinal Marine Sequences
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Maya Elrick, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Judith L. Hannah
* 06/30/1995
* USD 17,952.00

The proposed research is to investigate the origin and periodicity of
rhythmically interbedded limestone-marl couplets in four separate Paleozoic
basinal marine sequences. In each of the sequences, the limestone-marl couplets
are characterized by decimeter-scale alternations of even-bedded, laminated
limestone and marls; well-preserved calcareous fossils in marl layers indicates
a primary depositional(versus diagenetic origin) to the interbeds. Spectral
analysis of the limestone-marl interbeds will be conducted to determine whether
there is a regularly cyclicity to the bedding couplets, and the duration of the
cycles will be determined from a range of sedimentation rates calculated for
each individual sequence. A planning grant is submitted to study the
sedimentologic origin and periodicity pf rhythmically bedded limestone-marl
couplets in one of the proposed sequences; the Middle Cambrian of western Utah
(Wheeler and Marjum Formations). The emphasis of the pilot project is to develop
accurate and time-efficient sampling techniques for generating time series in
interbedded limestone and marl facies. In previous studies, time series
generated from variations in HCI-insoluble residues has proven to be an accurate
method, however it is very laboratory-time intensive. Consequently, three other
less-time consuming methods will be tested on the Middle Cambrian couplets
determine which technique (s) best reflects the rhythmic nature of the deposits.
Specific planning grant activities will include describing and interpreting the
sedimentologic and stratigraphic characteristics of the basinal facies,
evaluating the lateral continuity of limestone-marl couplets, sampling the best-
exposed section for variations in HCI-insoluble residues, magnetic properties,
and bed- thickness variations. Results from spectral analysis of the different
time series will be compared to determine which time series sampling
technique(s) are appropriate for interbedded limestone-marl facies. The cause of
millennial-scale paleoclimatic fluctuations is not well understood, however they
have been attributed to changes in solar activity or due to the nonlinear
response of the climate to precessional (~20,000 yr) orbital forcing. If the
periods of such persistent oscillations can be characterized, they offer the
potential for developing high-resolution chronostratigraphy, with a greater
resolution than Milankovitch cycles, that can be used to calibrate the length of
time between absolute datums, variations in sedimentation rates, biologic
evolution rates, and the time intervals over which geomagnetic reversals occur.