* 9210434
* Optical Microstructures and Their Application to SpontaneousEmission Inhibition and Semiconductor Micro-Lasers (ResearchInitiation Award)
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1995
* Seng-Tiong Ho, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 09/30/1995
* USD 100,000.00

An experimental research program is proposed to study inhibition of spontaneous
emission in semiconductors using micro dielectric structures and to explore
various realizations of semiconductor micro-lasers with microscopic ring
cavities. The inhibition of spontaneous emission is of great interest because of
its potential application to low- threshold lasers. We showed recently
theoretically that the spontaneous emission rates of excitons in a semiconductor
can be drastically reduced by embedding a thin layer of the semiconductor in
low- refractive-index materials. An experimental study of this effect is
proposed. The experiment will involve time-resolved measurement of excitonic
decay in thin GaAs or InP quantum wells, or Yb-doped semiconductors, surrounded
by materials of low refractive indices. Later, similar studies will be extended
to wire-like dielectric structures. The microstructures required will be
fabricated via a selective- etching technique. The same technique can be used to
fabricate semiconductor micro-ring lasers, which were recently demonstrated to
have low (optically pumped) thresholds. A good way to obtain output from such
lasers, however, has not been achieved. An experiment is proposed to investigate
the coupling of such lasers to waveguides as an output coupling method. Various
geometries and active layers will be explored to determine the optimal
relaization of such lasers.