* 9210497
* RPG:  The Role of Dichogamy and Herkogamy in Plant          Reproductive Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Michele Dudash, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

The central theme of the proposed research is to determine the role of dichogamy
(temporal separation between male and female flowers), and herkogamy (spatial
separation between male and female flowers) in promoting matings among
individuals and/or preventing interference between male and female function both
within and between flowers on individual plants. Dichogamy and herkogamy are
widespread among angiosperms and are often found together; however, little is
known about the precise role each contributes to an individual's reproductive
success. The proposed study organism, hermaphroditic Sabatia angularis
(Gentianaceae), is self- compatible, dichogamous and herkogamous. The role of
dichogamy and herkogamy in influencing an individuals fitness will be quantified
using chimeric plants when dichomgamy and herkogamy are (1) both functioning,
(2) only one is functioning, and (3) neither is functioning . The role of
dichogamy and herkogamy will also be examined as a function of flower age, size
of floral display (in promoting self-pollinations between flowers on the same
plant), and plant density. Pollen donors will be exactly determined using
experimental plant arrays of unique genotypes known from allozyme markers. Male
function will be determined by measuring pollen production, pollen removal rates
and siring ability via allozyme markers in the same experimental plant arrays.
Female function will be estimated by quantifying pollen deposition onto stigmas
and seed set per fruit. These studies explore basic aspects of plant pollination
and reproduction.