* 9210869
* "The Effects of Surface Concentration and Particle Inter-   action on the Sturcture and Composition of Surface          Complexes"
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Lynn Katz, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 11/30/1995
* USD 93,150.00

This is an award to support research on a comprehensive modeling approach for
predicting metal ion sorption over the range of solid to solution ratios found
in natural environmental systems. The model must be capable of predicting the
distribution of surface complexes as a function of solids concentration and pH
and should incorporate the effects of particle interactions on sorption
phenomena. X-Ray absorption spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy will be
used to determine the structure of surface complexes as a function of solids
concentration in batch and recirculating batch reactors. The proposal leading to
this award was submitted in response to NSF 88-99 as modified by changes dated
09/19/91 to make the Research Initiation Award announcement consistent with
changes in NSF 83-57 and published as NSF 90-77. Many environmental problems
associated with energy and raw material production require reliable quantitative
prediction of the transport and dispersion of contaminants in surface and
groundwater systems. Reaction of contaminant solutes with mineral surfaces in
soils, sediments, and rocks typically causes a portion of each solute to
partition onto the solids. This sorption decreases solute mobility, which must
be accounted for in transport models. Results of this research are expected to
be used to formulate surface complexation reactions and the resulting model will
be used to simulate the sorption behavior of metal ions in column reactors used
in design of environmental pollution abatement processes and systems.