* 9210268
* Cellular Mechanisms of Nociceptive Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1996
* Edgar Walters, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Raymon Glantz
* 09/30/1996
* USD 222,852.00

This project by Dr. Walters will compare cellular mechanisms within the same
neurons contributing to 3 classes of long-lasting alteration. These alterations,
which have generally been considered separately in different biological
preparations by different laboratories are: 1) adaptive responses following
injury of a neuron's axon, 2) hyperexcitability of nociceptive neurons
(functionally equivalent to neurons in mammalian pain pathways) during
persistent nociceptive sensitization ("hyperalgesia"), and 3) aversive learning
and memory. Dr. Walters will be using electrophysiological, pharmacological, and
morphological methods, to characterize functionally identified neurons in an
invertebrate preparation to address the following questions: First, does axonal
injury induce long-term changes in excitability, synaptic transmission, and
morphology in functionally diverse neurons? Second, how do alterations induced
by axonal injury compare to activity-dependent alterations that have previously
been linked to learning and memory. In addition, how do injury-related and
learning-related effects interact? Third, is long-term plasticity induced by
axonal injury initially triggered by the interruption of retrograde axonal
transport of trophic factors, or do the axonal triggers involve elevation within
the axon of known signals for neuronal plasticity such as the second messengers
calcium and cAMP? Fourth, do cAMP and calcium in or near the cell body of the
neuron contribute to the triggering of long-term plasticity during both learning
and cellular reactions to axonal injury? These investigations may reveal basic
mechanisms of plasticity that appeared early in evolution and which may be
involved in memory, regeneration, and chronic pain-like states.***//