* 9210100
* RIA: Innovative Design and Analysis of Blind Adaptive       Equalization Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1996
* Zhi Ding, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 11/30/1996
* USD 89,986.00

Blind adaptive equalizers are important elements in high data rate digital
communication systems to remove linear distortions incurred by nonideal and
bandlimited channels. By removing linear channel distortions without the aid of
a training sequence, blind equalization makes it unnecessary for the transmitter
to interrupt the normal data transmission in order to generate a training signal
for the sake of a newly tuned receiver. Despite the plethora of existing blind
equalization schemes, few exhibit the desired global convergence property. Many
existing blind equalizers are prone to undesirable local convergence
corresponding to little or no intersymbol interference removal, as shown in the
previous works by the principal investigator and others. In addition, the
convergence rates of many of the existing algorithms are very slow. A principal
objective of this research is to improve the performance of blind equalization
systems by designing new and better blind equalization algorithms. Various
linear and nonlinear constraints will be utilized in developing, analyzing and
testing fast and globally convergent equalization algorithms. The
cyclostationary nature of the PAM/QAM modulated channel output will be exploited
to generate innovative designs of blind equalizers. In addition, various
stochastic dynamic systems analysis tools (such as probability and stochastic
processes, spectral analysis, averaging and stability theory) will continue to
be exploited in this study, as it has been in many previous adaptive system
studies. However, unlike most of the previous studies, cyclostationary signal
analysis will also be utilized in the design of blind equalizers based on the
cyclostationarity of the channel output. The proposed research is aimed at
expanding the utility of the concept of blind adaptive equalization and
applications of broadcast digital communication systems, and is expected to have
significant direct and indirect impact on the application of adaptive systems in
areas such as adaptive system control, robotics, array processing, mechanical
and aerospace engineering, and geophysical signal processing.