* 9210894
* RIA: Degradation and Buckling of Thin-Walled Elastic-PlasticStructural Members Under Cyclic Bending
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Edmundo Corona, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/1996
* USD 95,495.00

The objective of this project is to study the degradation and buckling of metal
beams subjected to cyclic bending into the plastic range of the material. The
cross-sectional shapes which will be considered are: tubular (square and
circular), I, wide- flange and T. Previous work on cyclic bending of circular
tubes has indicated that the interaction of material and geometric
nonlinearities causes accumulation of deformation in the beam cross-section.
This leads to degradation of the structural response. Persistent cycling results
in buckling and catastrophic collapse of the structure. Evidence exists that
similar degradation and failure can occur in the other geometries mentioned. The
problems will be studied through a combination of experiment and analysis. The
cyclic bending experiments will be conducted in a special purpose bending
apparatus. In these experiments the curvature, bending moment and deformation of
the cross-section will be monitored. The analysis will be conducted using
special purpose numerical tools which include appropriate nonlinear kinematics
and state-of-the-art cyclic plasticity models. The models which yield good
predictions in the cases studied will be identified and used to help establish
the cyclic degradation and the onset of failure of the structures.