* 9210169
* Collaborative Research on Campaign Finance
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Paul Herrnson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 12/31/1993
* USD 30,996.00

Political parties, political action committees, and individuals who make large
contributions comprise the most important sources of money in congressional
election campaigns. These actors have improved their institutional resources and
increased their campaign activities since the passage of the Federal Election
Campaign Act of 1971 and its amendments. Nevertheless, political scientists know
relatively little about how the development of these actors has influenced their
contribution stragegies in elections for the U.S. House of Representatives and
the U.S. Senate. One school of thought holds that those who invest large sums of
money in federal elections adapt gradually to their environment and are
therefore slow to change their contribution strategies. This body of theory
would predict that PACs, parties and individuals would have difficulty departing
from established patterns of behavior, even under radically different
circumstances. A second school of thought maintains that campaign contributors
are strategic actors who constantly survey the political environment in order to
take advantage of opportunities created by political change. This theory would
predict that parties, PACs, and individuals would rapidly adjust their
contribution behavior in response to an altered political environment. The 1992
election cycle promises to be radically different from those held during the
last 12 years because of a confluence of factors, including redistricting, a
large number of congressional retirements, a presidential election, and
political scandals. These factors will lead to an election cycle characterized
by many highly qualified candidates competing for a limited reservoir of money.
The unusual qualities of the 1992 elections provide the research team with a
unique opportunity to assess the two schools of thought. This investigation will
examine changes in patterns of party, PAC, and individual contributions to
incumbents, challengers, open-seat contestants, Democrats, and Republicans over
the course of the 1978 through 1992 election cycles. It will assess the impact
of national political conditions, such as the state of the economy, the
popularity of the president, and political scandals, on the strategies of these
contributors. It will evaluate how organizational development and learning have
affected their campaign decision making. It will also evaluate the impact that
Washington-based organizations, such as national party committees and lead PACs,
have on the contributions of individuals and other organized contributors. The
project will culminate in a unique and comprehensive set of campaign finance
data. It will lead to the development of several generalizations about the
organizational evolution of political parties and PACs. It will also enhance our
understanding of how these organizations and individuals interact in the context
of congressional election campaigns.