* 9210726
* Robustness Quantification and Performance Improvement in    Adaptive Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Aniruddha Datta, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1996
* USD 89,999.00

The aim of the research outlined in this proposal is two-fold. First, we intend
to develop a systematic quantitative theory for the design and analysis of
robust adaptive control schemes. The second objective is to develop a
methodology for studying and improving the transient performance of adaptive
control schemes, as also alleviating erratic steady state behaviour such as
bursting. The objectives mentioned above relate to two of the outstanding
problems in the area of adaptive control. None of the existing theory (Lyapunov
approach, persistence of excitation, etc.) can solve these problems in a
practical or satisfactory manner. The lack of such results is a major stumbling
block that engineers invariably encounter in attempting to put the results of
adaptive control theory to practice. The methods we plan to use are based on
recently obtained breakthroughs in robust parametric stability (Kharitonov's
Theorem and its extensions, calculation of parametric stability margins,
connections between parametric and unstructured (Hoo) perturbations) and
parameter- error compensation methods. We are motivated by the possibility of
exploiting these recent results in robust parametric (nonadaptive) stability and
control to obtain non-conservative (practically useful) stability margins for
adaptive systems, and to develop effective design schemes for robust adaptive
control. Though the robust adaptive control problem is much more difficult than
the corresponding nonadaptive one, the payoff is that the results obtained are
likely to be more useful.