* 9210626
* Traffic Control Algorithms for Integrated-Services          Packet-Switched Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Jon Peha, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 01/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

In this research, we explore traffic control algorithms for integrated-
services networks. which are networks that carry diverse traffic types such as
computer data, voice, video, text, and images. ln such a network performance
objectives and packet arrival processes vary tremendously from one data stream
to another. Either networks must be designed with so much capacity that every
conceivable set of performance objectives will be met, or algorithms are needed
that differentiate packets and packet streams based on these characteristics and
adjust delay distributions, loss probabilities, and blocking probabilities
accordingly. We plan to develop an integrated set of traffic control algorithms
based in part on a novel mechanism called the priority token bank. An admission
control algorithm admits or blocks entire packet streams, where admitting a
packet stream means guaranteeing its performance objectives will be met. In each
queue, a scheduling algorithm orders the transmission of queued packets and a
dropping algorithm selects packets to be discarded when buffer overflow occurs.
Both algorithms effectively adjust delay distributions and loss probabilities to
optimize performance at a given load as perceived by the applications, or,
equivalently, to achieve a given level of performance at a higher load. We also
explore usage-based charges for network services based on the packet arrival
processes of admitted packet streams and on the corresponding performance
achieved (and possibly guaranteed). These charges reflect the extent to which
network resources are consumed. Policing and monitoring are also addressed.
Algorithms are evaluated through analysis and extensive simulation by comparing
delays, loss probabilities, blocking probabilities, and other relevant metrics,
with those achieved with known algorithms.