* 9210723
* Research Initiation:  Capacity Expansion and Replacement in an Uncertain Dynamic Technological Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Medini Singh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 12/31/1995
* USD 89,848.00

The objective of this research is to develop models which consider the
possibility of future innovations while taking acquisition and replacement
decisions. In particular, the research focuses on a capacity expansion and
replacement model wherein a sequence of technological breakthroughs are
anticipated but their magnitude and timing are uncertain. A firm, operating in
such an environment, must decide how much capacity of the current best available
technology to acquire to meet the future demand growth. It must also determine
whether to replace any of the older vintages partially or completely, with the
focus on obsolescence rather than deterioration as the motive for replacement.
Such decisions are of the essence in electronics and other industries
characterized by rapid technological change. This research also considers the
interaction between product life cycles and manufacturing flexibility in a
rapidly changing market. This work is motivated by the economic analysis of
investment decisions in flexible assembly lines for automobile assembly. The
advent of future generations of products lead to obsolescence of dedicate
transfer lines. Flexible lines, on the other hand, can process successive
generations of product. The high investment required in flexible assembly line
is weighed against the reduced obsolescence of such lines.