* 9210635
* Collaborative Research:  Role of Atmospheric Nitrogen       Deposition in Estuarine and Coastal Production and Food     Chain Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Marilyn Fogel, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John R. Gold
* 08/31/1996
* USD 240,107.00

Atmospheric deposition, as rainfall and dryfall, is an increasingly important
source of biologically-utilizable nitrogen in estuarine and coastal regions:
about 30% of their combined nitrogen loading comes from atmospheric sources.
Nitrogen from atmospheric deposition may be a unique source of nitrogen in
coastal waters, as direct surface water deposition may occur downstream of
estuarine nutrient stripping zones that assimilate the majority of terrigenous
nitrogen loading. Moreover, analyses of rainwater reveals that dissolved organic
matter can be a significant fraction of the total dissolved nitrogen in
precipitation from both continental and oceanic origins. This nitrogen from
rainfall has been shown to stimulate primary production in coastal waters
adjacent to North Carolina. Impacts of atmospheric nitrogen deposition will be
elucidated by assessing algal primary production and trophic responses with
complementary bioassays and stable isotope tracers measurements at the natural
abundance level. The three sources of nitrogen in rainwater (nitrate, ammonium,
and dissolved organic nitrogen) will be followed into primary producers with
stable isotopes, while species composition and photosynthetic rates are
monitored. The transfer of primary products from algae to both microbial and
zooplankton populations will be assayed to investigate the response of grazing
and the microbial loop to increased productivity. A quantitative model and
budget of nitrogen entering the area from atmospheric deposition will be the
final result of the study. Results may be useful to global modelers attempting
to assess the importance of atmospheric deposition on climate and species
diversity.