* 9210839
* Research Initiation:  Dynamic Analysis of Mechanical        Assemblies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Frank Liou, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/29/1996
* USD 90,000.00

Computer simulation of the kinematic and dynamic behavior of mechanical
assemblies has become a very important tool in design and manufacturing. The
designer can foresee how a product is going to perform before the product is
actually fabricated. The most current simulation modules are based on analysis
from other kinematic or dynamic modules by specifying conditions between
components and then displaying the motions on a screen. This computer simulation
actually performs similarly to a movie and can only provide visual checking. The
drawback of this simulation approach is that designers are forced to use the
available joint models and may lose their creativity. In this project, a
prototype feature-based modeling system will be developed with which a designer
can interactively create an assembly of mechanical components ready for dynamic
analysis. Contact points between parts will be modeled as temporary joints in
which reaction forces will be used to determine the status of the contact
points. Experimental analysis will also be conducted to enhance and verify the
analytical result. This project can provide a state-of-the-art technology for
real simulation of general mechanical systems and act as a cost-effective test
bed for concepts, final design and control algorithms.