* 9210278
* Market Structure and Aggregate Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1996
* Michael Woodford, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1996
* USD 170,411.00

This study takes the premise that imperfectly competitive product markets and
variations in the degree of market power possessed by firms play important roles
in how a variety of aggregate shocks affect employment and economic activity.
This study intends to examine various models of imperfect competition in which
the equilibrium markup changes in response to aggregate shocks. Particular
attention will be given to developing a theoretically rigorous and empirically
tested quantitative model of the effects on U.S. output and employment of energy
price changes. The empirical success of the various theories will be tested in
two ways. First, the effects of certain shocks (such as changes in world oil
prices) upon the U.S. economy will be estimated using a relatively atheoretical
econometric specification. These estimated impulse responses will then be
compared to the quantitative predictions of "calibrated" versions of the
theoretical models. Second, certain structural equations of the models
(especially those linking average mark-ups to other macroeconomic variables)
will be estimated econometrically, and the coefficient restrictions implied by
the various theories formally will be tested. This project is meritorious
because it deals with substantive economic matters - the influence of market
structure on aggregate fluctuations. It will also serve to close current
methodological gaps between alternative schools of macroeconomic thought.
Finally, the study of the consequences of oil price shocks is in itself a very
important and noteworthy activity.