* 9210260
* Software Systems for Irregular Application on Scalable      Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Katherine Yelick, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 08/31/1996
* USD 87,200.00

This project will implement systems software to support irregular parallel
programs on scalable multiprocessors. Machines with physically distributed
memory offer the best opportunity for scalable performance, but current
programming techniques for these machines are cumbersome and often inefficient.
This is particularly true for applications with irregular data structures or
irregular patterns of communication and control. Two issues of primary concern
are data layout and scheduling. Data layout is critical to avoiding
communication overhead, but good layout strategies are difficult to determine
during compilation because they depend on global properties of the program and
on input data. Similarly, scheduling for irregular problems must adapt to
varying loads during program execution. For both problems, there is a trade-off
between the inflexibility of decisions made during compilation and the overhead
of decisions made at runtime. High level language mechanisms to allow the
programmer to specify data layout and scheduling strategies, and implement them
using a combination of compiler and runtime support will be developed. The
emphasis will be on irregular applications: the layouts, for example, will
describe the placement of subgraphs of a logically global graph, and the
scheduling primitives will allow for both control and data parallelism.
Throughout the project's duration applications to motivate and test the systems
work will be developed.