* 9210406
* Synthesis, Structure and Reactivity of Metal Complexes With Sterically Demanding Chalcogenolate Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* John Arnold, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 07/31/1995
* USD 226,600.00

This project, funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organo-metallic
Chemistry Program, involves the study of tellurolate and selenolate ligands with
both main group and transition metal centers. The focus is on ligands that
contain bulky alkyl, silyl or aryl substituents such that monomeric complexes
are formed. Studies of the reactivity of these complexes will include
chalcogenide displacement/substitution, insertions into the M-ER (E = Te, Se)
bond, reactions of the E center, and cleavage of the E-R bond. The long term
objective of the research is to put this chemistry on the same basis as the much
studied alkoxide and sulfide congeners. The potential for use of the molecular
chalcogenide compounds as precursors for solid-state, materials will be examined
as part of the project. %%% This project involves the study of the fundamental
chemistry of selenium and tellurium. Unlike the lighter elements in this family
(the chalcogenides), relatively little attention has been given to the molecular
chemistry of these elements, primarily because of the difficulty of working with
them. This is in spite of the fact that they are constituents of technologically
important devices such as infrared detectors rechargeable batteries,
photothermic imaging materials and photovoltaic solar cells to name a few.
Professor Arnold, an excellent synthetic inorganic chemist, has laid the
groundwork that could lead to some exciting advances in the chemistry of these
elements and potentially to advances in technology arenas as well.