* 9210099
* Collaborative Research on Welfare and Inefficiency Under    Directly Unproductive Activities
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Constantinos Syropoulos, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1995
* USD 31,178.00

There are numerous economic environments where agents use some of their
resources for directly unproductive purposes. Rent- seeking, influence
activities in organizations as well as expenditures on armaments are some
activities which can be classified in this category. Although undertaking such
activities is an individually rational enterprise, the social outcome is
typically inefficient. The purpose of this research is to analyze a series of
topics using models where agents allocate their resource endowments between
productive inputs and directly unproductive activities. Total output depends on
the productive inputs and it is distributed among the agents according to their
relative contributions in the directly unproductive activity. This distribution
mechanism sharply contrasts with the competitive mechanism in at least one
respect: Agent-specific productivity improvements are disadvantageous to the
agent who undertakes them. Related topics examined in this setting include the
determinants of the individual welfare of agents; the primary reasons for
inefficiency and incentives for the adoption of alternative allocation
mechanisms; individual behavior within groups; and dynamic efficiency and
distributional effects. The research is of descriptive as well as of normative
significance for variety of institutional environments where the primary means
of distribution are directly unproductive activities.