* 9210970
* Research Initiation:  Closed-loop Shape Control During Hot  Isostatic Pressing Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Weiping Li, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/1994
* USD 25,664.00

An important problem with the hot isostatic pressing (HIP) process is the
occurrence of shape distortion, which greatly limits the potential of HIP as a
net or near net shape processing technology. The basic objective of the research
is to explore the use of feedback control principles for reducing the
unpredictable shape distortion due to model inaccuracy and process disturbance.
The feedback compensation is achieved by adjusting the HIP temperature and
pressure in real time based on the densification information provided by the in-
situ eddy current sensors. Due to the multi-input multi-output, nonlinear and
uncertain nature of the HIP process dynamics, a modified version of the model
predictive control method will be used to design the computer control system. A
state estimator will be constructed to estimate the densification status from
the impedance values provided by the eddy current sensors. The research results
from this project will not only lead to closed-loop computer control systems for
improving HIP quality and productivity, but may also be useful for the
development of real-time feedback control systems for other material processing
systems. If successful, the research will allow the production of part from
powdered metal with a high degree of consistency and shape accuracy, reducing
scrap.