* 9210800
* Generalizations of Condorcet's Jury Theorem
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Krishna Ladha, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 12/31/1993
* USD 24,997.00

Societies and organizations spend considerable resources in search of the truth
or to identify the true state of the world. For example, it must be decided
whether a defendant is guilty, an economy is in recession or a given parcel of
land bears oil. Usually, the decision is made in a state of relative ignorance
because no one knows the truth. The question then arises: By what rule should
the society decide? In particular, is the society more likely to succeed by
delegating the task of discovery to one of its members or to a jury (committee)
which follows majority-rule voting? If the latter, who should be on the jury?
When the number of alternatives is two, Condorcet's jury theorem (CJT) states
that under certain conditions a majority of jurors would do better than any one
individual. Unfortunately, these conditions are difficult to satisfy: CJT
assumes that jurors (i) share a common goal, and (ii) vote independently. In
reality, assumption (i) may not be met, and assumption (ii) is seldom met. This
research investigation seeks to advance Condorcet's jury theorem in various
directions. It synthesizes the preceding work on CJT by permitting
simultaneously both conflict of interest and correlated votes. It studies choice
situations where the alternatives are not fixed but arise from interactions
among the voters. In particular, the research seeks to specify conditions under
which a relatively uninformed electorate attains the outcome it would choose
with full information.