* 9210351
* Derivation of DNA Probes for Analysis of the Junction of theMouse RB (6.16)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Patricia DeLeon, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

This proposal is to study genetic factors that affect sperm function in
fertilization. Previous work by the P.I. has identified a factor near the
centromere of mouse chromosome 6 which plays a role in sperm maturation and
function; this area was identified using Robertsonian translocations involving
the Rb (6.16) junction. The current work will involve analysis of regions
surrounding this junction to identify sequences involved in delay in sperm
viability. DNA clones from the Rb (6.16) junction and the centromeres/telomeres
of the normal 6 and 16 chromosomes will be prepared after microdissection. The
clones will be characterized and unique sequences will be localized and
amplified. Genetic mapping of unique sequences will be done using recombinant
inbred strains and interspecies backcross. The presence or absence of telomeric
repeats in the Rb junction will be determined, to try to understand the origin
of Rb translocations. Information about the mechanism of centric fusions will
also be obtained. %%% This proposal is to study genetic factors in sperm that
are involved in fertilization. Chromosomes or chromosomal regions that play a
role in mammalian sperm function are being identified, prior to identifying
genes that influence sperm maturation and function. chromosomally different
sperm in a predictable manner. Using mice bred to carry certain chromosomal
translocations, a factor(s) near the centromere region of chromosome 6 has been
identified which affects sperm maturation and function. This area, known as an
Rb (6.16) junction, and the centromeres/telomeres of chromosomes 6 and 16, will
be microdissected and cloned. Clones will be characterized and unique sequences
will be amplified; genetic mapping of unique sequences will be done. The
presence or absence of telomeric repeats in the Rb (6.16) junction will be
assessed, to determine what is involved in the origin of Rb translocations. This
will be the first molecular analysis of the junction of an Rb transloca- tion.
This may help in the understanding of centric fusion and its role in sperm
function.