* 9210469
* RIA: The Role of Lubricant Viscosity in the Frictional      Behavior of the Magnetic Slider/Disk
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Henry Schwarcz, McMaster University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1995
* USD 159,000.00

This project will continue research on ESR dating of prehistoric archeological
and hominid sites. Energy is stored in natural materials as a result of
bombardment by natural radioactivity. The amount of stored energy increases with
time and can be used to determine the age of the material. The amount of stored
energy can be determined from the intensity of an electron spin resonance (ESR)
signal displayed by these materials. ESR dating can be applied to tooth enamel
of large mammals, and to quartz which has been heated in fires. Tooth enamel is
very commonly found in archaeological and hominid sites, and can be dated by ESR
over a time range from a few thousand to over three million years with a
precision of + 5 to 10%. Burnt flint and quartz are also common in
archaeological sites. ESR dating has been successfully applied to prehistoric
sites in Europe, Africa and Asia, and has contributed to a revolutionary new
view of the emergence of Modern Man. This project will continue research on
methods of ESR analysis and application of the methods to sites now being
studied by U.S. archaeologists and anthropologists. The laboratory at McMaster
University, Hamilton, Canada, is the only lab in North America carrying out such
analyses, which have been recognized world-wide for their importance to the
chronology of human evolution.