* 9210608
* RIA:  Analysis of Discourse Events
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* John Batali, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 60,000.00

The development of a formal model relating the syntactic, semantic, and
discourse level analyses of texts will be investigated. This model will be
organized around the notion of "discourse events" which involve the creation,
modification, or manipulation of the propositional structure contributed by
sentence constituents. Along with the development of the formal models,
computational support for the analysis to texts in terms of the model will be
implemented. With such support, a large collection of analyzed texts and
utterances will be accumulated. The model will also serve as the specification
for the design and implementation of integrated natural language understanding
programs. The primary methods to be employed will include unification based
grammar formalisms and logic programming techniques. The theoretical background
for the approach will be based on the analysis of "speech acts" by Searle, the
"projection semantics" of Halvorsen and Kaplan, and the lexical functional"
approach to grammar developed by Kaplan and Bresnan, as well as the techniques
for implementing all of these, developed by the PI. It is important to
understand the contributions that all linguist levels make to the workings of
texts. The discourse events model is meant to serve as a way to organize the
analysis of those contributions.