* 9210763
* Active Vision:  Low Resolution Cues, Eye Movements and      Visual Routines
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Michael Swain, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 08/31/1996
* USD 92,894.00

Recent research in active vision has show that creating a visual system for a
robot interacting with an unstructured, dynamic world differs vastly from
interpreting a static image. On one hand, the constraints of real-time
performance force optimizations such as a focus of attention and spatially
variant sensing. On the other hand, the availability of a large number of views,
whose acquisition is controlled by the robot, has proven to simplify problems
enormously. In addition, the processing necessary to permit intelligent behavior
has been found to be easier to achieve than the difficult goal of reconstruction
and full interpretation of a science form a single image. This research explores
two open problems suggested by ongoing research in active vision. One problem is
the study the control of a spatially variant (foveal) sensor using the low-
resolution formation available in the periphery. In particular, this research
will examine the use of color information, which has been shown to be well
preserved under low resolution. The other problem is the integration of set of
visual modules, each capable of sustaining a particular task, with a suitable
robot architecture sos that the resulting system is capable of timely, flexible
interaction with a dynamic world. //