* 9210743
* Molecular Analysis of Streptomyces Sporulation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Kathleen Kendrick, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1996
* USD 274,000.00

Streptomyces is a genus of soil bacteria that undergoes differentiation in
response to nutrient limitation. Among the bacterial genera known to
differentiate, Streptomyces stands out because differentiation of this genus is
a reproductive developmental process: one filamentous mycelial community divides
into thousands of autonomous, uninucleate spores. To understand the molecular
basis of cellular division and differentiation in a relatively simple organism,
we have isolated and characterized nonsporulation mutants of Streptomyces
griseus and have identified a gene (orf1590) involved in streptomycete
sporulation. A defect in orf5190 may result in the premature and irregular
formation of sporulation septa, pointing to spore wall biosynthesis as the
aberrant process in orf1590 mutants. Previous studies implicate transcriptional
and translational mechanisms in the regulated expression of orf1590 and the
activity of its gene product. Our overall objective is to define the function of
orf1590 in streptomycete sporulation by characterizing the product of orf1590.
We will use molecular techniques to determine the number of polypeptides encoded
by orf1590, identify proteins that accumulate subsequent to expression of
orf1590, and clone the genes encoding these sporulation-specific proteins as
well as proteins that are likely to play a major role in the formation of
sporulation septa. These experiments have also been designed to extend our
dissection of the developmental defect in nonsporulating mutants. %%% Continued
analysis of orf1590 and other Streptomyces developmental genes can be expected
to reveal a variety of intricate and novel regulatory cascades central to
cellular division and development.