* 9210275
* Behavioral and Neuroendocrine Control of Reproduction in a  Sex Reversing Frog
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Mary Mendonca, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 12/31/1993
* USD 17,410.00

This study will: 1) explore the generality of the natural sex- reversing
ability of Hyperolius viridiflavus in the field. A chromosomal analysis will
attempt to determine the frequency of sex-reversed individuals. 2) establish a
breeding colony of these frogs. 3) analyze plasma, gonad and larynx samples of
the three categories of animals (females, genetic and sex-reversed males) and
correlate circulating sec steroid levels to morphological and behavioral
changes. 4) compare volumes of hypothalamic brain nuclei of individuals in the
three categories and in females treated with testosterone and flutamide, an
anti-androgen. 5) test the effectiveness of i.) group composition, ii.)
exogenous testosterone and flutamide and iii.) gonadotropin releasing hormone
agonist and antagonist in affecting sex-reversal in females housed in different
group situations. 6) record vocalizations of genetic and sex- reversed males,
analyze the recording to determine if they differ, and if so, initiate call
playback experiments in the field to determine if females distinguish between
the two. The data obtained in this preliminary venture will provide a
springboard to many future studies ranging from the neuroendocrine to the
evolutionary in scope. This unique model system is sure to provide new insights
into mechanisms controlling sec at both the proximate and ultimate levels.