* 9210186
* Acquiring Techniques to Study Somatic Mutation in           Immunoglobulin Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Roberta Pollock, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1994
* USD 30,976.00

This proposal is to study the role of somatic mutation of immunoglobulin
variable (V) genes in development of antibody diversity. A fusion protein
containing a rearranged V gene with a stop codon 5' to the lacZ gene will be
constructed. The lacZ gene can be easily detected by fluoresence or
histochemistry. The fusion protein will be used to make transgenic mice and in
cell lines. The stop codon prevents translation of the lacZ "exon" unless a
somatic mutation occurs, causing reversion of the stop codon and expression of
lacZ. Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) will be used to isolate cells
expressing lacZ; and putative mutations will be confirmed by sequencing after
PCR. The expression and location of somatic mutation during ontogeny will be
determined by histochemistry and FACS analysis of isolated cells. This should
help determine the mechanism of somatic mutation. %%% Antibodies are proteins
which react with millions of different kinds of compounds, and among other
things are a major source of defense from disease-causing organisms. Antibodies
to each compound are not identical to those against other compounds. The
mechanism by which this specificity is obtained is still not completely
understood. A method to study the role of somatic mutation in producing antibody
diversity involves making a fusion construct which contains a piece of
rearranged V gene and the gene for a reporter protein called lacZ. The
rearranged V gene contains a "stop" signal which will prevent synthesis of the
lacZ protein. The product of the lacZ gene can be easily detected. Only if a
mutation occurs in the "stop" signal can this product form. Mice containing the
fusion construct will be used for several studies, to see where and when the
lacZ can be detected. This may help increase our understanding of antibody
diversity.