* 9210491
* Workshop on Generalized Inverses-Computational Techniques   and Applications, New Delhi, India, December 11-16, 1992,   Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1992,04/30/1994
* Surender Jain, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/1994
* USD 16,500.00

Description: This proposal seeks group travel support under the US-India
Cooperative Science Program for invited speakers from the U.S. to participate in
the workshop: "Generalized Inverses- Computational Techniques and Applications".
The workshop will be held at the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) in New
Delhi, on December 11-16, 1992 and is co- sponsored by ISI and the International
Linear Algebra Society. ISI is a major research center for Statistics,
Mathematics and Economics where pioneer work on generalized inverses was done by
C.R. Rao and S.K. Mitra The center continues to attract eminent scholars of
international reputation. The workshop will include: presentations by
outstanding scientists on contributions to date in the theory of generalized
inverses and their applications to Statistics and Electrical Engineering,
contributed papers giving the latest developments in the field of generalized
inverses by active researchers, and panel discussions to identify the directions
of future research and to list open problems. Scope: The air travel of six US
scientists will be supported by this proposal. As the bulk of research in
generalized inverses has shifted away from the US to India, Europe, Japan and
China, this workshop will be an opportunity for US scientists to share their
knowledge with the rest of the world and to take stock of the prevailing
situation and determine new research directions. The workshop will be a boost
for research in generalized inverses and their applications.