* 9210538
* Regulation of mRNA in Human Endometrial Cells (Career       Advancement Award)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Honoree Fleming, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 02/28/1994
* USD 39,960.00

An important function of estradiol (E2) is to stimulate cell proliferation and
to induce synthesis of specific proteins in target cells. Both of these effects
are believed to involve changes in the RNA transcriptional program of target
cells. Experiments are designed to detect transcriptional changes in cultured
human endometrial cells (Ishikawa cell line) in response to physiological
concentrations of E2. There are a number of human endometrial cell lines around
but few of them actually retain E2 responsiveness. The Ishikawa cell line has
been shown to retain its ability to respond: proliferation can be stimulated and
specific proteins can be induced. Changes in specific mRNA are essential to
these effects. These changes will be studied in a systematic way during the
first 24 hours following the addition of E2. If E2 effects on these cells are
comparable to those occurring in vivo it might be expected that some genes will
be induced soon after exposure, as a direct result of E2 receptor interaction
with DNA (primary response). Other gene inductions may not be detected until
many hours after E2, their induction requiring a protein induced as part of the
primary response. Such responses are sometimes characterized as secondary
responses. Experiments are suggested that may lead to detecting whether both
kinds of mRNA's are increased in response to E2 in human endometrial cells and
begin to study and compare the characteristics of these responses.