* 9210334
* The Cyclical Behavior of Inventories and Unfilled Orders
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1995
* James Kahn, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1995
* USD 104,964.00

This project carries out research on the behavior of inventories and unfilled
orders. The contributions of this research to this line of work are important
because unfilled orders play a very significant role in business cycles and in
the overall volatility of national output, yet there is relatively little
empirical research on unfilled orders and there is no adequate theoretical
explanation of the reasons why unfilled orders and inventories are positively
correlated. One would think that increases in inventories would reduce unfilled
orders, but that is not what the preliminary evidence shows. The research builds
on earlier work on the stockout-avoidance motive for inventories in two main
directions: First, it extends the stockout-avoidance model to allow for strictly
convex costs of production and inventory holding. Second, it incorporates the
joint determination of inventories and unfilled orders. This is useful not only
for those industries in which orders data are available. Many industries (most
notably the automobile industry) are known to have orders, but data on them are
not available. Consequently current sales or shipments partly reflect unmeasured
unfilled orders. The model developed will resolve this problem. The project also
explores some new evidence of increasing marginal cost and extends the stockout-
avoidance model to allow for it. Because the model is not linear-quadratic, and
it explicitly incorporates non-negativity constraints on inventories, this
extension is non-trivial and leads to the use of some numerical methods that may
themselves be of independent interest. Preliminary work focused on evidence
related to the slope of marginal cost. The extreme sensitivity of inventory
behavior in the model to small departures from zero marginal cost suggests that
marginal cost may be very close to flat.