* 9210895
* Theoretical Studies in Ecological and Population Genetics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Marjorie Asmussen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1997
* USD 200,000.00

Recent population studies show that joint nuclear-cytoplasmic surveys allow
unique inferences about many important evolutionary processes. This special
utility derives from the fact that genes in the nucleus are inherited through
both parents, while an organism's cytoplasmically-housed genes, such as those in
mitochondria and chloroplasts, are usually inherited solely through the mother.
As a result of this asymmetrical transmission, a population's joint nuclear-
cytoplasmic makeup can provide a new way for detecting zones of genetic
admixture between two populations, and for unraveling the relative amounts of
pollen and seed dispersion in plant populations. The proposed research will
develop the necessary theoretical framework for unlocking the novel information
encoded by nuclear-cytoplasmic data in these and other important evolutionary
contexts. The practical utility of these new approaches will be demonstrated by
direct applications to a variety of recent data sets. A parallel line of
research will provide a conceptual framework for understanding the fundamental
question of how and why cytoplasmic inheritance patterns evolve through time.
This seminal theoretical study is motivated by the growing number of cases in
which mitochondria and chloroplasts are inherited through the father or both
parents, instead of solely through the mother. Moreover, the pattern of
inheritance may evolve through time under the control of nuclear or cytoplasmic
genes within the parents or progeny. These exciting experimental discoveries
will form the basis of an extensive series of models designed to delimit the
conditions favoring evolution among the three cytoplasmic inheritance patterns,
and answer the critical and intriguing question of why strict maternal
transmission now seems to predominate.