* 9210429
* Public Values and the Transition to the Market Among Post-  Soviet Republics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Donna Bahry, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 08/31/1995
* USD 150,500.00

Although post-communist countries vary in their approaches to economic reform,
many share a common complaint: the opposition of sizeable groups in society to
the basic values of a market economy. Particularly in the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Baltics, pro-and anti-market leaders alike have noted
what they see as deep-seated public resistance to private property, market
prices, and substantial inequality. Cultural traditions and socialist values
appear to have reinforced a public taste for a strong but benevolent welfare
state, from early Tsarist times to the post-Soviet era. An adverse public
reaction could surely undermine the transition to a free market economy. Not
only is there a threat of outright resistance; reforms may simply be subverted
by a resentful citizenry. As some experiments with privatization elsewhere
reveal, lack of public backing can breed chronic dissatisfaction or simple
disengagement. And as the reluctance of post-Communist leaders demonstrates,
fear of adverse public reaction influences both the content and the sequencing
of reforms. The problem is all the more challenging where economic restructuring
is accompanied by political liberalization. Society is "empowered" just at the
time when many of its most cherished values, and its accustomed economic
security, are under attack by political leaders. This situation leads to
examining the extent to which there is in fact resistance to the elements of a
free market economy, such as private enterprise, deregulation, and inequality of
outcomes. The current project is designed to gauge the extent and nature of
public resistance to a market economy, and to explain its sources. It is also
designed to address several other issues, some substantive (such as the
relationship between cultural values, support for economic reform, and
democratic attitudes); and some methodological (such as the consistency and
reliability of survey data from former Soviet republics). The research explores
public attitudes toward economic reform in four republics of the former Soviet
Union. Based on a survey in Russia, Armenia, Lithuania and Estonia the
investigator examines support for, and opposition to, different elements of a
market economy, and the core values that shape public views. The research should
help to inform the debate both in the West and in the former republics over the
prospects for a post-Soviet market economy.