* 9210189
* Farming Systems and Agroclimatological Development          Planning in Tanga Region, Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Philip Porter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 02/28/1994
* USD 13,033.00

Sustainable agriculture and environmental preservation are important topics in
research on development in Third World settings at present. It is important that
this research be informed by longitudinal studies of agroclimatological change
which document change, explain the processes and events leading to change, and
consider the consequences of change in the lives of people living in developing
societies. Longitudinal studies of change in agricultural regions of developing
countries are uncommon. This project offers a unique opportunity to revisit a
region in East Africa that was studied twenty years ago. The Tanga Region of
Tanzania lies along a climatic transect where rainfall distribution changes from
two seasons in the northeast to one season in the southwest. This situation
presents interesting and potentially significant questions of agricultural
potential and management. The research will analyze climatological data, crop
productivity, and agricultural risk in this area of great climatic variability
and uncertainty. A random sample of farmers will be interviewed about their
agricultural practices, management decisions, and social behavior, and these
data will be compared to those collected in the same region two decades earlier.
These data will be used to assess changes in the effects of rainfall variation,
moisture stress in crops, crop yields, and management interventions on
agricultural practices. The objective will be to enhance the ability to predict
which practices will produce different crop yields under conditions of
environmental uncertainty. This research should provide basic knowledge about
whether and how agricultural practices have changed over the twenty year
interval since the original survey. It will also improve our understanding of
the relationship between climate variation over space and time and its effect on
agricultural management practices. These insights will be helpful in formulating
agricultural policy which attempts to foster sustainable development practices
in sensitive agricultural areas of developing nations.