* 9210314
* Crime and Its Linkages to Urbanization and Industrialization
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Jack Marietta, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 01/31/1994
* USD 25,415.00

This grant provides support to study crime and its linkages to urbanization and
industrialization in early America. Specifically, the grant provides support to
collect and collate data from public records on persons accused of crimes and
their accusers or prosecutors in the justice system of Pennsylvania, 1682-1800,
specifically in Chester County and the City of Philadelphia. The data treat
their economic and vocational status as well as residence and their previous
domiciles. The analysis concentrates on a number of issues related to the
etiology of crime, particularly whether the identification of the criminal
population changes consistent with shifts in the economic and labor structure of
these locales. Also, the evolution of the criminal population in the City of
Philadelphia is traced to determine whether it fulfills postulates about the
relationship between urbanization and the proliferation of crime. This study
deals with central issues related to the etiology of crime, and the richness of
the historical data will enable scholars interested in various facets of crime
causation to advance inquiry of their own postulates about the interfaces among
crime, industrialization, and urbanization. Further, the availability of the
sentencing data will provide an opportunity to determine early penal policy in
the United States, and gain rich understanding of how the Quakers
operationalized their penal philosophy. These data and their analysis provide
historical context for advancing debates about the purpose of punishment in the
United States.