* 9210388
* Robust Stability and Stabilization of Systems with Real     Parameter Uncertainty
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Kemin Zhou, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1996
* USD 90,000.00

This proposal addresses an important problem in system and control area: the
analysis and design of control systems in the face of uncertainty. The problem
of designing a control system against uncertainties is of fundamental practical
interest and has been the main thrust for development of control theory and
technology. The proposed research on this subject includes stability analysis,
stabilization, and disturbance rejection in the presence of real, possible
nonlinear/time varying, uncertainties. Each of these problems is of independent
interest and they together follow a natural progression toward the development
of a general methodology for analysis and design of uncertain systems. The main
object under here will be an uncertain dynamical system described by a linear
fractional transformation, and the necessary tools required for this research
include advanced matrix theory, convex optimization techniques, and modern
robust control theory. The approaches and idea proposed here are believed to be
unique and original. In particular, the proposed approaches for the
stabilization of systems with structured nonlinear/time varying uncertainty
using the combination of convex optimization and advanced separation principle,
and using the parameter dependent gain scheduled controller, appear very
promising, and are expected to lead to valuable applications in practical design
of highly complex uncertain systems.