* 9210789
* Publication of Proceedings of Symposium on Syntactic Theory and First Language Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1994
* Barbara Lust, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 03/31/1994
* USD 20,082.00

ABSTRACT A symposium will bring together theorists in formal linguistics,
researchers on the empirical phenomena of language acquisition and groups
concerned with the computational problems of language acquisition. Several key
topics that exemplify some of the most exciting current interactions between
linguistics, psychology and computer science will be explored by leading
researchers and theoreticians at all levels of career development. These topics
include: knowledge of principles and parameters of phrase structure and
configuration, knowledge of principles and parameters concerning types of
anaphora, and formal and empirical approaches to learnability. In addition to
helping promote advances in one of the most successful areas of cognitive
science, this symposium also seeks to explore the nature of that success and its
broader implications for cognitive science as a whole. The field of language
acquisition research has begun to adopt a number of common assumptions that form
a core set of methodological and explanatory guidelines that have proved to be
extraordinarily successful as a research strategy across several disciplines.
Since these general guidelines do not seem to be obviously dependent on unique
properties of language, it is natural to ask how well they might work in other
content domains. To that end the beginning session of the symposium will propose
an initial characterization of those guidelines to be evaluated in terms of the
specific research presentations that follow. The final session of the symposium
will then revise those guidelines and then have leading researchers from
different disciplines discuss possible extensions of the revised guidelines to
other domains of cognition.