* 9210392
* Protein-Protein Interaction Involving The Cellular CREB     and Viral px Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Ourania Andrisani, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 18,000.00

This proposal is to study the interaction of a cellular trans- cription factor,
the protein CREB, and the hepatitis B transacti- vating factor, the protein px.
Cellular genes are transcribed when transcription activators react with specific
DNA sequences. When viruses infect cells, immediate early viral genes are
transcribed in order to obtain expression of other virus-encoded genes. CREB is
a leucine zipper protein, which also contains a specific DNA- binding region, px
is unable to bind DNA, but the px-CREB protein- protein complex is able to bind
to a variant CRE-like site present in the viral genome. The interactions between
CREB and px will be studied using CREB site-directed mutants expressed in and
purified from bacterial systems, and CREB-specific polyclonal antibodies. The
mechanism of recognition of the variant CRE-like site will also be determined.
%%% In order to have transcription of cellular DNA, proteins called
transcription factors bind to sequence-specific portions of DNA; one such
protein is called CREB. When viruses infect cells, some of their genes are
transcribed; one protein product is called px. When these two proteins interact,
the complex can interact with a viral DNA binding site very similar to the
cellular DNA binding site, that the two proteins separately cannot interact
with. This allows synthesis of further viral proteins. This proposal is to
examine the factors that allow the two proteins to interact, using mutant CREB
proteins and antibodies to CREB. The mechanism of recognition of the viral DNA
binding site by the protein complex will also be determined.