* 9210605
* RIA:  Time-Domain Permutation Networks for High Performance Computing and Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Kyungsook Lee, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 11/30/1995
* USD 89,825.00

Time-Division Multiplexing is a technique for sharing multi- terahertz
bandwidths of optics among multiple users connected to a common channel of a
communication network, or among multiple processors in a time-multiplexed
optical multiprocessor. Communication among such users or processors requires
time-domain permutation via a time-slot permuter. The project is to design a
wide array of time-slot permuters with different hardware and control
complexities for different applications. The approach is to apply the rich
knowledge in spatial interconnection networks to the permutation networks in the
time-domain. We have formulated a general method for a mapping from the space-
domain to the time-domain, and have demonstrated how the method can be used to
design new time-slot permuters. The new designs will be verified with the
simulator HATCH developed for the logic level verification of optical systems at
the NSF Engineering Center for Optoelectronic Systems at the University of
Colorado at Boulder. Time-slot permuters have very important applications in
time- multiplexed communication networks, and in pipelined processor
architectures where rearrangement of pipeline slots is required as in a time-
multiplexed optical multiprocessor. The proposed research will enhance the
knowledge base in the relations between permutation networks in space-domain and
permutation networks in time-domain, as well as in tradeoffs between switching
and control complexity in different permutation architectures. Such a knowledge
base is critical for advancing the dissemination of optical technologies in high
performance computing and communication.