* 9210141
* Characterization of Myosin in the Vertebrate Retina
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Jennifer Breckler, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal is to study the content and isoforms of myosin in the retina of
green sunfish and zebrafish. These teleost fish contain three well-defined types
of cells: rods, cones, and RPEs (retinal pigmented epithelial cells). All three
cell types show well-defined changes in response to light, darkness, and certain
chemicals. These shape changes occur both in the intact retina and in isolated
cells, and are known as retinomotor movements. Some of the motility changes have
been shown to be actin-dependent, so it is likely that myosin is also involved.
Myosin K/EDTA ATPase activity will be measured by standard techniques. Myosin
will be immunolocalized using monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies against three
types of non-muscle myosin, and monoclonal antibodies against retinal myosin
will also be prepared. Myosin isoform synthesis and deposition will be
determined in the developing retina; because of the way the retina develops, the
age and state of morphogenesis of the various cell types can be easily
determined. %%% Fish retinas change more in response to light, darkness, and
other stimuli than mammalian retinas do. They provide a convenient system for
studying the possible role of myosin in the changes in cell shape. Actin has
already been identified in fish retinal cells. In non-muscle tissues, at least
three types of myosin have been identified, which have markedly different
properties. Antibodies to these isoforms have been prepared. They will be used
to determine which form of myosin is present in each cell type, and where it is
localized. If retinal myosin is different from the known types, monoclonal
antibodies will be prepared against it. Since the location of cells is well-
characterized during retinal development, the antibodies will be used to see
whether isoforms change during this time. Since myosin-based cell motility is
important for many life processes, it is likely that the results will apply to
other systems as well.