* 9210200
* Specification and Update Semantics of Views for CAD         Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1996
* Karen Davis, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Y. T. Chien
* 07/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

This research addresses computer-aided design (CAD) data modeling and view
construction, as well as updating both materialized views and the underlying
database in support of design activities. Database support provides a means to
share data between CAD tools and multiple designers; however, only a small
portion of the contents of a database may be germane to a particular design
application. A copy of the relevant data (a materialized view) may be stored and
modified locally during a design step. Maintaining consistency between a
database and views of it entails ensuring that changes to the database are
reflected in the view data, and vice versa. Database view technology to
efficiently and correctly support extraction and manipulation of relevant views
of design objects will be developed, including a formal CAD data model and an
extended object-oriented query algebra for view specification. Algorithms for
view maintenance will be derived from the formal semantics. Database support for
CAD offers opportunities for concurrent design by simplifying the maintenance
and sharing of technology-related data. View processing provides a conceptual
framework for unifying a CAD software environment; both the input and output of
a tool are views of a design. This research seeks to facilitate interoperability
of tools and cooperation between designers via CAD database view technology.