* 9210082
* Studies of Nuclear Reactions and Structure
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/1992,10/31/1996
* Kirby Kemper, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Steadman
* 10/31/1996
* USD 4,613,758.00

The Florida State University Nuclear Research Laboratory will operate a tandem
van de Graaff accelerator and superconducting linac booster accelerator for low
energy nuclear structure studies. The structure of nuclei at high spin will be
studied with a new array of Compton-suppressed gamma ray detectors to explore
the relation between single- particle and collective degrees of freedom,
including superdeformation. Spin dependent effects in reactions will be studied
using polarized ions made possible by a laser-pumped ion source. High spin and
high excitation energy states will be studied via resonant particle decay
spectroscopy. Collective octupole states and nuclei with permanent octupole
deformation will be studied in the medium to heavy nuclei region. Appropriate
instrumentation will be developed for this work, including a superconducting
conversion electron spectrometer. The effects of incomplete fusion on heavy ion
induced fission reactions will also be studied using a Bragg curve spectrometer
to identify charge states. Planning will occur for a radioactive beam
capability. Some low energy studies using specialized national facilities will
also continue: at Argonne's APEX detector and at the GAMMASPHERE facility at
Berkeley. High energy nuclear research will continue at a number of other labs
including CEBAF and RHIC.