* 9210543
* CAA: Molecular Systematics of the Lythraceae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Shirley Graham, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 44,000.00

The Lythraceae is a plant family best known for the popular cultivated crape
myrtles, the pomegranate, and the purple loosestrifes. They are serious invaders
of North American wetlands. Other important genera are Henna, from which henna
dye is obtained; heimia, an hallucenogenic plant used by the Aztecs; and cuphea,
a promising new industrial crop being developed for its specialized seed oils.
The family is primarily tropical and, although its evolutionary history is
unclear, it is considered one of the oldest members of the large order Myrtales.
The natural relationships of the 31 genera are not easily determined, but
computerized phylogenetic analysis of the floral, wood, and vegetative
characters have produced hypotheses suggesting where the family originated, what
major divergent lines have evolved, and how the modern genera are related. The
hypotheses are not strongly supported by morphological characters, probably
because of substantial loss of intervening taxa through time. Taxonomic
classification of the family is also inadequate and needs to be revised based on
phylogenetic information. Molecular data offer powerful new sets of characters
for estimating phylogeny of the family. The research proposed will obtain DNA
sequence data from the nuclear and chloroplast genomes in 28 genera, construct
phylogenies based on actual evolutionary changes at the molecular level, and
combine molecular and morphological information to produce a better
understanding of the history and biodiversity of this important plant family.
The Molecular Systematics Lab at the Smithsonian Institution is an ideal
facility for the molecular studies. Modern characterization of the family will
contribute to active basic botanical research aimed at establishing the overall
history of the flowering plants, and to a myriad of applied research problems,
including protection of wildfowl habitats from invasion by loosestrife,
production of specialized seed oils for industrial and medicinal use, and
investigation of lythraceous alkaloids for new drugs.