* 9210551
* RIA: Effective Media Characterization and Optimization of   Optically-Active Composite Materials: Applications from     Microwave to Optical Frequencies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Keith Whites, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 02/29/1996
* USD 107,450.00

Recently, industrial and academic researchers have developed a keen interest in
complex composite materials since they can exhibit unusual and, when properly
designed, beneficial electromagnetic properties. An example of this is a chiral,
or optically active, material which macroscopically is a large collection of
tiny, handed inclusions randomly embedded in a host medium. The objective of
this research project is the development of a deterministic capability for
macroscopically characterizing both naturally-occurring and artificially-created
chiral materials. This capability is crucial in the design of these materials to
optimize their beneficial electromagnetic characteristics. This Research
Initiative Award project will address this issue through a comprehensive program
of research which will combine computational methods with analytical models and
techniques to ascertain the effective constitutive parameters. The time-
consuming and computationally intensive numerical simulations will be assisted
by the use of both equivalent boundary condition models and the implementation
of parallel computational algorithms in order to produce results which are both
meaningful and temporally tractable. Once the effective descriptors are known
they will be applied to a wide range of problems such as optical fibers, devices
and waveguides in the optical frequency bands and absorbers and micropatch
antenna substrates at microwave frequencies. Finally, experimental measurements
will be performed to both validate these methods and results, and to evaluate
the accuracy of the macroscopic models.