* 9210398
* Economic Models of Strategic Information Technology         Investments
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Anitash Barua, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Les Gasser
* 11/30/1995
* USD 66,250.00

Information Technology (IT) is considered as a strategic weapon that can be
used to secure competitive advantage. Most of the relevant studies in this
domain seek to make the case through the development of conceptual frame works,
and ex post examples of successful deployment of strategic IT. Empirical
evidence, however, suggest that many strategic IT investments became unfortunate
strategic necessities rather than means of gaining competitive advantage. Thus,
many questions regarding the economics of strategic IT remain unanswered. The
research analyzes IT investments under various competitive situations through
the development of formal economic models. The research consists of three
studies in distinct but related areas within strategic IT. The first study
involves IT related quality competition in a setting where two firms have the
opportunity to improve the quality of their services through IT investment. The
research analyzes the division of technology related benefits between the firms
and the consumers, and the impacts of technological improvements on investment
levels. The second study focuses on competition through IT innovation. It
analyzes the IT investment incentives of a market leader and a challenger, and
characterizes situations in which there may be a reversal of such incentives.
Adoption of interorganizational systems is the topic of the third study. In
particular, the optimal adoption times of an Electronic Data Interchange network
by supplier firms are studied. The research is based on the Industrial
Organization (IO) approach with both theoretical and empirical components. Game
theory is used as a primary theoretical research tool. The studies enhance the
understanding of many economic aspects of IT investments in competitive
environments.