* 9210051
* Within-Colony Kin Discrimination in a Social Insect
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Joan Strassmann, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 178,500.00

From the time of Darwin on, the social insects have posed one of the great
puzzles of evolutionary biology. Their worker castes are the prime example of
reproductive altruism in the natural world, yet the process of natural selection
is expected, for the most part, to lead to reproductive selfishness. How can
evolution lead to giving up reproduction? The answer for social insects (and
perhaps also to some extent for humans) turns out to be kinship. Colonies of
social insects are groups of kin. Workers don't reproduce, but they help
relatives to reproduce and this permits selection for genes for working
behavior. However, we still don't understand what kind of balance is struck
between the interests of the individual and the interests of the group as a
whole. The same evolutionary kinship theory that explains how cooperation can
evolve also predicts that there may be conflict within colonies. This is
particularly true if individuals can distinguish and aid their closest relatives
in their colony, but it is not known whether they do this. Drs. Strassmann and
Queller will use DNA technology to answer this question. They will use a class
of genes called microsatellite genes. Because these genes are both numerous and
highly variable, they can be used to make the necessary fine-level estimates of
relatedness. Thus, Drs. Strassmann and Queller will determine to what extent
social insect colonies really are completely cooperative entities, or if they
are in part cryptically contentious assemblies of individuals, each pursuing its
own aims. This will greatly increase understanding of the extent and nature of
altruism in the natural world. This project will contribute to the new
technology surrounding microsatellite genes, which is important in many areas,
including all kinds of evolutionary studies, conservation genetics, forensics,
and gene-mapping studies for agricultural and medical needs. Besides
contributing to the training of postdoctoral and graduate students, Drs.
Strassmann and Queller encourage participation of undergraduates, high school
students, and teachers who take the knowledge they gain back to the classroom.