* 9210122
* Isolation and Characterization of a Calcium-dependent       Hyaluronanbinding Protein in Rat Liver Sinusoidal           Endothelial Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Paul Weigel, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1994
* USD 17,820.00

This proposal is for study of an extracellular, calcium- dependent receptor
which binds the glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan (HA) in liver endothelial cells. HA
is a component of extra- cellular matrix, and is involved in cell migration,
cell division, tissue organization, and development. One major and two minor
poly- peptides have been tentatively identified as the HA receptor using
modified HA which has been radioiodinated. The putative receptor will be
purified using standard biochemical techniques, the oligo- saccharide
specificity will be determined, and polyclonal or mono- clonal antibodies will
be produced. The antibodies will then be used to localize the receptor in
various cell types. Properties of this receptor will also be compared to the
calcium-independent HA receptor, which is involved in binding and endocytosis of
HA. %%% One component of the matrix surrounding cells is a polysaccharide called
hyaluronan (HA). It is involved in development, tissue organization, cell
division, and cell migration. Endothelial cells have a receptor which is
involved in removal of HA from the circulation. This proposal is to study the
properties of a second HA receptor which was recently discovered. Standard
biochemical techniques will be used to purify the protein, and antibodies will
be prepared so the location of the receptor in various cell types can be
studied. The mechanisms controlling the interaction between extracellular matrix
and endothelial cells will be examined.