* 9210928
* Policy Design and Implementation with International         Macroeconomic Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* John Taylor, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1995
* USD 187,649.00

Recent developments in the international economy have raised new questions and
possibilities about international macroeconomic policy. Many of these questions
have to do with changing or reforming the institutions of policymaking. From an
economic perspective, analysis of these questions involves specifying
alternative rules or systems for the conduct of policy-- say feedback rules for
interest rates or exchange rates--and examining how these rules work by
stochastically simulating them in a rational expectations econometric model.
From a practical or institutional perspective, they involve examining the role
and operation of the institutions of macroeconomic policy making and policy
analysis--including the international financial institutions. For example, the
trend toward regional trading areas has raised questions about coordination of
economic policy both across countries and within countries, including
macroeconomic policy, labor market policy, environmental policy, and trade
policy. Questions about the need for increased monetary integration, cooperation
in financial market regulation, exchange rate stabilization, common currency, or
the coordination of fiscal policy have been raised. This research focuses on
developing an analytical approach to these types of policy issues. The approach
builds on the principal investigator's earlier research on international
economic models. The proposal is divided into four parts. The first part
investigates the use of rational expectations econometric models for
forecasting. The second part uses full information maximum likelihood techniques
to estimate a multi-country econometric model which would be updated and
modified as part of this estimation. The third part examines the practical
significance of the Lucas critique by using stochastic simulations of a rational
expectations econometric model. The fourth part focuses on policy design and
implementation issues using the framework developed in the first three parts. A
key element in the proposed research is the examination of alternative ways to
improve the implementation of policy rules or systems that result from policy
design research.