* 9210461
* RPG:  Clay-Mineral Assemblages as Signature of Climate      Changes in Pennsylvanian-Age Rocks (USA)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Keddy Yemane, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Marvin E. Kauffman
* 12/31/1993
* USD 18,000.00

Although there is a consensus that major long-term global climate changes
occurred during the Pennsylvanian in North America, there are fundamental
disagreements in the frequency and magnitude of these inferred climate changes.
Are the disparities in the inferred records of Pennsylvanian climates
reflections of nonuniform methodologies? Or results of regional climate
fluctuations? In this proposal it is planned to readdress this issue through an
innovative approach in which the quantitative changes in the distribution of
both clay-mineral and pollen and spore assemblages will be documented on
individual rock specimens from selected continental sequences in the Appalachian
Basin. The integration of combined clay/pollen study will provide high
resolution analysis and at the same time allow the comparison of clay and pollen
curves to isolated differences that may arise from employing different
methodologies. Reconstructed climate changes will be compared against the
Pennsylvanian climate trends established by other workers. In this proposal I
will answer the following questions using microfacies studies and quantitative
variations of the clay-mineral and pollen/spore flora assemblages across
stratigraphic boundaries. 1) Are the aridities postulated for the early Middle
Pennsylvanian and Late Pennsylvanian recorded in the clay mineral assemblages?
2) Are the abrupt climate changes suggested by plant extinctions during the two
arid intervals indicated in the clay mineral assemblages? 3) Are there
similarities in the onset of aridity between the earlier and later arid
intervals? 4) Does the clay-mineral assemblages record minor climate
fluctuations not indicated in the paleoflora or in the large-scale
sedimentological features? This research will increase the understanding of
Pennsylvanian climate changes, and assess the regional applicability of this
rigorous and comprehensive approach in documenting climatic signatures from
continental deposits.