* 9210027
* Cross-National Differences in Probability Judgment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* J. Frank Yates, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/1996
* USD 206,000.00

There are large, reliable differences in probability judgments made by
individuals in Western countries like the United States and those in many Asian
countries. Most differences pertain to calibration. (Good calibration exists,
for example, if about 40% of the events that are assigned probability judgments
of 40% actually happen.) However, differences in discrimination have been
documented, too. (Discrimination is the ability of judgments to sharply
distinguish instances when a target event will occur from those when it will
not.) Several potential explanations of the observed differences will be tested
with subjects in the United States and several Asian locations. The major
research hypothesis is that the variations rest on cognitive processing habits
rooted in different cultural traditions, including ones pertaining to social
interactions. Another proposition is that the differences are an artifact of
previous researchers' sampling of judgment tasks. According to a third
explanation, the distinctions are specific to particular judgment topics and to
student subjects. A final explanation says that the differences reflect cross-
national variations in the relative importance of various aspects of judgment
quality. This research promises insights into universal judgment mechanisms as
well as ones peculiar to given cultures. It should also provide guidance about
problems in cross-national communication and collaboration and for improving
decision technologies and their transferability.