* 9210756
* RIA: Feedback Controller Design of Active Sound             Cancellation Using Close-form Transfer Function Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Kenneth Kline, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 01/31/1995
* USD 68,600.00

Active sound cancellation, as an important technique in noise control, requires
an effective control algorithm to achieve its optimum performance. The objective
of this project is to design the algorithm using feedback control theories which
not only enhance the performance, but also reduce the installation cost. One of
the difficulties facing the feedback design is the infinite-dimensional nature
of the sound system. The novelty of this study is to use the closed-form
transfer function to describe the dynamics of sound. The transfer function
reveals many useful properties which are lost when a discretized model, such as
the modal expansion, is used. The proposed study which seeks (a) to develop a
time-domain recursive identification scheme can directly identify the dynamics
of sound in ducats;(d) to develop the repetitive control system for harmonic
noise cancellation; (c) to experimentally verify the performance of the
repetitive control system; (d) to develop a broad-band active noise controller
based on transfer function models; (e) to extend the result to sound
cancellation of higher modes. The study will complement the research of
microphones and loudspeakers used in active sound cancellation. Also, it
provides a good case study of the feedback optimization of distributed parameter
systems. Although only active sound control is considered, this study has
potential applications to general vibration control.*** //