* 9210478
* Oculomotor Responses in Substantia Nigra and Thalamus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Thomas Gardiner, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/1996
* USD 224,141.00

The control of movement is accomplished by the coordinated activity of many
different brain nuclei, which are discrete collections of brain cells or
neurons. One system of brain nuclei that make important contributions to the
function of movement in general is the basal ganglia. Recently it has been shown
that the basal ganglia help to control eye movements as well as other types of
movements. Signals from the basal ganglia are known to project to lower
brainstem structures that control the detailed execution of saccadic eye
movements, which are rapid, ballistic-like eye movements that are made in order
to rapidly change the direction of gaze. Another pathway by which the basal
ganglia can influence eye movements is via a projection to nuclei of the
thalamus. Such signals are then propagated to selected parts of the neocortex
where more complex aspects of eye movements are regulated. In this award to Dr.
Thomas Gardiner, signals transmitted to the thalamus from the basal ganglia will
be studied to understand the type of controls that the basal ganglia has over
eye movements via pathways from the thalamus to the neocortex. Recordings of
activity will be made from neurons in thalamic regions which receive basal
ganglia input in relation to the performance of both saccadic eye movements, as
described above, and pursuit eye movements, which are the smooth, slow movements
that allow visual tracking of moving objects. This work will contribute
important knowledge about how the central nervous system controls eye movements.