* 9210009
* Foundations and Practice of Social Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1996
* A. Kimball Romney, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/1996
* USD 313,083.00

Social measurements derived from informant judgements are widespread and
improvements in their quality are critical to advancing social science research.
Examples of these measurements, drawn from various areas of social science,
include: ratings of occupational prestige in sociology, rankings of friendship
in social networks and social psychology, determinants of group preferences in
social choice, judgments of the similarity among kinship terms in anthropology,
and judgments of the seriousness of crimes in political science, etc. The long
range goal the this research is to contribute scientific methods to improve the
quality of social measurements that depend upon aggregating the judgments of
informants. Social concepts such as cultural beliefs and social norms are
defined by social conventions, with no outside criteria for comparison.
Measurements must be inferred from the pattern of responses among informants,
obtained in field settings with limitations on time, facilities, and number of
informants. Combining methods from foundations of measurement and statistical
modelling, this research probes the fundamental logic underlying two problems
basic to social measurement: (1) How can one meaningfully infer item attributes
from responses of informants, each of whom may be calibrated on a different
scale ? Meaningful social attributes should satisfy some sort of invariance
under permissible transformations in the response scales of each informant.
Improved measures of interitem similarity and social network concepts will
result from such investigation. (2) How can one assess the quality of the
information provided by each informant in order to arrive an an optimal
weighting scheme for aggregating responses ? The research develops new
statistical models for different scaling techniques such as magnitude
estimation, paired comparisons, and the constant sum method. The models will
allow researchers to optimize the reliability of aggregated data. The
significance of the research is that it will provide new methods of social
measurement comparable in quality to those used in such areas as psychophysics,
where comparisons with objective physical stimuli are utilized. The
interdisciplinary collaboration of the two investigators has been extremely
successful in the past. The promise of their ambitious research agenda, both in
its conceptual significance and practical import, is equally great.