* 9210405
* Calculation Behavior and Bounded Rationality in Economic    Models
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1995
* Garey Ramey, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1995
* USD 85,966.00

The vast majority of theoretical economic models impose very strong hypotheses
as to the rationality of agents. In macroeconomic contexts, the standard
assumption is that agents are fully aware of the equilibrium distributions of
endogenous variables, i.e., rational expectations prevails. Models in which
strategic interactions are important typically impose some strengthened form of
Nash equilibrium, in which agents know with complete accuracy the decision plans
of their rivals. These hypotheses, although central to the economic predictions
of the models, can be criticized on the grounds that they give no account of how
the agents acquire such information. Recent research posits that agents engage
in passive adaptive learning. For example, the least squares learning approach
presumes that the adaptive rule takes the form of a least squares regression,
and evolutionary adaptation schemes specific that agents adjust their actions
based on the relative fitness of competing strategies. This project seeks to
develop a middle ground between the opposing extremes of full rationality and
passive adaptation. The overriding goal is to establish a general framework for
analyzing expectation formation behavior that allows agents to engage in a
process of active cognition with respect to the economic environment, but places
inherent limitations on their cognitive abilities in terms of restrictions on
the calculation technology. This project develops an approach to bounded
rationality in which agents are endowed with a technology for calculating
expectations, together with preferences over forecast errors. Agents form
expectations by balancing the benefits of imp;roved forecasts against the costs
of calculation. This project extends previous work by the investigators to
incorporate a much richer variety of economic environments and calculation
algorithms. The approach is used to study hyperinflation and to explain puzzling
experimental finding by Marimon and Sunder that are difficult to reconcile with
either rational expectations or conventional passive adaptive learning
approaches. The calculation framework is extended further and applied to
problems in macroeconomics, finance and industrial organization.