* 9210178
* RIA: Condition Monitoring and Control: An Integrated,       System-Theoretic Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1997
* Arthur Helmicki, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 08/31/1997
* USD 90,000.00

Modern engineering systems often utilize closed-loop control in order to meet
requirements on system performance. Condition monitoring systems augmenting the
control system are seen to be a means of enhancing reliability, reducing
operating cost and extending system lifetime. This research is a general system-
theoretic approach which will promote the integrated analysis and design of
condition monitoring and control systems. This approach is based on recent
results from algebraic systems theory allowing the integrated condition
monitoring and controls problem to be imbedded in a general control systems
architecture. The capabilities of this approach will be demonstrated as follows:
First, this approach will be used to illuminate the extent to which condition
monitoring and control system design objectives impact one another. Second,
existing control system design tools will be extended to handle the design of
integrated condition monitoring and control systems. Third, these tools will be
used to obtain analytical results quantifying the design trade-offs involved.
Fourth, these tools will be used to address open research questions related to
generating condition monitoring system specifications and selecting condition
monitoring sensor suites. Finally, it will be shown that the above results can
be extended to classes of nonlinear plants.*** //