* 9210058
* Power in Negatively Connected Exchange Networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Phillip Bonacich, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/1994
* USD 110,389.00

This study consists of a series of experiments testing different models for the
determination of power in social exchange networks. The experiments will be set
up so that it is possible to test the effects of nine different types of social
networks on the exchange that occurs among individuals in the networks. Networks
are different in size, in the number and direction of exchanges which can be
made, in the values associated with an exchange between two individuals, and in
the alternatives available outside the network. In the experiments, subjects
will be playing a game where the object is to agree with one or more other
players on how to divide points between them. These points can later be
exchanged with money. Depending on the type of network a subject is in and on
his or her location in that network, one player may have more power than others
because he or she can negotiate with more players, have alternatives for gaining
points from outside the network, or because he or she is forced to trade with
certain other players in order to earn any reward. The experiments provide tests
of competing hypotheses about the effects of such structural conditions on the
actions and decisions of the participants in the experiment. Although this study
is experimental, and thus highly abstract, the results will improve our
understanding of the ways in which social structures differ in the power
embedded in different positions in a given social structure and how that in turn
influences individual actors behavior and decisions.