* 9210365
* RIA: Quantitative Quality Metrics for Halftone Images       and Visual-Model-Based Halftoning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Theophano Mitsa, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/1996
* USD 96,091.00

The recent proliferation of digital binary output devices, such as laser
printers and facsimile machines, has brought increased attention to high quality
halftone reproduction. A question that often arises in halftone research is how
to evaluate the quality of halftone images using a quantitative quality metric.
Such metrics would allow objective evaluation, in addition to being
independently reproducible. Halftoning introduces unique types of distortions,
and to be able to formulate quantitative quality measures for halftones it is
first needed to develop visual models that agree with the response of the human
visual system to halftone images. However, the problem of developing such models
has received scant attention. For the above reasons, the first objective of the
proposed research is to investigate how different visual models can predict the
quality of halftone images, and then based on these models, formulate
quantitative quality metrics. Visual modeling can also be used for the
improvement of existing halftone processes, and provide a basis for the
development of visual-model-based halftoning algorithms. In the proposed
research, visual modeling will be incorporated in the construction of a halftone
mask which was developed by the investigator in her Ph.D. thesis. The
incorporation of visual modeling will improve the performance of the halftone
mask and permit the development of a halftoning algorithm that combines
utilization of information about the human visual system and speed, since the
mask is completely independent of the image to be halftoned and needs to be
constructed only once.