* 9210215
* An Experimental Investigation of New Parameters for         Predicting Turbulent Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Paul Maciejewski, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 02/29/1996
* USD 99,909.00

In their investigation of boundary layer heat transfer in the presence of very
high free-stream turbulence, Maciejewski and Moffat (1990) conclude that the RMS
value of the streamwise turbulent fluctuations, u', plays a dominant role in
determining the heat transfer coefficient, h. However, for the set of
experiments that they performed, the value of u' was highly correlated with the
value of the RMS turbulent fluctuations normal to their heat transfer surface,
v'. The primary goal of the proposed research is to establish a set of boundary
layer flows in the presence of high free-stream turbulence for which v' may be
varied independently of u' in order to test by means of experiments the
hypothesis that v' and not u' determines h. This same hypothesis will also be
tested by measuring the individual components of the turbulent fluctuations
instantaneously, using the hot-wire techniques suggested by Blair and Bennett
(1987), and attempting to correlated them with the instantaneous surface heat
flux, which will be measured using a technique described by Mancuso and Diller
(1991). Measurements of the turbulent heat flux and the turbulent shear stress
will also be made for each of the free-stream test conditions in order to test
the hypothesis that v' is independent of u'v' for boundary layer flows in the
presence of high free-stream turbulence.