* 9210188
* Molecular Cloning and Functional Analysis of p130,          app60src associated protein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Amy Bouton, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

This proposal is to study the interaction of a protein tyrosine kinase (pp60
src) and a putative substrate, p130. When naturally occuring point mutations
occur in pp60 src, resulting in pp60 v- src, or when site-directed mutagenesis
is performed, pp60 src becomes oncogenic. The pp60 src protein probably
functions in cellular signal transduction as well as in cell transformation. The
p130 substrate protein will be purified, peptides from it will be
microsequenced, and a molecular clone encoding the protein will be isolated.
Interactions between these two proteins and a third protein (p110) will be
examined to try to determine their roles in src-mediated cell transformation and
other cellular processes that pp60 src is involved in. The importance of the src
homology 2 domain will be assessed; this domain is believed to be involved in
protein-protein interactions related to signal transduction. %%% Cells contain a
variety of enzymes (kinases) which can add phosphate residues to certain amino
acids in susceptible proteins. Protein tyrosine kinases have been implicated in
transformation of cells from normal growth to cancerous growth. The best studied
of this group is pp60 src. This proposal involves the interaction of pp60 src
with a putative substrate, p130, and will investigate the events following their
complex formation which result in cell transformation and signal transduction.