* 9211368
* Effects of a Target Muscle on the Development of a Spinal   Neuromuscular System
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Bruce Newton, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 03/31/1995
* USD 140,325.00

Over the past 20 years, sex differences in the central nervous system have
moved from being a subject of speculation to being a focus of intense research
and widespread interest. This is because the study of sex differences enhances
our understanding of the nervous system in at least two different ways. First,
detailed examination of sex differences in a neural circuit of a known
behavioral or physiological function may provide insights regarding those
aspects of the neural circuit that are critically involved in the display of the
function under question. Secondly, sexual differentiation is a fundamental
process of development. Thus, knowledge of the mechanisms underlying sex
differences may lead to deeper insights into the general processes involved in
differentiation specialization of nerve cells and their pattern of connectivity.
Dr. Newton has identified a neuromuscular system that can be used as model to
examine questions that may lead to a better understanding of both function and
development. The cremaster nucleus is a group of motoneurons located in the
ventral gray horn of the lumbar spinal cord that project through only one nerve
to innervate only one muscle. This nucleus is sexually dimorphic and controls
exclusively masculine functions related to testicular physiology. Using state-
of-the-art anatomical methodology, Dr. Newton will tease apart the hormonally
and non- hormonally mediated events in the development of this system. He will
examine how these cremaster motoneurons normally develop and then determine how
they are altered by changing the size of the muscle that they innervate and/or
by changing the hormonal milieu. The results will provide new insights into how
spinal cord neurons respond when their environment is altered. Besides leading
to significant advances in concepts regarding developmental interactions between
motoneurons, their afferents, their target muscles and control by gonadal
hormones, these studies may provide information on which hormonal conditions are
best for neuron survival when the muscles which neurons innervate are damaged or
if the spinal cord itself is damaged.