* 9211589
* Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Direct and Indirect         Corticotectal Relationships
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1995
* John McHaffie, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 11/30/1995
* USD 99,952.00

This award will support a two year long-term visit by Professor John G.
McHaffie, Department of Physiology, Medical College of Virginia, Virginia
Commonwealth University to Japan for a cooperative research project with
Professor Masao Nortia, Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Niigata
University. The researchers plan to undertake a study of direct and indirect
corticotectal relationships. Study of interactions between cerebral cortex and
superior colliculus are extremely important because this is the circuitory which
controls visual orienting movements and foveation eye movements. Indirect
pathways act in a permissive manner, while the direct pathway acts in an active
manner. There is little understanding of the anatomical and physiological
details of these two systems. The researchers will study the functional
significance of the indirect pathway from the cortex via the basal ganglia to
the substantia nigra of the tegmentum and thence to the superior colliculus.
Results of the research will provide valuable insights into commonalities among
the different sensory systems, with added information regarding the interface
between sensory and motor (striato-nigral) systems. The results may have major
implications for understanding the disorder of Parkinsonism. Professor McHaffie
is an experienced electrophysiologist who has participated in several
neuroanatomical studies. Professor Norita is a well-established neuroanatomist
with a distinguished laboratory and the appropriate institutional resources
available for the research. The researchers' previous record of successful
collaboration and their common interests should provide a mutually beneficial
interaction.