* 9211240
* RUI:  Roughened Manifolds in Ill-Condensed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1997
* Timothy Halpin-Healy, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1997
* USD 62,100.00

This is a Research at Undergraduate Institution grant to conduct theoretical
research concerning the static and dynamic scaling properties of a variety of
surfaces which exhibit entropic roughening due to thermal fluctuations, but in
the presence of quenched disorder (in the form of randomly distributed pinning
impurities) can lead to wandering that is enhanced many-fold. There are a number
of fundamental theoretical issues of great practical importance which arise from
the delicate interplay between thermal and disorder-induced roughening. This
follows naturally from the fact that most experimental systems are to some
degree forms of ill-condensed matter; the smallest modicum of randomness having
potentially drastic effects upon not merely the critical properties, but the
entire global structure of the phase diagram. Among the various manifolds to be
discussed are individual vortex lines in ceramic superconductors, directed
polymers in random media, and domain walls in impurity-stricken magnets. A
mapping via Burgers equation permits us to connect the directed polymer problem
to stochastic growth models such as ballistic deposition and Eden clusters. Also
considered are interfacial delocalization due to quenched disorder and impurity
controlled distortions of Abrikosov flux line lattices. %%% Analytical and
computational research will be conducted at Barnard College on the effects of
disorder on the general properties of surfaces and their manifestations in
particular physical systems such as polymers, superconductors and magnets. The
work will utilize undergraduates.