* 9211445
* Travel Support to International Workshop on Sustainable     Development Strategies, Impacts on Climate, New Delhi, IndiaJanuary 25-30, 1993, Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1992,04/30/1994
* Sethu Raman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/1994
* USD 22,000.00

Description: This proposal will support travel of eight US scientists to attend
the International Workshop on Sustainable Development Strategies and
Global/Regional/Local Impacts on Atmospheric Composition and Climate, New Delhi,
January 25- 30, 1993. Professor M.P. Singh, Center for Atmospheric Sciences,
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi and Sethu Raman, North Carolina State
University are the conveners of the conference. The objective of the workshop is
to provide a forum to review and discuss the current state of physical processes
within the earth-atmosphere systems, their impact on the ecological system as a
result of complex interactions and feedback processes and remedies to be sought
to preserve the quality of the atmosphere. The workshop deliberations should
lead to recommendations on more wide- spread utilization of existing
technologies to cope with energy requirements in the immediate future; and the
development of new energy/industrial/agricultural technology that will avoid the
threat to our ecological system. Scope: The workshop is highly relevant to
scientists from the US and India since it will synthesize information on global
and regional climate variability and discuss sustainable development and energy
use measures that need to be taken into account by countries adversely affected
by climate change scenarios. Common issues to be addressed include forest and
coastal zone management, groundwater storage, adaptation to likely shifts in
agricultural patterns and aquatic productivity associated with the expected rise
in global temperature from the greenhouse effect.