* 9211601
* Dissertation Research: Maya Economic Integration:           Perspectives from the Lithic Production System at El        Pedernal, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1993
* Brandon Lewis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/1993
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Leventhal, Mr. Brandon Lewis will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. Building on previous fieldwork he carried
out in the region, he will conduct archaeological excavations at the site of El
Pedernal which is located in the northeastern Peten region of Guatemala. The
site and its surrounding environs formed part of the Tikal Mayan empire and was
occupied during Early and Late Classic periods. Thus it documents the height of
Mayan achievement. Work to date has demonstrated the presence of a number of
plaza groups and habitation sites. Mr. Brandon will conduct limited excavations
at several of these to collect lithic remains. He will relate the distribution
of such materials to the chert sources from which they are derived. Through
analysis of the production sequence, which can be reconstructed from the
byproducts recovered, he will gain insight into the organization of stone
working at the site. While archaeologists have traced the rise and subsequent
decline of the Mayan empire, it is still uncertain how it functioned and how
large numbers of individuals were integrated into this large entity. In recent
years attention has been focussed on the economic system and attempts made to
understand the degree of economic specialization. Because metal tools were not
available, stone played an important role in Mayan subsistence and Mr. Lewis
will attempt to understand the degree to which stone tool production was either
centralized or dispersed in the hands of local users. This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will shed new light on how complex societies developed and were maintained and
will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.