* 9211011
* Identification of the Inhibitor of A-kinase in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Susan Whitehouse-Hills, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1994
* USD 40,000.00

This proposal is to identify and purify the inhibitor protein (PKI) of the cAMP-
dependent protein kinase A in fruit flies. A purification scheme similar to that
used for mammalian PKI will be employed. Fruit flies have a relatively simple
genome and many mutants have been described, making them useful experimental
organisms. After the PKI is purified, primers will be prepared in order to
obtain and sequence the gene. Gene expression in various tissues and at various
stages of development will be determined. The PKI gene will be mutated to
determine the resulting phenotype. Potential roles of this gene in embryonic
development, especially in the nervous system and in pattern formation, will be
examined. Previously described mutants have been shown to have abnormal levels
of cAMP. The proposed experiments will help elucidate the role of PKI in
regulating cAMP-dependent processes in fruit flies. %%% Mutants of fruit flies
have been described which have altered cAMP levels. cAMP-dependent protein
kinase (PKA) activity is involved in many cellular processes, changing the
behavior of target proteins. This proposal is to isolate and study the
properties of a protein (PKI) which inhibits PKA activity. The gene for PKI will
then be isolated, mutations will be made, and the phenotype of the flies will be
determined. Gene expression in various tissues and at various times in
development will be measured. The information obtained should increase
understanding of what roles PKA and PKI play in development and pattern
formation, and why regulation of cAMP levels seems to be critical for many
processes in fruit flies.