* 9211025
* Adaptive Systems for Identification, Signal Processing and  Control:  Solvability, Performance, Robustness and          Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Wei Ren, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/29/1996
* USD 120,000.00

The goal of this research is to develop a comprehensive theory for designing and
analyzing adaptive systems for identification, filtering and control of unknown
linear stochastic systems. The focus of this proposal is to investigate several
fundamental aspects of stochastic adaptive system theory, including adaptive
solvability, convergence, performance, and robustness. The specific problems
addressed include recursive identification, adaptive feedback an feedforward
control, adaptive filtering and state estimation, adaptive channel equalization,
adaptive echo cancelling, adaptive active noise cancelling and vibration
control. Under the topic of adaptive solvability, we examine the fundamental
issue of whether there exists a self- tuning algorithm which automatically tunes
itself to the correct controller or filter based on on-line data, given a
filtering or control objective and certain a priori information. Under the topic
of performance, we consider the issue of asymptotic behaviors of signals and
parameter estimates for a variety of adaptive algorithms and configurations.
Under the topic of robustness, we propose to investigate several robustness
enhancement methodologies, including the filtering of adaptive algorithms, a new
H00 identification procedure, adaptive control based on instrumental variable
identification methods and adaptive internal model control. In addition to
theoretical research, this project will maintain close ties with several applied
research projects which include the applications of active noise cancelling and
vibration control, applied research in smart and adaptive structures, research
in ghost cancellation in digital high definition TV, and research in automatic
vehicle control.