* 9211908
* Constrained Minimization for Interactive Modeling Using     Parallel and Vector Supercomputers
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1994
* Lynn Ten Eyck, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robert G. Voigt
* 06/30/1994
* USD 37,718.00

This research examines parallel algorithms for finding a local minimum of a
nonlinear energy function that satisfies a set of nonlinear equality
constraints. A constrained minimizer is the bottleneck in a system that lets a
user interactively move atoms in a protein model while the system automatically
minimizes protein energy and maintains constraints denoting rigid bond lengths.
This research examines Lagrange multiplier methods that can find a local
constrained minimum using parallel processing. Particular implementations to
study include multiple-instruction, multiple-data (MIMD) computers that use
shared memory (in particular, a Cray Y-MPI) and MIMD computers with hypercube
memory connections (iPSC/860). The research compares the performance of
different MIMD computers on different steps in the constrained minimization
algorithm. Using the comparison results, the goal will be to reduce the total
solution-time two orders-of magnitude by concurrently running steps on separate
supercomputers. The research also examines methods that compute long-distance
electrostatic interactions without destroying interactive performance. One
method includes computing a neighbor list for each atom on one processor while
the other processors evaluate electrostatic interactions using the list from
previous iteration. Understanding effects from thousands of non-bonded
interactions is quite difficult. The research also addresses visualization
methods for determining which interaction to display and how to display them.
The visualization avoids cluttering the screen while indicating the interacting
atoms, strength and type (attraction or repulsion) of interaction, and ideal
separation. A goal with this visualization is to help a user tightly pack
interior sidechains.