* 9211277
* Structure of Similarity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Douglas Medin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1995
* USD 243,990.00

The goal of this research is to develop and test theories of human similarity
processing. Similarity provides the basis for much of concept learning, transfer
of knowledge from one situation to another, and generalization. Conversely,
similarity can also be a source of human error, for instance when confusions
between similar-looking materials or devices occur. This research will develop a
new approach to encompass a range of human similarity processes, from causal and
functional similarities to perceptual similarities. This approach departs from
prior approaches in emphasizing the psychological processes that underlie
similarity. The first set of studies will investigate interconnectivity, i.e.,
whether interactions between features can make some aspects of objects more
salient in similarity judgments or even change the psychological interpretation
of their properties. The second issue is the effect of alignment in judgments of
the similarity of two figures. These studies will investigate how the seeming
similarity between two figures changes as a function of how easy it is to place
components of object representation in correspondence. A third set of studies
will investigate the effect of similarity in constructive induction. These
studies are based on the hypothesis that when people judge similarity, they
sometimes align non- identical features in a way which captures only their
abstract commonalities. For example, two engines, one missing a fan belt and the
other with a broken generator, may be judged similar because they have
dysfunctional parts. These research results will inform us about the range and
flexibility of similarity processing. The next set of studies will address the
dynamic process of similarity computation. In these studies, people will be
asked to perform rapid similarity matches or will view similarity pairs for
varying periods; this will allow comparison of fast and slow similarity
judgments. If fast judgments have dynamics different from slow, interfaces and
devices to which humans must respond quickly will have to be designed
accordingly. The final set of studies will investigate the role of similarity in
other cognitive processes. Some experiments will examine the role of similarity
in category-based induction. For example, when people are told a new fact about
some entity, (e.g., a tiger) they typically assume that the fact applies to
other similar entities, (e.g., a lion). This research will investigate whether
the similarity is symmetrical or directional and what aspects of the similarity
affect further inferences that can be made. Other experiments will investigate
whether the process of retrieval from memory can change the subsequent
representation of the items. If items stored in memory are changed by the
process that retrieves them, it suggests how gradual learning can occur and how
certain similarity-based distortions can come about.