* 9211449
* Plant Biochemistry Course, '92 to be held in San Diego, CA, June 28-July 19, 1992
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1993
* William Ogren, American Society of Plant Physiologists
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 11/30/1993
* USD 71,124.00

This award supports a three-week summer course on plant biochemistry to be held
on June 28 - July 19, 1992 on the campus of U.C. San Diego. Biochemical
reactions create form and function according to the instructions found in the
cells. In the last two decades, there have been exciting developments in our
knowledge of how genetic instructions are read in plants. However, the
information about metabolic pathways and the regulation of these pathways has
increased only marginally. In addition, younger generations of plant biologists
have fewer and fewer opportunities to learn about what is known about plant
biochemistry due to the decreasing number of investigators interested in the
subject. This summer course is designed to focus attention of the plant biology
community on the biochemical problems of form and function of plant cells that
could profitably be addressed using the tools developed during recent years.
Twenty lecturers, all experts on specific aspects of plant biochemistry, are
selected to give lectures and lead discussion sessions on key topics in plant
biochemistry. The target audience is advanced graduate students, postdoctoral
function according tot he instructions found in the cells. In the last two
decades, there have been exciting developments in our knowledge of how genetic
instructions are read in plants. However, the information about metabolic
pathways and the regulation of these pathways has increased only marginally. In
addition, younger generations of plant biologists have fewer and fewer
opportunities to learn about what is known about plant biochemistry due to the
decreasing number of investigators interested in the subject. This summer course
is designed to focus attention of the plant biology community on the biochemical
problems of form and function of plant cells that could profitably be addressed
using the tools developed during recent years. Twenty lecturers, all experts on
specific aspects of plant biochemistry, are selected to give lectures and lead
discussion sessions on key topics in plant biochemistry. The target audience is
advanced graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and college/university
professors who teach plant biochemistry at their institutions. After the course
is completed, the lecture notes will be made available widely to the general
scientific community as an aide to teach plant biochemistry. The course is
supported jointly with the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Department of
Energy.