* 9211156
* RIA:  A Knowledge-Based Approach to Adaptive Finite Element Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Kamyar Haghighi, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 07/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

This research initiation project (RIA) seeks to develop an efficient, reliable,
and user- independent finite element analysis methodology to aid design analysis
automation for various engineering applications and to provide an advanced
analysis environment. The specific objectives of this research are as follows:
To develop an efficient, knowledge- based and fully automatic finite element
mesh generator based on new concepts of wave propagation and subsstructuring. To
integrate the proposed knowledge-based mesh generator with simple and efficient
a posteriori error analysis and adaptive procedures. To evaluate the performance
characteristics of the integrated finite element analysis system in terms of its
efficiency and accuracy. The automatic and knowledge-based finite element mesh
generator will first use the new concept of substructuring to locate the
critical regions in the domanin and to assign priority and mesh size to them.
This involves the decomposition of the original structure into substructures for
which an initial and approximate analysis can be performed by using analytical
solutions and heuristics. It then will use the new concept of wave propagation
to generate graded nodes and to form well-shaped elements, using a new and more
efficient algorithm. There are several potential payoffs: reduced design cost
and cycle time, the ability to rapidly consider a wider range of design
alternatives, improved product quality and increased engineering productivity.
Successful completion of this work will contribute to the vitality and
competiveness of U.S. industry in the international marketplace.