* 9211522
* U.S.-Western Europe Regional Workshop on the Ethnography of Modern Iceland; Iowa City, Iowa; May 28-30, 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1994
* E. Paul Durrenberger, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1994
* USD 6,222.00

This award supports seven U.S. anthropologists to participate in a regional
European workshop on the ethnography of modern Iceland. The small meeting is
jointly organized by Dr. E. Paul Durrenberger of the University of Iowa and Dr.
Gisli Palsson of the Faculty of Social Science of the University of Iceland. It
will be held at the University of Iowa in late May, 1993. The objective of the
workshop is to analyze ethnographic aspects of major questions facing modern
Iceland, especially in the context of ongoing developments in Europe and
America. Among these issues are negotiations about regulating fishing and
whaling under the European Economic Community (EEC), how the economic and
political system of Iceland affects its relations with the emerging EEC, the
role of American policy and Icelanders' reaction to it. In addition, the meeting
participants will analyze the colonial roots of the modern period and the
political uses of the past in the construction of national identity. This
meeting will encourage expansion of the focus of research on the culture and
people of Iceland away from the romantic- nationalistic school of folk studies
and toward examination of its place in the contemporary world. The discussions
are also likely to contribute to the broader question of what constitutes an
adequate ethnographic description of a highly literate and modern state society.