* 9211772
* The Virginia Coast Reserve LTER Site
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,10/31/1995
* John Porter, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 10/31/1995
* USD 1,315,956.00

The Virginia Coast Reserve (VCR) is an extremely dynamic, frequently disturbed
landscape which is comprised of elements (e.g. grasslands, marshes) that differ
in degrees normally associated with biome-level differences. Because the
frequency of disturbance at the VCR is so great the types of ecosystem changes
that would normally occur across large distances (continents, biomes) and over
long periods of time (e.g. glacial and interglacial periods) happen on decadal
time-scales. Ecosystem state changes are frequent. The central research theme of
the VCR LTER project is the understanding of the dynamics of ecosystem state
change, both the transitions among ecosystem states and succession within these
states. The basic elements of this LTER's theoretical concept of landscape
dynamics are that 1) there are "attractors" in the ecosystem state space within
which successional dynamics operate and 2) there are events that produce
transitions from one of these attractors to another. The VCR LTER will continue
to study succession within several of the more prominent states (Myrica thickets
and salt marshes) and the response of these states to disturbance. This will be
accomplished by research in the NSF-defined LTER network core areas as well as
additional VCR-established areas as well as additional VCR-established areas
examining states and state changes that have occurred at the VCR in geologic,
historic, and present-day context. The VCR LTER will address the following
working hypotheses: 1) The controls on succession within states are the
availability of water, the salinity of that water, the frequency of tidal
inundation, and sediment deposition; and 2) Gradients in salinity and tidal
inundation frequency and thus organic matter accumulation, primary productivity,
and nutrients, are a function of the slope, sea level, and astronomical and
storm tides. 3) Many ecological state changes are triggered by infrequent,
short-duration, intense disturbances such as coastal storms. The products of the
proposed work will be the development of a new theoretical base for maintenance
and structuring of landscape, further elucidation of controls on ecosystem
processes, and new ecosystem and landscape modeling approaches.