* 9211776
* Effects of Climate Change in the Colorado Alpine: Ecosystem Response to Altered Snowpack and Rainfall Regimes
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1992,10/31/1999
* Carol Wessman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1999
* USD 3,660,600.00

Climatological data measured over the past 40 years at Niwot Ridge show that
this temperate alpine site is undergoing directional change. Cooler, wetter
conditions correlate with shifts in Plant community composition, reduced soil pH
and modification of controls on nitrogen limitation to vegetation. While a
number of future climatic scenarios are possible, enhanced precipitation in the
alpine may continue the cooling trend due to increased albedo and
evapotranspiration. This new research will therefore emphasize the influence of
snowpack and precipitation on alpine ecosystem processes and patterns. The
project group will identify and quantify mechanisms controlling the alpine
ecosystem response to snowpack and precipitation and develop prediction models
based on this knowledge. The research has four focal points: (1) watershed-level
physical and biological processes affecting geochemical budgets; (2) plant and
soil microbial processes, emphasizing organismic controls on nutrient
allocation, pools and fluxes, photosynthesis and net primary production; (3) a
hierarchical set of landscape analyses involving populations and communities of
plants and animals and employing GIS and remote sensing techniques; and (4)
paleoecological responses to changed snow conditions during recent centuries and
millennia. All research areas use process-oriented models that provide
analytical and predictive capabilities. Interfacing these models with GIS
technologies will provide spatially explicit representation and provide a
mechanism to scale relevant biophysical processes to regional levels.