* 9211045
* Explanation-Based Learning:  Finding Better       Explanations Via Partial Evaluation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Oren Etzioni, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 12/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

Controlling search is a central concern for AI. Overcoming combinatorial search
in realistic planning, design, and reasoning problems requires large doses of
domain specific search control knowledge. Explanation Based Learning (EBL) has
emerged as a standard technique for acquiring search control knowledge. Previous
EBL work has produced impressive demonstrations but has also uncovered a
fundamental problem EBL frequently constructs overlycomplex explanations that
yield ineffective control knowledge. This research describes a solution:
integrating EBL with partial evaluation to improve EBL's explanations. In
standard EBL systems, the problem solver's behavior on a training example
determines what EBL explains and how. Partial evaluation, in contrast, performs
a global analysis that often yields simpler and more general explanations. In
previous work, STATIC (a partial evaluator written by the PI) was pitted against
PRODIGY/EBL, a state of the art EBL system. When tested in PRODIGY/EBL's
benchmark problem spaces, STATIC generated search control knowledge that was up
to three times a effective as PRODIGY/EBL's, and did so twenty six to seventy
seven times faster. Since STATIC's analysis in not focused by training examples,
however, it may flounder when confronted with large and complex problem spaces.
The PI intends to design and build a hybrid system , called DYNAMIC, that will
overcome the weaknesses of both approaches. DYNAMIC will identify learning
opportunities a la PRODIGY/EBL, BUT GENERATE EXPLANATIONS a la STATIC. The
detailed studies of the two systems suggest that DYNAMIC will significantly out
perform both, and yield insights in two fundamental questions: how to improve
machine generated explanations, and what is the appropriate role of training
examples in explanation based learning? //