* 9211215
* An Investigation into the Effects of Feedback, Attributions,and Expertise on Overconfidence in Marketing Management     Prediction
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Jayashree Mahajan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 12/31/1993
* USD 17,223.00

Estimating the likelihood of future events is a critical aspect of making a
variety of managerial decisions. A predominant finding in prior research is that
individuals are overconfident. This Research Planning grant is to develop a
research plan seeks to theoretically investigate why overconfidence occurs by
drawing upon prior work on how cognitions are used in decisions. The focus of
this research is on comparing the effects of evaluative and outcome feedback,
the underlying attributional process that is invoked and the moderating effect
of expertise. Four separate experiments will be designed. Each experiment will
be comprise three stages and data will be gathered using an interactive computer
program. The manipulated experimental variables will consist of evaluative
feedback, nonevaluative feedback, attributions, and expertise; while there will
be repeated measures on item domain. Subjects will perform the judgment task in
the context of making a strategic plan. The research requires planning
activities such as theory development, development of experimental stimulus,
operationalization of independent factors, and identification of experimental
procedures. The proposed research will contribute to existing knowledge on the
overconfidence bias and isolate conditions when it can be reduced. It will
foster research on overconfidence in an application context (i.e., marketing and
strategic planning) where there are likely to be tangible benefits.