* 9211531
* Urban System Evolution in Frontier Settings: The Ecuador    Amazon and General Frameworks
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1992,11/30/1996
* Lawrence Brown, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* James W. Harrington
* 11/30/1996
* USD 137,171.00

Although Third World frontiers have received considerable attention in recent
years, their urban segment has been neglected. Urban frontier studies are few in
number, rarely do they reference the experience of other Third World locales or
North America, and they fail to formulate a conceptual framework of frontier
urbanization and integration into a national urban system. Existing frameworks
of frontier urbanization derive largely from research on 18th and 19th century
North America, which tends to reflect more developed portions of that frontier
experience. This research project will provide an understanding of urban place
evolution in Third World frontiers. It will compare the evolution of frontier
towns cross-nationally to understand better similarities in the urban process
from place to place. It will also build a conceptual framework to account for
the transition of urban places from their formative phase in a rudimentary
frontier setting to an emerging urban sub-system in a mature, but evolving,
economy. This will be accomplished by a detailed study of the frontier
urbanization process in Ecuador for the period 1960 to 1990. Data will come from
census and other secondary sources, surveys, and informant interviews. Five
major urban centers will be examined in terms of economic activity, human
resource profile, transformation in patterns of interaction with local
hinterlands and other portions of Ecuador, shifts in the type of interaction,
and the explanatory factors influencing these trends. This research will provide
a bridge to existing frameworks of frontier urbanization, which largely derive
from research on North America during its own frontier development. It will
address the function of frontier towns and their integration into a national
urban system in a Third World context. Population growth and national settlement
policies in these nations are promoting an acceleration or urban development in
heretofore sparsely populated regions. rates on irregular surfaces. New
knowledge about how urban places develop and become integrated into a national
urban system will provide both scientists and policy makers with a basis for
evaluating the impact of this phenomenon on economic, social, and environmental
systems.