* 9211971
* Inhibition of Beta-Lactam-Recognizing Enzymes by Phosphonates - U.S. Nigeria Cooperative Science (Science in Developing Countries).
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Rex Pratt, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 02/28/1994
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports the participation of Dr. S. A. Adediran of the Department
of Chemistry, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria, in a collaborative research
project on the enzymology of beta-lactam antibiotics in the laboratory of Dr.
Rex F. Pratt, Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut. Previous work by the
PI's group has show that beta- lactamases are inhibited by a series of
phosphonate monoester monoanions. In this one- year collaborative effort, a
series of phosphonate peptide analogs of these phosphonate monoesters will be
synthesized and evaluated as inhibitors of DD-peptidases. The results promise to
provide important information on the DD-peptidase active site, which could
eventually lead to new routes for designing antibacterial agents. The
collaborative research would extend Dr. Adediran's experience in enzyme kinetics
into a more medicinal or pharmaceutical direction, centered more on organic
reaction mechanisms. Such experience will improve Dr. Adediran's teaching and
research, and greatly enhance his ability to initiate and coordinate future
inter-departmental research collaboration between the College of Science and the
College of Medicine at the University of Ilorin. The project is consistent with
the criteria for the Science in Developing Countries (SDC) program in that it
strengthens collaboration between U.S. scientists and engineers and their
counterparts in developing countries, and increases the capacity of scientists
and engineers in developing countries to address constraints to development.