* 9211247
* Acquisition of Plant Growth Equipment for the Proposed      "C.A. Ryan Plant Growth Fac. Complex"
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Rodney Croteau, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 08/31/1995
* USD 349,444.00

We are requesting that the Instrumentation Facilities Program of the National
Science Foundation match funds made available by Washington State University for
construction of a modern greenhouse and acquisition of two environment
controlled growth chambers. These plant growth facilities are essential to
alleviate the critical shortage of plant growth space available to the faculty
of the faculty of the Institute of Biological Chemistry, a limitation which will
be compounded by the addition of two new faculty in the next three years. Of the
6,240 sq. ft. of greenhouse space presently available to the 7 Institute
researchers, more than 80% is on loan from other departments. As discussed in
detail in the proposal, research at the Institute includes studies on the
regulation of terpeniod and phenylpropanoid metabolism, regulation of carbon and
nitrogen metabolism, structural elucidation and role of novel carbohydrates and
peptides involved in plant signaling processes, structure- function
relationships of stress induced and developmentally regulated genes that encode
proteins involved in plant defense or of storage function, and the regulatory
role of carbohydrates and lipids involved in cellular metabolism. These research
programs, which are currently or have been supported by NSF, employ a diverse
assortment of plants that demand specific environmental conditions for optimal
growth and often require large amounts of these plant materials to be grown
under controlled conditions.