* 9211945
* ABR:  Developments in Matrix Population Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Hal Caswell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1997
* USD 200,083.00

This project has both basic and applied aspects. One of the most important basic
research developments in population ecology in the last decade has been the
increased use of modeling techniques that encompass population structure, I.E.,
the distribution of individuals into age classes, size classes or developmental
stages. Matrix population models are one of these techniques, one particularly
suited to inter-population comparisons and to stochastic analysis. The research
proposed here will extend the basic theory for comparative analysis to permit
evaluation of the population-level effects of environmental factors, and will
explicitly connect matrix population models to stochastic models for the growth
and extinction of small populations. Each aspect of this project contributes to
an important applied problem. Measuring the responses of populations to
environmental factors is essential for evaluating the impact of pollutants,
possible climactic changes, harvesting, biological control and other
anthropogenic effects. The results of this project will be directly applicable
to such studies. The problem of extinction of small populations is crucial to
population viability calculations in conservation biology. The models currently
used for such analyses ignore population structure, which may have important
effects on viability. The results of this project will be directly applicable to
such situations.