* 9211541
* Geometric Complexity Problems in Arrangements
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Boris Aronov, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1996
* USD 72,468.00

Computational Geometry is primarily the study of geometric algorithms. Thus the
geometric aspect of problems considered by computational geometers is as
important as the algorithm and data structuring aspect. Sometimes the connection
is explicit, e.g, when the number of features of a geometric object provides a
worst-case lower bound on the running time to compute it. Other times the
relation is less obvious, but just as crucial. This project is concerned with
geometric arrangements from a primarily combinatorial rather than computational
point of view, with investigation of algorithmic issues as a secondary goal. The
focus is on the geometric complexity problems, which involve estimating the
number of features in certain portions of an arrangement. Such combinatorial
bounds lead to construction of efficient geometric algorithms and to
establishing sharp lower bounds on their performance. Planar arrangements of
various classes of objects and general hyperplane arrangements have been studied
extensively, but until recently rather little was known about arrangements of
such simple objects as flat triangles in three-dimensional space. Building on
some recent work, the investigation of this subject will be continued, initially
concentrating on triangle arrangements. The study of simplex arrangements is
expected to lead to new techniques applicable to more general families of
objects in three and higher dimensions, which will in turn yield better tools
for the design and analysis of geometric algorithms.