* 9211016
* Use of Interval Arithmetic in Symbolic Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Jeremy Johnson, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 12/31/1994
* USD 44,111.00

This project explores the use of interval arithmetic in symbolic computation.
Interval arithmetic provides an efficient and error free method of combining
floating point arithmetic with exact computation. The primary goal of this
project is to develop and analyze hybrid interval/symbolic algorithms that
provide a practical efficiency gain to time consuming algebraic algorithms such
as Collins' Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition based Quantifier Elimination.
Reduced execution times will allow more complicated and interesting problems to
be solved. Example hybrid algorithms include Lehmer's multiprecision integer GCD
algorithm, real algebraic number sign computation, algebraic number inequality
tests, polynomial root bound computation, polynomial real root isolation, and
potentially approximate algebraic polynomial GCD calcuation. Preliminary study
of some of these algorithms show the potential merits of this approach. An
interval arithmetic package will be implemented for the SAC2-C computer algebra
library. Using this package all algorithms will be implemented and carefully
analyzed empirically and theoretically. The empirical study will be used to
investigate the performance gain achieveable through the use of the proposed
methods. Furthermore, empirical results will provide useful information on the
effectiveness and limitations of interval methods in exact compuation. Programs
with detailed documentation and analysis will be made available to the research
community.