* 9211454
* Conference:  INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON MOLECULAR          BIOINFORMATICS, in Wadern, Germany, September 7-11, 1992
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1993
* Michael Waterman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Peter Arzberger
* 07/31/1993
* USD 15,000.00

This award will provide support for US-based scientists to participate in the
International Conference on Molecular Bioinformatics, which is part of the
Dagstuhl-Seminar Series. The conference will take place September 7-11, 1992, in
Wadern, Germany. The bulk of the award will support the travel costs of new
researchers in this area. Molecular bioinformatics is an area in applied
computer science which is rapidly gaining significance due to the explosion of
basic data from molecular biology. This area is concerned with the development
of methods and tools for analyzing and understanding the relationships between
and the functions of macromolecules. The design of large biomolecules is an area
of increasing importance that depends critically on computation. The workshop
will be interdisciplinary (molecular biology, computer science, applied
mathematics). The workshop will focus on the following topics: alignment of
biomolecular sequences (DNA, RNA, protein); interpreting nucleotide sequences
and their role in gene regulation; determining large genomic sequences by
shotgun and other methods such as hybridization; modeling of large biomolecules,
including the prediction and analysis of secondary and higher-level structure as
well as spatial conformations (folding); molecular dynamics and simulations of
interactions between biomolecules.