* 9211699
* Charge Distribution &amp; Nonlinear Optical Studies Probing     Electric Field Effects in Polymer Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Hilary Lackritz, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1997
* USD 168,300.00

The effect of large magnitude electric fields on polymer thin films is being
investigated by examining the charge distribution, symmetry, and magnitude
across doped and undoped glassy polymer thin films as a function of temperature,
time, and poling (processing). This is done by electrochromism, second-order
nonlinear optics, isothermal current and surface voltage decay measurements.
Trapping levels and sites are also examined. Electrochromism examines the charge
distribution and trapping sites across doped polymer and functionalized polymer
films as a function of processing. Second-order nonlinear optical techniques
including second harmonic generation and the linear electro-optic effect are
used to study the charge distribution at different penetration depths and will
yield qualitative information on trapping sites. Isothermal current and surface
voltage decay measurements allow bulk characterization of fields in contact- and
corona-poled films, respectively. Dielectic relaxation provides bulk electrical
property data and information concerning polymer relaxations and rotational
mobility of the dopants. This research represents an attempt to systematically
investigate the electric field properties of glassy polymer thin films.
Potential applications include electric power transmission, printing technology,
photonics, telecommunications, and electrophotography.