* 9211934
* Comparative Neuroanatomical Study of the Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Wallace Welker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1995
* USD 61,529.00

The primary objective of this research is to thoroughly describe the main
neuroanatomical characteristics of the brain of the Florida manatee in order to
understand how this endangered species experiences its environment and why it
behaves as it does. The manatee's habitat is being degraded at an alarming rate,
and it may become extinct within the next 2 decades. This aquatic herbivore
belongs to a unique Order of mammals (Sirenia) and is closely related to
elephants and hyraxes. Its brain is relatively small, unlike those of porpoises
and seals; externally, the manatee brain appears to be relatively simple in
appearance in keeping with is its behavior. However, research from this
laboratory has shown different parts of the manatee brain are quite elaborately
organized, suggesting a high degree of complexity. Some brain areas are common
to all mammals, while others are unique to the manatee. Ongoing research
involves the completion of analysis of the manatee brain and the publication of
two major manuscripts to describe and portray all of the important external and
internal features of the entire manatee brain. Comparison of the manatee brain
with those of several other mammals will provide clues about the anatomical
basis of the manatee's unusual sensorimotor activities, as well as the
evolutionary relationships of the manatee with other mammalian species.