* 9211228
* RUI: The Impact of Firm Financial Performance and BankruptcyRisk on Safety Investment
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Devra Golbe, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1995
* USD 107,207.00

Safety has become an increasingly important public policy consideration. With
enactment of the Environmental Protection Act and the Occupation Safety and
Health Act in 19970, a healthy and safe work place became a national goal. The
purpose of this project is to analyze how a firm's financial performance affects
work place safety. In particular, a model is developed showing how a firm's
incentives for preventing accidents depends on its financial situation. The
possibility of bankruptcy means that optimal safety investments depend on such
financial variables as expected profits, debt burden, ability to sell assets,
and expected future profits. It is shown that it is impossible to determine
analytically the direction and magnitude the effect of these factors have on
investments in safety. Answers must be determined empirically. This project will
provide empirical estimates of the relationship between a firm's financial
condition and its investment in work place safety using two plant-level proxies
for safety performance form OSHA records: lost workdays and violations of safety
standards. This research is important because it will have important public
policy implications, most notably for the efficient allocation of regulatory
resources and policies towards highly leveraged transactions.