* 9211166
* ROW:  Laboratory Studies of Facultative Anaerobic Benthic         Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1994
* Joan Bernhard, New York State Department of Health and Health Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1994
* USD 16,567.00

Foraminifera are protozoans which are generally thought to be obligate aerobes
although a wide variety of evidence suggests that certain benthic forms are
facultative anaerobes. This research planning projects objectives are to (1)
develop a rapid, non terminal screening procedure to distinguish living from
dead individuals, (2) characterize formainiferal ultrastructure after exposure
to extended periods of anoxia or low oxygen conditions, and (3) establish the
postmortem ultrastructural degradation sequence of foraminifers. The screening
procedure will employ flourogenic substrates which will fluoresce within living
specimens but which are undetectable by fluorescence microscopy in dead
specimens. The ultrastructure of specimens exposed to anoxic or low oxygen
condition for time periods of weeks to months will be examined with high voltage
electron microscopy (HVEM). The use of HVEM permits rapid examination of a
significant sample size since observed section are about 10 times thicker than
those for conventional electron microscopy. In order to investigate postmortem
ultrastructural changes, foraminifera will be irradiated with ultraviolet light
in a dose sufficient to induce necrosis. These specimens will be examined with
HVEM to assess changes over time. The results of this project will provide the
foundation for future investigations concerning the physiological ecology of
foraminifera inhabiting anoxic environments.