* 9211327
* Regulation of Retinal Functions by Light and a Circadian    Clock
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Barbara-Anne Battelle, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/1996
* USD 394,941.00

Retinal functions in both vertebrates and invertebrates are regulated by light
and a circadian clock. In the horseshoe crab, Limulus polyphemus, the
interactions of light and a circadian clock on retinal structure and function
are particularly well characterized. The goal of these studies is to clarify the
largely unknown biochemical substrates and mechanisms underlying the effects of,
and the interactions between, light and the circadian clock on the retina. Two
interesting substrates have been identified. One, pp46A, probably participates
in a light-driven pathway modulated by the circadian clock. The other pp122, is
in a clock-driven pathway that is probably modulated by light. The hypothesis
that pp46A quenches the transduction cascade initiated by light and that pp122
is critical for clock-driven changes in the structure of the photoreceptor that
occur at night will be investigated. Molecular, biochemical and immunochemical
approaches will be applied to characterize these proteins and their functions.
The interactions between light and a circadian clock in regulation of proteins
critical for retinal function, opsin, pp46A and pp122, will be determined. These
studies will provide new knowledge of the biochemical processes that underlie
the day to night changes in the retina that are required for normal vision.