* 9211969
* Summer Training Workshop in Law and Social Science; Denver, Colorado; July 1993
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Felice Levine, Law and Society Association
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1994
* USD 40,000.00

This is a workshop conducted by the Committee on Education of the Law and
Society Association, the major professional organization for sociolegal
scientists in the United States. It is designed to extend and intensify previous
training efforts for approximately 30 new entrants into sociolegal science. In
addition to providing social scientific training to faculty with and students
anticipating professional degrees from law schools, the summer workshop stresses
the interdisciplinary character of the field of law and social science by
counteracting disciplinary perspectivism. Attention is given to core debates and
questions which serve to integrate the field. Specifically, participants are
recruited through advertisements in the relevant scholarly newsletters and a
special mailing to 700 individuals to seek applications from minority scholars.
Twelve distinguished faculty persons join the thirty participants for the three
day workshop. Through sessions which feature small group exchange, hands-on
mentoring, and follow-up after the workshop, the workshop enables participants
to work through specific research ideas and plans. In addition, the workshop
sessions expose participants to the core subfields of law and social science,
the relationships and settings for law and social science, and the full range of
research orientations associated with sociolegal science. The workshop is
significant in providing advanced interdisciplinary training to individuals who
are or soon will be teaching law and social science in law schools and social
science departments in colleges and universities across the United States. Also,
the workshop encourages more minority faculty and graduate students to enter
into this interdisciplinary field of teaching and research.