* 9211963
* Morphological Tailoring and Properties of Perfluorinated    Ionomer/Inorganic Oxide Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Kenneth Mauritz, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1996
* USD 321,300.00

Unique perfluoro-organic/inorganic oxide hybrid materials will be formulated by
merging processes recently developed for the solution and melt processing of
perfluorosulfonate ionomers (PFSI's) and the production of nanocomposites by the
in situ sol-gel reaction for silicon and metal alkoxides within the polar
clusters of PFSI's. The working hypothesis is that the resultant morphology of
the inorganic phase is ordered by the nanophase-separated morphology of the PFSI
matrix. In this research, the three-dimensional morphological template presented
by the PFSI will be tailored by manipulating the primary polymer structure,
polymer solution conditions, film casting procedure, and post-processing (e.g.
drying, annealing, melt-quenching, mechanical orientation). The nanocomposites
will be extensively characterized for microstructure broadly ranging from light
microscopic resolution down to the level of Angstroms using various microscopic,
scattering, diffraction, and spectroscopic methods. Structure-property
relationships will result from the investigation of the mechanical, thermal,
dielectric/electrical conductance and gas permeation characteristics of these
materials. The percolative nature of the inorganic phase is anticipated to
generate "smart" materials in the sense of acting as temperature and pressure
sensors. Oriented nanocomposites should possess directional mechanical, thermal,
and electrical properties. The scope of the microstructural investigation will
be greatly broadened through strong interactions with governmental (Sandia, Oak
Ridge) and industrial (Dow Chemical Co.) laboratories. This research aims to
produce new materials that should be act as gas-permselective membranes under
rather demanding conditions, and this be useful in a variety of separations.
This research is in cooperation with the Electric Power Research Institute.