* 9211481
* RIA: Object-Oriented Motion Decomposition and Estimation    with Application to Low-Bit-Rate Video Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Yao Wang, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

This project considers the estimation of motion in a time-varying image
sequence, and its applications in video compression. The proposed approaches are
based on a transform domain motion representation which describes the spatial
displacement field of a moving object by a set of transform coefficients, each
specifying the contribution of a basic motion to the apparent motion. The
difficulty with using such an object-oriented motion representation for images
containing multiple objects with mixed motions is countered by a joint motion
estimation and object segmentation procedure in a multi-resolution quad-tree
structure. The proposed project consists of two parts. The first part includes
theoretic and algorithmic investigation on, 1) viable motion transform bases, 2)
transform domain motion estimation, 3) hierarchical, joint motion estimation and
object segmentation, and 4) motion compensated temporal interpolation. The
second part encompasses the studies on low bit rate object oriented video coding
using the techniques produced in the first part. Results from the first part
will contribute to the theory of image sequence processing and analysis, and
will provide new solutions to several key elements in video signal processing
and three dimensional scene analysis and object tracking. The success of the
second part, in particular, will suggest new alternatives to low bit rate video
coding which is indispensable for video coding over narrow band channels and
video database applications.