* 9211004
* Algorithms for Implementing Relaxed Memory Consistency      for Distributed Shared Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Alan Cox, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 06/30/1996
* USD 89,997.00

The objective of this project is to develop algorithms for implementing a
software distributed shared memory that reduce both the number of messages and
the amount of data transferred between processors. A software distributed shared
memory (DSM) enables processes to share memory even when they execute on
processors that only communicate via message-passing. In recent years, the
developers of tightly-coupled multiprocessors have adopted relaxed memory
consistency models to reduce the latency of remote memory access. However, in a
distributed memory multiprocessor, it is equally important to reduce the number
of messages used for remote memory access. The principal investigator has
developed an algorithm that implements a well known form of relaxed memory
called Release Consistency. This algorithm, called Lazy Release Consistency,
differs from most previous work because it is designed specifically for software
DSM, rather then being an imitation of hardware implementations. Our preliminary
results using trace-driven simulation indicate that Lazy Release Consistency
significantly reduces both the number of messages and the amount of data
transferred between processors. In order to reduce communication, Lazy Release
Consistency performs more computation. To assess the impact of this trade-off,
Lazy Release Consistency is being implemented in the Munin DSM and application
program performance compared to previous work.