* 9211759
* Workshop on:  "Molecular Biology of Mitochondrial Transport System; Ostuni, Italy, September 30 - October 3, 1992.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Michael Forte, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1993
* USD 7,200.00

The vast majority of eukaryotic cells contain many mitochondria. In this
organelle, the oxidation of small molecules generates cellular ATP, thus
providing most of the available energy for the cell. A unique feature of
mitochondria and related intracellular organelles is that they are composed of
two independent yet interacting membrane systems. Embedded in both of these
membranes are a variety of channel and carrier molecules that are responsible
for the monumental biochemical tasks necessitated by this structure; the
transport of highly charged molecules into and out of the mitochondria. Many of
the molecules responsible for these transport processes have been identified and
characterized in recent months. Many of the recent advances in the field have
been made by investigators applying disparate technologies and methodologies.
This workshop on "Molecular Biology of Mitochondrial Transport System" will
bring together scientists examining these systems by different approaches to
begin to identify structural similarities and functionally important
interactions. Although many of the individual players are known, the nature of
potential functional interactions and conserved structural motifs have yet to be
thoroughly explored. It is both important and timely to bring together a
multidisciplinary group of investigators examining mitochondrial transport
systems by different approaches but with the same overall goal.