* 9211746
* Development of Immunological and Cytochemical Techniques for Study of Metabolic Partitioning in a New Tripartite        Endosymbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Mary Saffo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 07/31/1994
* USD 29,545.00

I have been studying an apparently mutualistic endosymbiosis, between a widely
distributed family of marine invertebrate animals (molgulid ascidian tunicates)
and a funguslike protist, Nephromyces. Nephromyces inhabits the ductless "renal
sac", surrounding the urate-containing concretions conspicuously accumulated in
this molgulid organ. Nephromyces cells possess high levels of urate oxidase
activity, and are thus metabolizing the renal sac urate. The intracellular site
of this activity in Nephromyces is unknown; paradoxically, peroxisomes, the
usual site of urate oxidase in eukaryotes, are not obvious in Nephromyces. I
have unexpectedly discovered a third partner in this endosymbiosis:
intracellular bacteria in the cytoplasm of Nephromyuces. I hypothesize that the
activities of these bacteria are of profound consequence to the biology of the
symbiosis as a whole. By adapting techniques developed to study compartmentation
of ureide metabolism in legume-rhizobial symbioses, I plan to develop
cytochemical and immunological techniques to study the activities of these
bacteria in my system. I well test the hypothesis that the bacteria are the site
of urate oxidase activity in Nephromyces, and, more generally, that the bacteria
are serving as Nephromyces' peroxisomes. I will also test for the presence of
allantoinase activity (the next step in the uricolytic pathway) among all three
partners of the symbiosis. The general technical approaches developed in this
work should be applicable to eventual elucidation of other steps in urate
synthesis and degradation in the symbiosis, and of other possible metabolic
activities of the bacteria; data gathered through these techniques will also be
relevant to elucidation of the physiological dynamics of he several other, less
studied, urate-associated endosymbioses found in both marine and terrestrial
ecosystems.