* 9211342
* Diagnosing Parallel and Distributed Software Performance    Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Marc Abrams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 02/29/1996
* USD 87,690.00

Parallel and distributed computing will not enter the mainstream of computing
until simple means are found to diagnose and correct performance problems. This
award supports development of a system which, given monitored data collected
from multiple program execution observations, will trace back from a graph of a
performance metric to the processes and portions of source code that should be
modified to improve the metric. The trace back is possible because all parts of
the system, the source code, monitored data, graphs of performance metrics, and
empirical and theoretical models, use a common state representation. The system
performs three novel functions. First, it allows visual editing of monitored
data from a small number of program executions to define aggregate states and an
aggregate state transition rate matrix that can represent all observed program
executions. Second, it generates graphs of performance metrics from the
empirical model, rather than from the monitored data, to accurately predict
discontinuities in program behavior. Third, it generates a theoretical model of
program behavior that maps program behavior to a multidimensional Cartesian
space. The system is applied to a TCP/IP protocol implementation and a parallel
discrete event simulation system. Success in diagnosing performance problems in
these large systems could change the way programmers design parallel and
distributed software.