* 9211883
* Nonlinear Modeling and Prediction with Time Series Data
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1996
* A Surjalal Sharma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 06/30/1996
* USD 284,620.00

The proposal plans an examination of nonlinear, dissipative and non-equilibrium
systems in the magnetosphere. Recently studies have shown that a system with
complex behavior may have a simply dynamical description and that experimental
data can be used to reconstruct the system dynamics, thus gaining insight into
the physics of complex nonlinear systems, independently of particular modeling
assumptions. Using these techniques, the time series data of a single dynamical
variable can be used to obtain the fractal dimension, Lyapunov exponents, etc.
If the system is low dimensional and thus has a small number of degrees of
freedom, its dynamics may be described by a nonlinearly coupled set of a few
ordinary differential equations, which can be constructed from time series data.
These equations can then be used for prediction, which however would be limited
because of the chaotic behavior, and a predictability time scale can be defined
by a comparison of the predicted and observational data. Analysis of
magnetospheric activity using geomagnetic data has shown a low-dimensional
chaotic behavior, and thus its dynamical equations can be constructed. We
propose to develop nonlinear dynamical models using the phase space
reconstruction techniques in the solar wind--magnetosphere coupling and stellar
variability. The implications of such nonlinear dynamical techniques for the
study of astrophysical and space physical phenomena is the prime focus of the
proposed research.