* 9211002
* Practical Automated Assistance for Program Restructuring
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* William Griswold, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/1995
* USD 95,000.00

The goal of this project is to improve the current technology of semantically-
driven global program restructuring, enabling its practical application in
reducing software maintenance costs. Software maintenance is disproportionately
costly, and it has been observed that structural degradation is the primary, but
unavoidable, cause. The only alternatives are to reimplement the system or to
restructure it. Restructuring is the more attractive approach, though it is a
complex activity requiring tool assistance to manage consistency of changes
dispersed through the program text. Recently, methods have been developed for
tool-assisted restructuring, and a prototype has been built and tested. However,
the current methods do not fully address module-level restructuring or
performance issues of interactively manipulating semantic information. To make
these techniques practical, this project endeavors to design and implement
global module transformations, increase the speed of the tool by incrementally
updating data structures, and enhance the restructuring tool with structural
analysis tools and a visual front- end to support higher-level transformations.
The results are expected to be natural adaptations of existing results in
restructuring, compilers, programming environments, and program understanding.
The result of the research will be a tool employing these techniques, allowing
high-level interactive restructuring of programs, and showing that structure is
not an inherent barrier to software maintenance.