* 9211924
* The Geography of Welfare State Formation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Kevin Cox, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 08/31/1994
* USD 56,970.00

Comparative research on the development of modern welfare states treats the
U.S. welfare state as an aggregate, and often this work must discard the U.S.
case in any testing of hypotheses because it is exceptional. This holds true for
those theories which argue that welfare states have resulted primarily from the
exercise of power by social democratic parties. Since the New Deal, the role of
state governments in welfare activity has grown. Yet, there has been no explicit
geographical study of the formation of the U.S. welfare state, especially in
terms of variation at the state level. This research project will use a number
of theories to examine the geographical dimensions of the U.S. welfare state
from the 1930s to the 1960s. Programs for unemployment insurance, aid to
families with dependent children, and general relief will be analyzed across
states over time in order to determine whether they conform to one of three
models of welfare state development. Welfare program variables will be examined
using pooled cross-sectional time series analysis in a time dependent analysis.
The results will be used to test hypotheses about the regional structure of U.S.
politics over the time period in question, and to assess the effectiveness of
competing explanatory models in different regional contexts. This research will
make an important contribution to an understanding of the causes of welfare
state formation in the United States. It will be the first extensive
longitudinal analysis of the applicability of competing theories of welfare
state formation across different regional divisions.