* 9211364
* Democracy and the Mediation of International Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* William Dixon, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 12/31/1994
* USD 39,718.00

Democratic nations are involved in hostilities and wars about as often as non-
democratic nations. However, hostilities and wars between democracies are rare
events. A fundamental proposition has emerged to explain why democracies rarely
engage in hostile acts with one another. Namely, contending democratic nations
avoid war with one another by successfully employing mediation and other efforts
of third parties to resolve or ameliorate conflicts between them. The goal of
this research is to investigate the impact of democratic governance on the use
of conflict management techniques and peaceful settlement in approximately 250
postwar interstate security disputes. It represents the first attempt to subject
this fundamental proposition to direct empirical investigation. The researcher
will begin by developing an integrated data base drawing together diverse
information on interstate disputes and their outcomes, attributes of contending
parties in the disputes, any third parties seeking amelioration, and specific
actions taken by both disputants and third parties. Using these data, the
researcher will construct and estimate a theoretical model incorporating
democracy as a factor promoting the use of conflict management techniques and
then, focus on more complex models of how democracy works in conjunction with
conflict management techniques in the peaceful settlement of disputes. The final
phase of the project involves post-hoc examination of selected disputes in a
series of comparative case studies. These stages of inquiry assure that the
proposition about why democracies rarely engage in wars with one another is
rigorously tested.