* 9211552
* Catalytic Reduction of Nitrogen Oxides from Stationary PowerSources Using Methane
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* M. Albert Vannice, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 08/31/1996
* USD 266,097.00

This project examines the feasibility of reducing emissions of nitrogen oxides
from stationary power sources by including a catalytic reburn step in the
process. The reburn chamber would be incorporated into the stack of a boiler or
into a heat- recovery steam generator following a gas turbine, and would
incorporate heterogeneous catalysts capable of generating methyl radicals from
natural gas (methane) injected into the exit stream of the combustor. The
ability of methyl radicals to reduce nitrogen oxides is already well
established. In this study, two families of catalysts known to generate methyl
radicals from methane are used: lithium-doped zinc oxide and magnesium oxide,
and rare- earth oxides such as lanthana. Catalytic studies and adsorption
measurements provide specific activities, activation energies, and kinetic rate
expressions. Infrared spectroscopy done in situ is used to characterized the
surface species on the most active catalysts. Successful application of this
concept to power generating processes would result in an enormous decrease in
nitrogen oxide emissions and would probably eliminate acid rain from power
generation as a major environmental problem. It would also obviate the need for
the more expensive and more cumbersome processes involving ammonia that are
currently being used. Application to other industrial sources nitrogen oxides is
also envisioned.