* 9211521
* Managing Dynamic Policy Systems:  Mental Models and         Performance
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Thomas Stewart, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 08/31/1994
* USD 77,215.00

Successful management of dynamic decision making tasks is widely thought to
depend on the adequacy of the decision makers' "mental models" of the dynamic
environment. A mental model is usually taken to be some representation of the
decision maker's knowledge and understanding of the dynamic task. This project
will explore mental models -- their measurement, their correctness, and their
relation to performance. The central question to be addressed is: To what degree
does the ability of humans to perform in dynamic environments depend on their
understanding of the system to be managed? Understanding of the task is
indicated by the correspondence between the mental model and the system model.
This question has not been addressed in previous research on dynamic decision
making because a) the dynamic systems used were simple and were described in a
way that would maximize understanding of the systems, and b) system
understanding, i.e., correspondence between mental models and system models, was
not assessed. Therefore, it has not been possible to determine whether
suboptimal performance was due to lack of understanding of the system (an
inadequate mental model), lack of an ability to manage the system even though it
is understood (inability to use the model as an effective guide to action), or
both. This project is the result of collaboration between judgment researchers
and system dynamicists. A dynamic policy simulation model of the JOBS program (a
social services program intended to get people off of welfare and into the
workforce) has been developed and validated. A user interface for the model has
also been developed and it has been found to be a feasible basis for decision
making simulations. In this project, the JOBS model will provide a platform for
realistic simulation of dynamic decision making in a public policy context.
Subjects will include policy experts (county social services commissioners and
staff) and novices (graduate students in public administration). Three distinct
but interrelated types of mental models ("ends" models, "means" models, and
models of system functioning) will be assessed before and after the policy
simulation using two different methods. Model coherence and correctness, and the
relation between performance and quality of each of the three types of models
will be evaluated.