* 9211708
* Specialized Algorithms for Tomographic Reconstruction       of Electron Density Distributions in the Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Helen Na, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

Ionospheric tomography is a new and innovative method for two- dimensional
reconstruction of distribution in the ionosphere. Reconstructing high resolution
images of electron density distributions would allow communication systems to
compensate for the irregularities in these distributions which cause significant
interference. Accurate images of these irregularities would also assist in the
determination of their origins. Previously, remote sensing techniques were
limited to measuring these distributions integrated over a path, or at
individual locations. Current reconstruction techniques are based upon x-ray
tomography algorithms which are not well-suited for ionospheric tomography due
to the geometry of the data acquisition system. The differences between these
systems cause considerable resolution degradation in the reconstructed images.
This proposal is for preliminary studies in the development of specialized
algorithms for ionospheric tomography. Substantial a priori information on the
formation of these distributions is available and ionosonde measurements provide
accurate values at specific locations. This a priori information can be used in
specialized algorithms to compensate for the geometric limitations of the data
acquisition system. The program of research would be for 18 months from the
start of the project. Upon completion of preliminary investigations, a full-
scale research proposal would be developed.