* 9211452
* Collaborative Research:  Expansion of the U.S. Supreme CourtData Base
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Harold Spaeth, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 12/31/1994
* USD 22,066.00

The decision-making of the United States Supreme Court is of substantial
interest to social scientists, journalists, and laypersons alike. Beginning in
1983, the Law and Social Science Program provided support for the construction
of a multi-user data base that codifies a wide range of dimensions relevant to
Supreme Court decision-making, and makes these data available to social
scientists and other parties through the Interuniversity Consortium for
Political and Social Research in Ann Arbor, Michigan. This grant will extend the
data base and therefore, enhance scholarship on the Supreme Court. Specifically,
this collaborative project with Spaeth, the principal investigator of the
original project, and Jan Palmer will extend the NSF-funded U.S. Supreme Court
Judicial Data Base (now covering the Warren, Burger and Rehnquist years) to
encompass comparable data on the official votes of the Vinson Court (1946-1953).
A second extension integrates data related to the official votes with a data
base created by Palmer that contains the justices' conference voting and opinion
assignments. This data base, which encompasses the Vinson Court, will be
extended to include the Warren Court. The resulting project will span 23 terms
of the Supreme Court (1946-1968) and the behavior of the 20 justices who then
served. As with the original data base, these extensions will be archived at the
Inter-University Consortium, and will be available as an SPSS export file. The
richness of the resulting data will tremendously enhance the formulation of
theory and testing of hypotheses with respect to the Supreme Court.