* 9211748
* International Cooperation in Exchange Rate Management
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Keisuke Iida, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 12/31/1993
* USD 45,000.00

The purpose of this project is to clarify the nature and dynamics of
international cooperation in exchange rate management among the three major
industrialized countries, namely the United States, Japan and Germany. The
currencies of these three countries, the dollar, yen and mark, have been
floating against one another since the early 1970s, but the exchange rates among
them have been unstable and saw major misalignments in the early 1980s, leading
to a greater concern for the possibility of international cooperation to
stabilize exchange rates and prevent misalignments. There is some evidence that
the three countries have been trying to coordinate their exchange rate policies
systematically since the mid-1980s, but except for some journalistic accounts of
coordination, not much is known about how and why cooperation takes place. This
project is the first major attempt to systematically analyze the causal
structure of exchange rate cooperation. The project covers the entire period of
floating exchange rates and uses the data on foreign exchange market
intervention published by the Federal Reserve Board and the German Bundesbank
and estimated data for Japan. Other standard economic statistics available from
national and international sources and political variables which are relatively
easily observable are also used. The project is significant in the sense that it
is the first scientific (statistical) attempt to explain exchange rate policy
cooperation among the three key countries of enormous economic and political
importance. If successfully executed, it will not only contribute to our
understanding of the nature of the current exchange rate system and exchange
rate policies but also contribute to our understanding of international economic
cooperation in general.