* 9211169
* Robust Control of Systems under Mixed Time/Frequency-Domain Performance Specifications and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Mario Sznaier, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/1995
* USD 98,716.00

A successful controller design paradigm must take into account both model
uncertainty and performance specifications. Model uncertainty can be used
successfully addressed using the Hoo robust control framework. However, this
framework cannot accommodate the realistic case where in addition to robustness
considerations, the system is subject to both time and frequency domain
performance specifications. In this research we propose to develop a robust
control framework that takes explicitly into account these specifications.
Specifically, the objectives of the proposed research are: 1) Development of a
set of simple measures to describe how well a given set of performance
specifications is satisfied in the presence of uncertainty. 2) Development of a
controller synthesis procedure that uses extra degrees of freedom available in
the problem to maximize an appropriate performance measure over the set of
controllers that achieve a desired robustness level. This research will use the
Youla parametrization to cast the problem into constrained optimization form.
This research effort will result in an expanded Hoo framework, capable of
addressing realistic problems without necessitating approximations nor multiple
trial and error type iterations, thus leading to improved and less costly
designs. The resulting framework will be used to design controllers for thermal
power plants and flexible structures. As part of the research effort, these
controllers will be tested both using simulations and prototype structure.