* 9211605
* Transition to Agriculture in Prehistoric Denmark
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Anne Gebauer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 173,210.00

Dr. T. Douglas Price, with a team of American and Danish collaborators, will
conduct two years of archaeological research, which will constitute the second
stage of a major, long term project. The team will undertake archaeological
excavation in the Saltbaek Vig region of eastern Denmark. This area, typical of
southern Scandinavia, is known to contain sites from the "Mesolithic" (terminal
hunting and gathering) and "Neolithic" (early farming) periods. It has excellent
preservation of archaeological remains. During two field seasons, the team will
excavate approximately 40 sites to distinguish those which date in the 3500 to
2500 B.C. range. It is during this time that the transition to agriculture took
place.They will also conduct paleoenvironmental studies in the area. These
investigations will constitute the first systematic survey for Stone Age sites
in Denmark, and help document changes in sea level, temperature, and vegetation.
Approximately 5,000 years ago, Neolithic farmers appear suddenly in southern
Denmark, and they rapidly replace the Mesolithic hunter- gatherer occupants.
While this fact is clear, the mechanisms involved in this transition are little
understood. It is not known to what extent resident hunters and gatherers were
replaced by new populations or whether these groups rapidly changed their
subsistence practices when new techniques, plants, and animals were made
available to them. It seems that domestic plants and animals were slow in coming
to Denmark, but once they appeared, a rapid transition ensued. Dr. Price and his
colleagues will examine this change and try to understand the mechanisms
involved. The transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture constitutes
perhaps the single most important advance in human prehistory. Within very short
periods of time, many populations were exposed to a new mode of subsistence and
underwent rapid social transformation. By understanding this process,
anthropologists can gain new insight into the plasticity of human social
organization and the mechanisms involved in rapid social change. This research
will provide insight into societies in isolated parts of the world who today are
undergoing this same transformation.