* 9211344
* Combined Coding and Modulation for Spread Spectrum          Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Brian Woerner, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aubrey M. Bush
* 01/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

A study of direct-sequence spread-spectrum (DS/SS) techniques for high capacity
mobile communications systems is proposed. This research aims to develop an
understanding of how coding and modulation affect the multiple access capability
of these systems. In particular, this research will focus on the development of
combined coding and modulation techniques for DS/SS systems. Although coded
modulation techniques have yielded dramatic performance improvements when
applied to communications over narrowband channels, attempts to apply these
techniques to spread-spectrum systems have thus far produced modest results
Rather than attempt to develop entire new classes of codes, this investigation
will examine existing classes of convolutional codes. When the choice of
convolutional code is combined with the choice of spreading sequence, a combined
coding and modulation technique results. It is conjectured that the resulting
codes will perform as well as any possible coded modulation technique for a
DS/SS system. The objectives of this research are to understand the fundamental
performance limits of coded modulation techniques for DS/SS systems, to identify
promising coded modulation techniques, and to analyze the performance of these
techniques using a channel model which incorporates the effects of multiple
access interference and frequency selective fading. The research proposed here
will have a twofold impact. While understanding the relationship between coding
and modulation in a DS/SS system is of long term theoretical interest, the
development of practical error correction techniques for DS/SS is of immediate
practical value to the mobile communications community.