* 9211700
* RPG: A Phylogenetic Analysis of the Dichrostachys Group (Leguminosae: Mimosoideae)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Melissa Luckow, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 17,995.00

The Dichrostachys group includes five genera of legumes with centers of
diversity in Madagascar and subtropical North America. The New World genera have
been well-studied, but species and generic limits are poorly understood in the
rarely collected Malagasy genera. The proposed research will investigate
evolutionary relationships among species in the five genera, integrating data
from morphology, pollen, chloroplast DNA, and floral development. A phylogenetic
tree will serve to clarify the generic limits, as well as provide a framework
for study of the evolution of pollen and floral development in legumes. This
study should also provide new insights into the biogeographic relationships of
tropical North American legumes. Some neotropical species in this group are
being developed as forage legumes, and one temperate species as perennial food
crop. It is possible that the as yet unstudied Malagasy species could likewise
provide food and forage legumes. In addition, the proposed field work in
Madagascar will contribute primary data on the infrequently collected legume
flora of Madagascar. This study represents a significant development in the use
of molecular character systems in the Mimosa subfamily of legumes, and is the
first time that characters involving floral development have been intergrated
with morphological and molecular characters in a systematic analysis.