* 9211679
* Employment Changes and Their Impact on Local Government
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Lynn Staeheli, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 07/31/1994
* USD 17,839.00

Political action by ordinary people is typically locally based, and it focuses
on local issues or on local responses to higher level trends. Changes in
political activism can have important consequences for issues such as public
service delivery and the form and role of government. Flexible employment such
as part-time work, off-shift work, temporary contracts, self- employment, and
homeworking may change patterns of political activism by making it more
difficult for unions and political parties to identify the common basis for
political action and by differentiating increasingly divergent wage and
compensation structures. Any evaluation of political activism depends critically
on citizen perception of the openness of local political institutions; if these
institutions are perceived as inaccessible, political activism would be less
likely. Thus, the nature and perception of local political institutions
intervenes in the restructuring of citizenship. This project will examine how
political activism by citizens is affected by the increase in flexible
employment forms that have accompanied economic restructuring. It hypothesizes
that flexible employment and changes in wage levels, job security, and time
availability lead to re-evaluations of the potential of political activism. In
this process, perception of the local political structure acts as an intervening
variable. Trends in activism are examined through interviews with a sample of
household members to reconstruct their employment and political histories. Three
interviewing strategies and alternative methodological techniques will be
employed in order to determine how the relationship between economic
restructuring and political activism can best be assessed. This Research
Planning Grant for Women will help fill a void in empirical knowledge about
changes in the work experiences of households, changes in the perceptions of
local political institutions, and political activism on the part of citizens.
This study will inform research related to restructuring, the state, and
citizenship, and it will advance our understanding of the fabric of local
democracy under conditions of restructuring.