* 9211694
* An Assessment of U.S.-German Exchange Programs in MechanicalEngineering workshop to held March 1992 in New Orleans,     Louisiana
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Leroy Fletcher, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1995
* USD 44,687.00

Engineering colleges have developed a wide range of individual education and
research exchange programs with institutions in Germany, some with support
through such organizations as the von Humboldt Foundation and the DAAD, many
with State support. There is a need to assess the status of the cooperative
programs between U.S. and German institutions so that successful experiences and
procedures can be shared. It is with these developments in mind that a workshop
assessing the overall impact of U.S.-German cooperative programs in Mechanical
Engineering is supported. There are multiple objectives for the workshop,
including: (1) an evaluation of existing U.S./Germany cooperative programs in
Mechanical Engineering; (2) an assessment of problems associated with developing
a cooperative program; (3) the development of guidelines/procedures of the
initiation of U.S./Germany cooperative programs, (4) the establishment of goals
for increasing the number of cooperative programs with Germany; and, (5) the
development of recommendations for the role that NSF could play in advancing
international cooperation in Mechanical Engineering. Based on the evaluation of
existing programs and associated problems, goals will be established for
increasing the number of U.S./Germany cooperative programs and recommendations
will be offered for the role that the USA may play in advancing international
cooperation with Germany. A workshop report will be prepared.