* 9211668
* RIA: Combined Logic Synthesis and Physical Design
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Massoud Pedram, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 05/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

This research is on finding efficient techniques for producing solutions to
logic synthesis and physical design problems both simultaneously and
interactively. Two problem areas are being investigated: integrating logic
synthesis with physical design; and layout algorithms for Boolean networks. In
the first area, a prototype synthesis system which is capable of making
synthesis decisions based on both logic level information and detailed data
about the interconnecting wires and characteristics of the physical media is
being developed. The key idea is to generate a placement of the Boolean network
that captures the structure of the layout. The correspondence between logic and
layout representations is maintained during iterations. Both technology
independent and technology dependent logic transformations are accommodated. In
the second area, ways to assign the I/O pads or place the nodes of an unmapped
Boolean network, where the nodes still have technology independent logic
realizations, are being investigated. Physical design tools which effectively
capture the structural characteristics of Boolean networks and can handle nodes
of inexact or approximate area, intrinsic delay and drive are being developed.
Accurate and efficient modeling of interconnect during logic synthesis and
layout plays a key role in the algorithm development.