* 9211965
* Dissertation Research:  Effects of Ecological Factors on    Facultative Mutualisms
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* NONE NONE, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 02/28/1994
* USD 3,771.00

The purpose of this research is to determine how ecological factors shape
facultative mutualisms, focussing on ant-plant system. The proposed studies of
the relationship between the plants and their ant occupants, of the life history
characters of the ant species that occupy the plants, and of ecological
interactions between ant species will contribute to our understanding of how
facultative ant-plant mutualisms are established and maintained. Ecological
investigations such as those outlined in this proposal can identify likely
selective environments in which future evolutionary specialization may take
place. Comparative research of the interaction between the ant-plant Conostegia
setosa (Melastomataceae) and its ant occupants at two rainforest sites, one in
Costa Rica and one in Panama is being conducted. Since each species of ant
occupant potentially has a different effect on plant fitness, the identity and
frequency of each species of ant occupant and how the identity of the occupants
is determined are important in predicting the likelihood of the evolution of
more specialized mutualisms. Experiments are designed to address several
ecological factors that may determine the occupants of C. setosa: by: 1)
observing interactions between the species of ant occupants and other area ant
species at baits, 2) comparing life history variables such as colony structure,
foraging strategies, and competitive behaviors that may affect establishment in
C. setosa plants by the different species of ant occupants, and 3) measuring the
benefits of the interaction to the plants and the ants. A long-term transplant
experiment has been set up to investigate modes of colonization by each ant
species, priority effects, and the influence of the ant community on the
identity of the ant occupants.