* 9211618
* Limited Contracting in General Equlibrium Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Patrick Kehoe, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/1995
* USD 189,289.00

Why in market economies is it the owners of capital that almost always hire
labor? Classical general equilibrium theory is silent on this question: whoever
controls a firm whether it be the owners of capital or the owners of labor, or
someone else, simply picks the value maximizing point in that firm's production
possibility set. In market economies we typically see limited liability of the
owners of firms. We also see bankruptcies and often firms are reorganized and
control is transferred to new owners and sometimes firms are liquidated. This
project develops a model in which bankruptcy, reorganization, and liquidation
occur in equilibrium and in which it is optimal for capitalists to own and
control the firm. Currently quantitative general equilibrium models of the
business cycle abstract from financial intermediation. One widely held view of
the business cycle is that shocks to the economy which do not directly have a
large effect on aggregate production possibilities may end up having large
aggregate consequences due to interactions with the financial intermediation
system. For example, the financial crises of the late 19th and early 20th
centuries were followed by severe declines in output and employment which seem
far too large to be accounted for by technology shocks. The contribution of this
project comes from the development of the first quantitative general equilibrium
model of the business cycle in which financial intermediation plays a central
role. These models are used to reassess the effects of monetary and fiscal
policy, including various regulations and policies with regard to financial
intermediation. An extended version of the model explores financial crises over
the cycle. The third part of this project evaluates monetary and fiscal policy
with limited contracting among agents. A quantitative model with nominal wage
contracts is developed and its policy implications are explored. A model is also
developed in which income distribution interacts with the tax system. These
models are used to quantitatively study the interact ion between equity and
efficiency goals in the design of tax policies.