* 9211418
* Building A Concept Space for an Electronic Community System
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 11/30/1994
* USD 63,804.00

Researchers in a scientific community or organizational members in a company
are often overwhelmed by the amount of current information, the subject and
computer knowledge required to access this information, and the constant influx
of even larger amounts of new information. Using an electronic community system
as a testbed the aim of the research is to address specifically the information
sharing, retrieval, and filtering problems through the use of a variety of AI
and statistical techniques, including knowledge acquisition, automatic thesaurus
generation, and neural network computing. A Concept Space is designed to
represent high- level community knowledge such as topics, subjects, techniques,
and people in terms of nodes and their weighted relationships in a structure
that is akin to a semantic network. This Concept Space can be perceived as a
high-level conceptual description of the basic information items that reside in
an Information Space. It is created mainly from a knowledge acquisition process
involving subject experts and from an automatic cluster analysis of documents
stored in the community's online, textual databases. Two kinds of system
interface are considered both making extensive use of the Concept Space. A
browsing interface permits users to traverse this weighted concept network
themselves, select concepts of interests, and access its underlying information.
An activation interface based on a Hopfield network spreading activation
algorithm traverses the network automatically and identify concepts most
relevant to searchers' needs, with very little searcher intervention. Both types
of interface are designed to provide user-friendly access, to facilitate
learning, and to avoid the need for extensive user computing knowledge. This
research is designed to provide insights for the development of more timely,
comprehensive, and accessible electronic community systems and computer-based
organizational memory.