* 9211588
* The Sevilleta Field Station: Construction of a Desert-Plant Lath House and a Shop/Storage Building
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Clifford Crawford, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1995
* USD 74,820.00

The newly constructed Sevilleta Field Station serves a large number of
scientists who study the extensive and ecologically diverse region of central
New Mexico. The region incorporates transition zones among numerous biomes,
including Great Plains Grassland, Chihuahuan Desert, Great Basin Shrub-Steppe,
Interior Chaparral, Mogollon (Pinon- Juniper) Woodland, and Montane Forests.
Additional biotic assemblages within these biomes include Rio Grande "Bosque"
(Riparian Cottonwood Forest ) and Wetlands, Subalpine Forests, and Subalpine
Grasslands. Much of the current scientific research in the region focuses on
biotic responses to climate change at various spatial and temporal time scales
(seasonal , annual, and long-term), biodiversity issues, and ecosystem
restoration following natural and anthropogenic disturbance. Funding levels for
the current year's research activities exceeds $7.25 million, and continues to
increase. At present, there are 70 scientists and graduate students working on
49 active research projects in the Sevilleta region. The Sevilleta Field
Research Station provides logistical support to a large proportion of these
projects. The Sevilleta Field Research Station has expanded with the
construction of new residences and laboratory facilities to meet the growing
demand for field logistical support. This project will increase the research
support capability of the Sevilletta Field Research Station. The construction of
a lath house and experimental garden, that will be used in germinating and
establishing native plants for a variety of research and educational projects
will add significantly to station research capability. In addition, the station
will provide an indoor storage facility for field equipment, and a workshop area
for equipment construction and maintenance. This addition to the station will
significantly expand the botanical and genetics research opportunities on the
Sevillets, and provide greater logistical support for virtually all ongoing
ecological field research activities in central New Mexico.