* 9211148
* Parallel Adaptive Finite Element Methods for Parabolic      Partial Differential Equations
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Joseph Flaherty, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert G. Voigt
* 11/30/1994
* USD 44,000.00

Adaptive finite element techniques provide a reliable, robust, and efficient
means of solving the complex partial differential equations that arise in
practice. Likewise, parallel computation is becoming indispensable in the
solution of modern large-scale scientific engineering computational problems. We
propose to investigate parallel and adaptive procedures for solving vector
systems of three-dimensional time-dependent parabolic equations. With a goal of
developing the most efficient techniques, we will emphasize adaptive procedures
that include both mesh modification (refinement and coarsening) and variation of
the order of the finite element procedure. In a similar spirit, we will
concentrate on massive parallelism using SIMD and MIMD architectures. Resulting
software will be capable of solving problems on arbitrary three-dimensional
problem domains using a finite octree automatic mesh generation procedure. This
tree structure, which manages data associated with mesh generation and adaptive
mesh refinement, with further be used to schedule parallel processors so that
loading is balanced and to map spatial regions to various parallel
architectures. Likewise, we will explore procedures that utilize the a
posteriori error estimates, furnished with the adaptive software, to estimate
the work remaining in different portions of the problem domain and schedule
processors accordingly.