* 9211769
* Successional Processes in Taiga Forests of Interior Alaska:  A Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) Program for Study   of Controls of Subarctic Forest Development
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,10/31/1999
* Leslie Viereck, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1999
* USD 4,182,506.00

This program focuses on population and ecosystem level questions within the
framework of succession. It capitalizes on a substantial existing base of
information and preliminary results from past research to address hypothesized
controls of structure and function of successional forest communities. These
processes previously have not been examined in a comprehensive manner in the
North American taiga. Results of this research will greatly improve
understanding of the links between resource (moisture, light, nutrients) supply
and plant growth as influenced by herbivores and soil microbial activity.
Researchers in interior Alaska have demonstrated their commitment to long-term
studies of ecological processes. Several studies have been pursued, essentially
by the same scientists for 20 to 25 years. For example a series of plots in
various successional stages on the floodplain of the Chena and Tanana rivers
established in 1964, are still being monitored for growth and changes in species
composition. The USDA Forest Service also is committed to long-term
experimentation and encourages these activities through their management of
Bonanza Creek Experimental Forest, the principal site of this research. The
hypotheses put forth in this proposal address important long- term aspects of
forest ecosystem structure and function only initially evaluated in earlier
research efforts. During this new phase initial experiments will be continued
and new hypotheses will be addressed based on some initial results. Considering
questions dealing with taiga forest ecology from a successional standpoint
establishes a strong organizational structure for the research and promotes
linkage among research projects and feedback of ideas and information among
personnel. The structure and objectives of this project take advantage of
existing knowledge, current research activities, and an experienced group of
investigators, melding them in a combination which will promote the type of
interaction necessary for advancing scientific understanding of the ecology of
taiga forest ecosystems, and insuring success of a long-term ecological research
program.