* 9211419
* Segmentation and Recognition of Complex Temporal Patterns
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* DeLiang Wang, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 06/30/1995
* USD 60,000.00

Temporal information processing underlies various kinds of intelligent
behaviors, including hearing and vision. A neural network framework for
segmenting and recognizing complex temporal patterns is proposed. Processing of
temporal segmentation is based on the idea that segmentation is expressed by
synchronization within each segment and desychronization among different
segments. Each segment becomes an input to the recognition network that
explicitly encodes neighborhood or topological relations of local features of
the input, and recognition is based on the graph matching method. To cope with
problems embedded in time, the network to constructed codes time explicitly.
Multiple temporal patterns are segregated into different segments that are
activated alternately in the time domain. The network is able to recognize
complex temporal patterns, and recognition is invariant to distortions of time
intervals (time warping) and to changes in the rate of presentation . The
network will be tested for both neural plausibility and computational
effectiveness. Results of this project will provide new computational principles
that might be used by the brain to process temporal segmentation and
recognition. Also, they will provide effective methods for solving technical
problems indispensable in real time continuous auditor pattern recognition.