* 9212452
* Marine Biotech Fellowship:  Molecular Analysis of Bacterial Genes Involved in Establishing the Vibrio Fischeri/Euprymna Scolopes Symbiotic Relationship
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1993,03/31/1996
* Lynne Gilson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1996
* USD 84,000.00

9212452 GILSON The long term objective of this project is to understand the
mechanisms involved in establishing a bacterial/animal symbiosis. Vibrio
fischeri exists both as a free-living marine bacteria and as a bioluminescent
inhabitant of the light organ of sepiolid squid and monocentrid fish. The
association of V. fischeri and the small squid, Euprymna scolopes, offers a
model mutualistic relationship and has already proven to be amenable to
laboratory and molecular genetic methodologies. This project is directed at
identifying the genes and gene products that are expressed as V. fischeri senses
and responds to the conditions within the host. Genes that are expressed only
when the bacteria is in association with the squid will be identified by fusions
with a gene whose expression is essential for bacterial survival within the
host, but, under selective conditions, is lethal outside the host. Protein gels
(2-D) will be used to identify proteins that are preferentially synthesized in
these two different environments. And since bioluminescence is preferentially
exhibited under symbiotic conditions and is controlled by a density-dependent,
pheromone-like molecule, other genes that are also part of this regulon will be
identified through mudlac fusion technology. The relationship between V.
fischeri and E. scolopes is apparently a mutualistic one, however its
establishment and maintenance is evolutionarily related to commensal, parasitic
and pathogenic associations. Information of the genetic basis for mechanisms of
cell-cell communications, signal transduction and gene activation will be
applicable to all of these systems. ***