* 9212606
* Workshop on the Role of the NSF Supercomputer Centers in    the National High Performance Computing Effort to be held   March 7-8, 1992 in Houston, TX
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1992
* Robert Sugar, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 08/31/1992
* USD 42,707.00

Given the rapid changes taking place in scientific computing and the Federal
High-Performance Computing and Communications multi- agency program, it is
important to examine future directions for the NSF Supercomputer Centers
Programs, its organizational structure and its role in the overall national
effort in high performance computing. The Program Advisory Committee (PAC) of
the Division of Advanced Scientific Computing will convene a workshop on this
subject on March 7-8 1992, to provide NSF with broadly- based input from experts
in the field, and to prepare position papers which will serve as the basis for
the report. Topics for discussion at this workshop will be: 1) Access: The major
function of the Centers Program is to provide access to state of the art
computational facilities for the national research community. What facilities
will be needed in the coming years. 2) Infrastructure development: What should
be role of the Centers in developing human and computational infrastructure? 3)
Catalysis and technology transfer: What should be the role of the Centers in
relation to the high performance computer industry and the industrial user
community? 4) Process: Are changes needed in the structure of the Centers
Program? How should it be reviewed and renewed? What should be the relationship
between the Centers Program and other high performance computing programs
supported by the NSF, other federal agencies and state government?