* 9212683
* Dissertation Research: Physiological and Demographic        Mechanisms of Tree Regeneration Following Hurricane         Blowdown in a Temperate Deciduous Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* NONE NONE, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1994
* USD 8,195.00

When catastrophic windstorms remove forest canopy, the forest floor is disrupted
by the uprooting of trees, leaving mounds, pits, and other microsites. These
microsites are important for regeneration of many tree species. The objective of
this suite of studies is to describe the different microsite environments and
examine the physiological and demographic mechanisms by which trees respond to
these environments. An integrative approach, combining descriptive community-
level studies with experimental studies of individuals and populations will be
used. This research is being conducted on the Harvard Forest Long-Term
Ecological Research Sites, where hurricane blowdowns have been simulated by
pulling down canopy trees. Five canopy tree species: red maple, red oak, black
birch, white birch, and yellow birch will be studied. The central hypothesis is
that forest regeneration can be explained in terms of species-specific responses
to light, temperature, water, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide. Fluxes of these
factors in the forest understory and on five microsites created by simulated
hurricane blowdown will be examined. Patterns of environmental factors will be
related to seed and seedling demography and to growth and physiology of
individual seedlings. Changes in the understory community following disturbance
will also be monitored to detect effects of understory vegetation on the forest
floor environment and on tree regeneration.