* 9212646
* Toward a Federal Theory of Partisanship
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1992,11/30/1994
* Michael Maggiotto, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 11/30/1994
* USD 40,000.00

This research involves the second wave of a panel study of the American
electorate begun with federal funds at the university of the researchers. The
project identifies the distribution, stability and roots of segmented
partisanship and assesses its impact on the way in which Americans think about
and react to politics, political institutions, and candidates. The role of
political parties in ordering democratic institutions and in framing electoral
choice has not been seriously questioned since political scientist E.E.
Schattschneider proclaimed, in 1942, that " . . . modern democracy is
unthinkable save in terms of the parties." Similarly, at the individual level,
while its predictive power has fluctuated over time, the centrality of party
identification to any understanding of electoral turnout, vote direction, the
assessment of candidates, the impact of issues, and the role of ideology has
never been seriously disputed. If anything, the most productive research has
enriched our appreciation of partisanship by demonstrating its
multidimensionality. The impact of federalism on the dimensionality of
partisanship, however, has been largely ignored. Research has emphasized the
constancy of party identification within each citizen across levels of
government. Because the scope and type of political decisions often vary among
levels of government, Americans may develop different expectations for the
performance of government at different levels. Hence, it is both logical and
often appropriate for voter approval, contempt, and indifference to be localized
and not fully generalizable across all levels of government. Moreover, when
party programs and personalities are linked to level-based performance
expectations, variation in citizen response to those programs and personalities
should be an expected, not a surprising, outcome. In short, it should be
anticipated that people will respond differently to the different powers and
purposes of national and state government. This second wave of interviews in the
panel study of the American electorate involves 1,350 respondents selected using
random-digit dialing and random selection within households. It should allow
greater understanding of the way in which Americans think about and react to
politics, political institutions, and candidates.