* 9212849
* Dissertation Research:  The Evolutionary Impact of Natural  Selection, Quantitative Genetic Variation, and Gene Flow in a Salt Marsh Perennial, Limonium carolinianum
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Johanna Schmitt, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1995
* USD 8,000.00

Recent developments in the theory and statistics for measuring natural selection
have allowed the action of selection on the phenotype to be measured separately
from the inheritance of that phenotype and these estimates of natural selection
on phenotypic traits have been used to address many contemporary theoretical
issues in plant biology. The proposed experiments with the salt marsh plant
Limonium carolinianum would provide measures of selection on reproductive traits
and address three issues crucial to a more complete understanding of selection
estimates and genotypic responses to natural selection in wild populations: 1)
understanding the genetic basis and heritability of the quantitative traits
being measured for selection estimates, 2) neighborhood parameters that
determine the spatial scale over which selection could cause adaptive change by
and control the balance between such change by natural selection or by random
genetic drift, 3) experimental manipulation of environment that can identify the
casual selective agents or partially explain why selection operates in an
observed way. Locally variable natural selection, random genetic drift, and
limited gene flow are all believed to play major roles in the local adaptation
of plant populations. However, simultaneous estimates of the spatial scale of
selection, amount of quantitative genetic variation available to respond to
selection, and neighborhood size and area have never been obtained in a wild
plant species. The study will contribute to better knowledge of plant population
change in sensitive and shrinking salt-marsh ecosystems.