* 9212668
* Molecular Rheology of Miscible Polymer Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1994
* Christos Tsenoglou, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Akbar Montaser
* 06/30/1994
* USD 44,600.00

This research is an experimental and theoretical study on the viscoelastic
properties of blends of dissimilar polymers in the entangled fluid state. Binary
blends will first be prepared from well-characterized linear polybutadienes of
narrow molecular-weight distribution and variable microstructure. The
heteropolymer character of these mixtures will be controlled by increasing the
disparity of the vinyl group content in the participating components. Dynamic-
oscillatory, steady-shear, tensile, and step- strain experiments will be
utilized in examining the linear and nonlinear viscoelasticity of these systems
at several temperatures as a function of composition. The fluidity, elasticity,
and rigidity of a blend will thus be related to the corresponding properties of
its pure constituents. Blends of commercial polymers will also be investigated
to test whether the conclusions drawn on model polymer mixtures apply to cases
of commerical interest. Especial emphasis will be given on blends where
miscibility is driven by the presence of strong specific interactions. A
molecular theory already developed to explain the composite network architecture
and molecular dynamics in miscible heteropolymer blends will be extended to
accommodate non-ideal behavior. This research is part of a general format to
understand better the mixing behavior of dissimilar polymer. A particle outcome
would be more efficient processing of recycled plastics, which are typically
mixtures.