* 9212994
* Marine Biotech Fellowship:  Genetic Population Structure    and Gene Flow in Deep-Sea Invertebrates
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Thomas Kocher, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/1996
* USD 84,000.00

9212994 France The deep sea is the largest environment of Earth and is known to
be highly diverse in its invertebrate fauna. Although considerable effort has
been devoted to measuring the patterns of species diversity, the evolutionary
forces which have generated the deep- sea fauna remain poorly studied. In order
to estimate gene flow and the potential for population differentiation and
speciation, studies of the genetic patterns of geographic variation are
required. Yet only a handful of such studies have been done in the deep sea. One
of the major obstacles to quantifying genetic population structure in deep-sea
species has been the difficulty of obtaining sufficient quantities of
appropriately preserved tissue for genetic studies. Most of the deep-sea benthos
is comprised of small, sparsely distributed organisms which are recovered dead
or moribund during typical sampling; these specimens have been inadequate for
the standard techniques of allozyme electrophoresis. However, with the advent of
new molecular biological techniques which make possible the characterization of
DNA sequences from ancient, dried, and alcohol-preserved tissues, studies of the
population genetics of deep-sea species are now feasible. In particular, the
extensive collections of specimens from dozens of deep-sea sampling efforts
provide a wealth of potential information ready to be analyzed. This project
will apply the techniques of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to characterize
genetic variation from alcohol-preserved specimens of deep-sea amphipods, with
the goal of estimating genetic population structure and gene flow at intra-ocean
and inter-ocean geographic scales. To accomplish this goal, this project will,
1.) with PCR, amplify rapidly evolving portions of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
from 15-25 individuals in each population with universal primers constructed
from mtDNA sequences of Drosophila; 2.) inspect amplified segments for
hypervariable regions; 3.) identify 15-20 base pair regions where most variation
is confined to 1 or 2 polymorphic nucleotides and design allele-specific
oligonucleotide (ASO) probes for each allele; 4. hybridize ASO probes to
amplified hypervariable regions from 100-200 individuals per population; 5)
calculate allele and genotype frequencies in each population and evaluate
population structure. The results of this project should provide the first
detailed examination of genetic population structure across deep ocean basins
and between world oceans. In addition, this project has the potential to
demonstrate the applicability of molecular biological techniques to problems in
deep-sea ecology and to promote further use of available resources in addressing
important evolutionary issues in the oceans. ***