* 9212204
* Unassisted Refugee Resettlement in Eastern Sudan
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Johnathan Bascom, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 06/30/1994
* USD 26,916.00

The processes of refuge migration and resettlement have long attracted the
attention of social scientists. Much research has enhanced understanding of the
ways that refugee populations move, resettle, and adapt under different
physical, social, and regional environments. Geographers have studied different
phases of the refugee experience: flight, resettlement, repatriation, and
reintegration. New approaches attempt to place the refugee question within a
contextual analysis which concerns how social, economic, and political
structures impinge upon the resettlement of refugees. This project will
strengthen geographical analyses of refugees by placing refugee resettlement
into a larger context of time and social space. The study will conduct a
detailed longitudinal analysis of unassisted refugee resettlement in the eastern
Sudan, and it will identify factors which determine the pace and scale of
repatriation. Data will come from a survey questionnaire, archival
documentation, focus interviews with local leaders, and interviews with members
of the institutional hierarchy associated with refugees. This project will
contribute to a better understanding of refugee resettlement in three ways.
First, it will place refugee resettlement in a larger context which will link
processes operating at different scales of analysis. Second, it will examine how
relations within the household are reorganized to accommodate the pressures on
refugees. Third, it will uncover the specific mechanisms which create
differential access to physical, financial, and social resources among refugees
and their hosts.