* 9212723
* Transformation of Legal Identities and the Relation to      Entitlement Claims
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Christine Harrington, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 12/31/1993
* USD 8,688.00

This planning grant will enable exploratory research for development of a full
scale proposal on the transformation of legal identities. The project
investigates how the identity of "leper" is being transformed on the island of
Molokai, in Hawaii, in the context of international tourism and of local,
regional, and international struggles over the acquisition of land in Hawaii. A
central theoretical focus of the research is to flush out the process and
meaning of reclaiming or reinventing legal histories and contemporary
identities. The case of "the leper" is an example of a legal identity that was
at one time excluded and punished and now is being transformed and mobilized to
secure entitlements, such as property. This transformation is examined in the
context of the colonial history of Hawaii and the present effort by remnants of
the nineteenth century leper colony in Kalaupapa to retain their rights to the
settlement in the process of its establishment as a national historical park.
The project traces the emergence of a new local identity for "lepers" by
considering how contemporary sufferers of Hansen's disease create a legal,
cultural, and political space for themselves, reworking the imagery of an
oppressive colonial past in the context of a neocolonialist tourist industry
through which their claims to entitlement may be secured and/or threatened at
the same time. The research contributes to empirical and theoretical work on the
ways in which law and other institutions construct identities while at the same
time structuring forums which people use to reshape their histories and make
entitlement claims. It has wider theoretical implications for the intersection
of legal and medical definitions, the conflict of state and federal notions of
land tenure and use, and the changes wrought in the legal landscape by a
dramatically changed economic situation.