* 9212192
* Atmospheric - Biospheric Interactions of Ozone, Hydrogen    Peroxide and Sulfur Dioxide:  Pollutant Transport and Plant Feedback Responses
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Candis Claiborn, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 12/31/1994
* USD 79,999.00

This is an award to support research on the transport and fate of sulfur
dioxide, ozone and hydrogen peroxide in selected plant species, to use this
understanding to interpret the results of laboratory and field measurements and
to calculate the fate of air pollutants in the internal regions of plant leaves.
Foliar uptake by plants represents an important sink for many air pollutants yet
factors for characterizing pollutant uptake are used in regional atmospheric
models are currently applied with a large degree of uncertainty. For improving
these deposition estimates, laboratory experiments are needed in which gas
exchange rates are accurately measured and results interpreted to improve the
transport models and validate their predictive capability. The proposal leading
to this award was submitted in response to NSF 88-99 as modified by changes
dated 09/19/91 to make the Research Initiation Award announcement consistent
with changes in NSF 83-57 and published as NSF 90-77. Results of this research
are expected to enhance our understanding of the transport and fate of trace
gases in plant leaves and lead to more effective parameterization of deposition
and emission rates for vegetation, for use in regional air quality models.
These, in turn can be utilized in improving engineering design of processes and
systems for abatement and control of air pollution.