* 9212792
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Insitu Intelligent Materials Processing
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Vinod Sarin, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 08/31/1995
* USD 47,066.00

A multi-processor platform will be used for the development of an insitu
intelligent materials processing system. This system includes data acquisition,
analysis and control of advanced material processing that can be conducted in
real-time as the process is running. This equipment will be dedicated to support
research in advancing several material processing problems including: (1)
composition and structure control for laminated coatings, (2) real-time control
for chemical vapor deposition processing, and (3) automated inspection of
coatings. All these projects take a multi-disciplinary approach in developing a
fundamental understanding and control of the principal phenomena of
manufacturing and structure/property correlations which would assist in the
engineering and development of new and novel materials capabilities. There is an
urgent need in all segments of technology and industry for new and advanced
materials. Custom tailoring of materials provides exciting new capabilities for
all applications from advanced electronic devices to new structural materials. A
major barrier to wide-spread use of this approach has been the difficulties in
utilizing all the data and processing information needed to design and fabricate
these materials. An intelligent materials processing capability will
significantly aid the materials engineer in achieving these objectives.