* 9212407
* RIA:  Near Field Photodetection Optical Microscopy and      Spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Clayton Williams, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 02/29/1996
* USD 100,000.00

The primary objective of the Research Initiation Award research is to
demonstrate the measurement of evanescent optical fields with nanometer scale
spatial resolution. To achieve this goal, a new concept and approach has been
invented. The approach is based upon the direct detection of local variations in
optical field intensity by a silicon photodector probe of nanometer size. The
probe is raster scanned in close proximity to an optically illuminated surface
and the photoresponse of the probe is measured and recorded at each point. This
information is electronically displayed in a manner similar to that of a
Scanning Tunnelling Microscope. The resultant image represents the local optical
field intensity at each point on the illuminated sample surface. The achievement
of this goal will require the design and development of a new silicon nanoprobe
and the demonstration of the novel concept of "Near Field Photodection Optical
Microscopy". The second objective is to explore the use of this new nanoprobe
for doing local optical spectroscopy on the nanometer scale. This will be
accomplished by focusing a tunable optical source onto a surface which has
heterogeneous optical properties. The nanoprobe is positioned in close proximity
to a specific sample feature and the nanoprobe photoresponse is measured as the
frequency of the illumination source is tuned over a given frequency range. The
measured photoresponse as a function of frequency is a spectroscopic fingerprint
which should allow identification of chemical or molecular species at the sample
surface with nanometer scale resolution.