* 9212020
* Efficient Techniques for Monitoring Distributed             Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Madalene Spezialetti, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 11/30/1995
* USD 95,000.00

Given the inherent concurrent, non-centralized nature of distributed systems,
monitoring and analyzing their behavior is a complex and costly task. However,
it is a powerful capability, which can be utilized for such diverse purposes as
process control, and the development and debugging of distributed computations.
This research is investigating the development of techniques to reduce the
computational, communication and storage costs related to the task of monitoring
distributed computations to recognize user-defined event concurrences. This is
accomplished by utilizing such general strategies as decentralizing analysis
responsibilities and sharing monitoring data. Techniques are being developed to
collect and organize information pertaining to the monitored behavior. These
strategies incorporate timing knowledge available within the system into schemes
to capture consistent views of the states of monitored components. Techniques to
integrate separate views of the system state are being utilized to reduce the
storage and processing overhead of constructing and maintaining the state views.
The placement of monitors throughout the system and the assignment of
recognition responsibilities to these monitors is being addressed. Event
hierarchies for detecting behavior related to specific process synchronization
conditions are being defined. Techniques are being developed to allocate to
monitors the responsibility of collecting, organizing and analyzing the data
pertaining to the defined activity. The techniques are designed and analyzed
based on the interrelated (and sometimes conflicting) goals of limiting the
impact of the monitoring activity on the processors where the monitored
components reside and on the communication medium. Finally, runtime
optimizations are being developed to adapt the monitoring strategies to the
actual behavior exhibited by the computation while it is being monitored. The
possible use of such techniques as preprocessing and filtering state data is
being studied. Techniques to transfer or suspend monitoring responsibilities are
being developed as a means of adapting initial monitoring decisions to the
behavior of the computation in order to increase the efficiency of the
monitoring strategy.