* 9212810
* Doctoral Dissertation: Ballistics and Military Change in    Eighteenth Century Europe
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1993
* USD 8,673.00

Brett D. Steele, Dissertation Student; Topic: "Ballistics and Military Change."
The incorporation of scientific knowledge into the practice of war has become an
increasingly important topic. In the 1960's, laboratories and research centers
at universities were bombed by anti-Vietnam protestors. Even now, many
universities are chary of having defense-related research programs on their
campuses. Yet this wariness of academic science to be actively involved in
military research (and its counterpart, the traditional wariness of the military
to adopt quickly the fruits of science and engineering) is not new. In
Renaissance Europe, it is said that Niccolo Tartaglia called for a moratorium on
the study of ballistics research. Shortly after this call, however, the Moors
were threatening the gates of Vienna and Western Europe was threatened with
being overrun. Tartaglia switched positions and worked to use his scientific
acumen to advance the theory of ballistics--he is the one who discovered the law
that projectiles fly farthest (in a vacuum) if shot at a 45 degree angle. While
much progress was made in the theory of ballistics during the Renaissance, the
crudity of the weapons made the theoretical discussions somewhat superfluous.
Mr. Steele, in his dissertation, is examining the period when the scientific
study of ballistics began to make a real difference. His dissertation has two
goals: to provide a more thorough investigation of historical publications on
ballistics, and to investigate the relationship between this science and
military developments. More specifically, Mr. Steele is documenting the
relationship between the revolution in ballistics launched by Benjamin Robins
and Leonard Euler and the transformation of artillery shortly thereafter. It was
in this period, according to Mr. Steele, that ongoing ballistics research
significantly improved gunnery or artillery "software." This research will also
shed light on an historically significant yet generally ignored side of
classical mechanics, namely the study of motion in resisting media. The
resulting dissertation will connect significant scientific and military
activities that are currently disconnected in history, integrating experimental
and mathematical research into a broad political framework.