* 9212747
* Dissertation Research: Genetic Relatedness and the          Costs-Benefits of Group Living in the Coati (Nasua narica)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1994
* USD 7,430.00

Many ecological costs and benefits thought to result from group living are a
direct result of cooperative interactions among individual group members.
Underlying these cooperative interactions are the concepts of kin selection and
reciprocity, analysis of which is dependent upon understanding the genetic
relatedness of the involved (and non-involved) individuals. Yet traditional
difficulties in determining the relatedness of specific individuals in a group
have hampered our understanding of if and how postulated ecological benefits are
gained by all group members. This study proposes to examine ecological and
genetic factors influencing the social system of the coati (Nasua narica), a
Neotropical procyonid whose social structure of female-bonded groups and
solitary males is unique within the Carnivora. Combining field observations of
an extensively known population with genetic fingerprinting techniques will
allow examination of three potential ecological explanations (predation,
foraging, and parasite pressures) for the evolution and maintenance of the coati
sociality-asociality dichotomy. Quantifying the importance of genetic
relatedness to variation in cooperative interactions among individuals will
provide a better understanding of underlying relationships and constraints and
how ecological costs or benefits vary with the relatedness of individuals. The
study can provide important clues to the stability and instability of mammalian
societies.