* 9212215
* Chapman Conference on the Lower Thermosphere and            Upper Mesosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1993
* A. F. Spilhaus, Jr., American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 07/31/1993
* USD 22,097.00

Research in the area of upper mesospheric and lower thermospheric physics and
chemistry has experienced a revival of interest over the past decade. The
importance of this region has become increasingly apparent through modelling
studies while advances in observational techniques have allowed an increase in
our empirical understanding. This is the region of the Earth's atmosphere about
which the least is known, owing to the difficulty of making detailed
measurements of the important parameters. Furthermore, current research has
pointed towards the possibility of rapid anthropogenic change in the region.
This Chapman Conference will provide an opportunity for the international
community of aeronomers and atmospheric scientists to engage in focused
discussion of progress in studies of the lower thermosphere and upper mesosphere
in a variety of areas using modelling as well as empirical approaches. These
discussions will be particularly timely, in view of the efforts currently
underway under the auspices of the Coupling Energetics and Dynamics of
Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) initiative. This initiative, which is an authorized
component of the Solar Terrestrial Energy Program (STEP), encompasses several
activities which address various questions regarding the physics and chemistry
of the upper mesosphere and lower thermosphere, including the Lower
Thermospheric Coupling Study (LTCS or MLTCS), Coupling and Dynamics of
Equatorial Regions (CADER), ARIA, and AIDA. In addition to Cedar activities, the
NASA TIMED (Thermosphere-Ionosphere-Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics) Mission,
planned for the mid-1990's, is invigorating researchers toward the development
of improved observational techniques.