* 9212662
* Southwest Regional Developmental Biology Conference         (May 22-24, 1992, Albuquerque, New Mexico)
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1992
* Sherry Rogers, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 10/31/1992
* USD 3,500.00

The tenth Annual Southwestern Developmental Biology Conference will be held May
22-24, 1992 in Albuquerque, N.M. The meeting is sponsored by the Society for
Developmental Biology, which states in its guidelines: "The function of the
Regional Conference is to provide a more informal opportunity than national
meetings for the exchange of information on development. Participation by
graduate students, postdoctoral and junior faculty is particularly
encouraged..." The meeting will adhere to the goals outlined above. For this
conference, three prominent speakers (Drs. Cameron, Capco, and Eisen) have been
invited to give papers related to the following theme: "Imaging Developmental
Processes". In addition, various developmental biologists from the Southwest
will be encouraged to present recent and preliminary findings on this topic, or
on any other field of developmental biology. The participation of graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows will be particularly promoted by providing
financial support to cover the costs of registration, housing, and travel
wherever possible. The conference will thus give developmental biology students
in the Southwest an excellent opportunity to give a talk, interact with a
variety of investigators, and gain a better understanding of research bering
pursued in their own geographic region.