* 9212395
* Evolution of Complexity in Vocal Repertoires:  A            Comparative Phylogenetic Study
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Sandra L. Gaunt, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 02/28/1995
* USD 45,000.00

Standard practice in animal communication studies is to define signal units
subjectively. In this pilot study, the researchers will explore the feasibility
of using recently developed quantitative methods to define objectively the basic
signal units (notes) in the vocalizations of a monophyletic group of birds
(chickadees). After assessing the performance of the computer- based SIGNAL
Sound Analysis System, they will assess intra- population and inter-population
variation in several common notes of representative species. They will then
define the entire repertoire of a previously unstudied species in a hierarchical
manner by examining clusters of similar combinations of note- types. Finally,
they will assess the feasibility of using vocal data for phylogenetic
reconstruction. If these preliminary studies are favorable, they will propose a
follow-up project using these methods to reconstruct the evolution of vocal
complexity in chickadees. This study, should it prove generally successful, will
clarify hypothesized analogies between human and animal communication systems.
For example, human phonemes and animal note-types function similarly as basic
units of differentiable sound. Although human and animal communication systems
differ quantitatively in the amount of information they can encode, they may
have converged evolutionarily on a generally optimal organizational framework
founded on a few dozen distinct sounds. This similarity suggests that similar
constraints on perceptual processing of sound operate in both systems.