* 9212070
* Mechanism of Ferric Entrobactin Uptake Through FepA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Phillip Klebba, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

The research will examine the mechanism of ferric enterobactin passage through
its Escherichia coli outer membrane receptor,FepA. Binding, in which the
siderophore or colicin associates with specific residues of FepA that are
located on the external surface of the bacterial cell; Uptake, in which the
receptor, by interaction with TonB, undergoes conformational change or other
mechanisms, facilitates the movement of ferric enterobactin through the OM
bilayer. A variety of biochemical, molecular genetic, and immunological
approaches to these problems will be utilized, including random and site-
specific mutagenesis, genetic selection for FepA proteins that function
independently of TonB, and immunochemical purification of cell envelope proteins
that may physically associate with FepA during ferric enterobactin uptake. These
investigations will enhance understanding of the mechanism by which two distinct
secreted proteins, colicins B and D, and a siderophore, ferric enterobactin,
interact with a single receptor, FepA. They will augment knowledge of bacterial
outer membrane protein structure, and provide specific information about the
physiology of TonB-dependent outer membrane proteins. %%% The research will
determine how a bacterial membrane receptor protein recognizes and transports
small molecules into the cell. The membrane protein of interest, Escherichia
coli FepA, is essential for the acquisition of iron. Theoretically, the
structure of this receptor is akin to a barrel with a lid, that usually remains
closed to protect the cell from noxious molecules in its environment, but can
open to permit entry of iron-containing nutrients. To test this model
experiments that subdivide the transport process into two stages have been
designed: Binding, in which the receptor protein recognizes iron-containing
molecules and holds them on the cell surface. Uptake, in which the iron is
transferred across the cell membrane, presumably by moving through the 'lid'
region of the receptor, and into the barrel domain. A variety of biochemical,
molecular genetic, and immunological approaches to these problems will be
utilized. The experiments will enhance understanding of the mechanism by which
small molecules are recognized and captured by bacterial cells. They will be
also improve knowledge of the structure of membrane proteins, and the transfer
of energy across membranes.