* 9212759
* Adsorption of Surfactant Mixtures at Solid/Liquid Interface:A Comprehensive In-situ Spectroscopic, Microcalorimetric andTheoretical Modelling Study
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1992,11/30/1996
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1996
* USD 270,768.00

Surfactant adsorption is an important phenomenon in many processes such as
enhanced oil recovery, detergency, flotation, and molecular electronics and
microstructure of the adsorbed layers a governing role in determining the
efficiency of these processes. An approach combining advanced spectroscopic
techniques such as luminescence, electron spin, resonance, Raman and NMR with
conventional techniques of adsorption, electrokinetic, calorimetric and
wettability has been used in recent studies to determine important
microstructural properties such as micropolarity, microfluidity, aggregation
number and surfactant and polymer orientation for several alumina-dodecyl
sulfonate/polyacrylic acid systems for the first time. It is now possible to
determine such properties in mixed surfactant systems that are invariably
involved in practical systems. Mixed systems offer significant advantages in
terms of high surface activity, salt tolerance, reduced precipitation loss etc.
On the other hand, preferential adsorption from surfactant mixtures will cause
chromatographic separation of the surfactant components resulting not only in
loss of surfactants, but also in significant changes in the efficiency of the
processes involved. Important questions to be answered include the effect of
mixing, for example, anionics with nonionics, effect of relevant variables such
as pH, ionic strength, multivalent ions concentration, temperature and order of
addition of the components. It is most interesting to determine arrangement and
rearrangement of the adsorbate species as the system is subjected to
perturbations of composition, pH, etc. and to determine the resultant changes in
the interfacial behavior of the systems. It is the aim of this work to
investigate molecular level behavior of the species in mixed adsorbed films as a
function of surfactant structure, PH, salinity, hardness, temperature using the
comprehensive approach involving above spectroscopic and adsorption techniques.
It will also be a major aim to model these systems with the help of additional
information to be obtained from microcalorimetric investigation. Also, new
techniques will be explored as in the past to determine additional micro and
nano level properties of the adsorbed layers. With this multipronged approach,
it should be possible to develop an accurate understanding of the adsorption
mechanisms of real surfactant systems and to develop capability to control
adsorption and to manipulate the configurational properties of the adsorbed
species and their aggregates.