* 9212813
* Constructing Colonial America: Immigration Controls and the Development of Communal Identity on the Fringes of the      British Empire, 1607-1763
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* John Scanlan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 08/31/1995
* USD 44,272.00

This project documents the history of laws and policies concerning immigration
to colonial America. It locates this history in its broad global context,
advancing the general notion that immigration involves not only the interests
and goals of the receiving nation, but also those of the sending countries, and
the complex interplay between receiving and sending nations. Specifically, the
project catalogs significant restrictions on immigration to North America in the
colonial period of 1607 to 1763. It demonstrates that these restrictions were
not simply local phenomena, but are the result of serious policy disputes
between the metropolitan center of the British Empire and its colonial
periphery. To document this history and advance the thesis that early
immigration laws are a by-product of tensions between the center and the
periphery, the investigator uses a combination of statutory research and
historical methods, including the full record of primary and secondary sources
located in the U.S. and abroad. In addition to filling an important gap in
knowledge about the early foundations of U.S. immigration law, it contributes to
the broader theme that law formation may be studied as a dynamic between
domestic/local interests and goals on the one hand, and external attempts to
impose or transplant interests and goals on the other.