* 9212892
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Multidimensional Gas       Chromatography System
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Nicholas Cernansky, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* George P. Peterson
* 06/30/1994
* USD 13,728.00

This equipment grant will be used to purchase a multidimensional gas
chromatography system to support combustion research activities at Drexel
University. The complex analytical problems of separating the intermediates and
products from the oxidation of fuel-like hydrocarbons require sophisticated
chromatographic techniques. Two complementary methodologies to provide these
capabilities are capillary columns and computer-controlled programmed valve
switching, also called multi-dimensional or "heart cutting" analysis. While
capillary columns by themselves provide increased resolution, they have not been
sufficient to separate very complicated mixtures of alkanes, olefins, and
oxygenates. To achieve separation, it is often necessary to use multiple columns
which are switched into and out of the carrier gas during an analysis. Further
separation is often achieved by holding selected fractions of the gas sample in
a column and backflushing this partial sample into a second analytical column.
This technique is called multidimensional gas chromatography and has been
successfully applied to hydrocarbon oxidation studies. The system to be
purchased will permit implementation of these sophisticated separation
techniques. To allow analysis of permanent gases, the system will be configured
to allow dual detector operation using both flame ionization and thermal
conductivity detectors. It is necessary to have a basic understanding of the
oxidation and ignition characteristics of pure single component fuels and simple
mixtures of these fuels before understanding of the oxidation and ignition
characteristics of full-boiling range fuels can be developed. This requires
development of detailed kinetic mechanisms and verification using analysis
techniques to assess the reaction intermediates and products formed during the
combustion process. The number of such species formed progressively increases
with increasing molecular weight of the fuel. Thus, determination of the large
number of compounds involved using conventional gas chromatography becomes
extremely difficult and tedious. Use of multidimensional gas separation
techniques greatly facilitates species identification for multicomponent samples
and thus allows for basic research into the oxidation chemistry of realistic
hydrocarbons of higher molecular weight.