* 9212339
* Prehispanic Intensive Agricultural Systems in the Llanos    de Mojos of Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Clark Erickson, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1995
* USD 151,997.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Clark Erickson will study
prehistoric agricultural systems of the Llanos de Mojos of northeastern Bolivia.
This region, part of the vast upper Amazon drainage basin, is one of the largest
areas of seasonally inundated grassland savanna in the world, covering some
145,000 square kilometers. During the rainy season of 4-6 months the area is
inundated and the alteration of marked wet and dry seasons and the waterlogged
and heavy soils have a significant impact on contemporary land use patterns.
Past indigenous populations developed a complex system of massive earthworks to
solve the problems of water control and agriculture. Dr. Erickson will attempt
to reconstruct how this worked. To accomplish this he will conduct a number of
activities. Aerial photographs and ground survey will be employed to locate the
most extensive and best preserved raised field complexes and canal-causeway
networks. Accurate topographic maps will also be made. With this as a basis key
agricultural structures will be excavated. Long stratigraphic trenches will be
dug perpendicular to raised fields causeways and canals to determine their
original profiles, individual building stages, post-depositional erosional
history, and chronology of use and abandonment. In situ materials will serve
both to date and determine how fields were constructed and used. This research
is important for several reasons. It will shed new light on the prehistory of a
little known area of the world and produce data of interest to many
archaeologists. It will also help to devise subsistence strategies which will be
of direct use in many regions. In some tropical areas prehistoric population
exceeded its modern counterpart. This most likely is due to the use of
appropriate technologies which have since been lost. Dr. Erickson will help to
recover them.