* 9212466
* Dietary Reconstruction with Stable Isotopes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Stanley Ambrose, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 266,611.00

Because a relationship exists between diet and the chemical composition of the
consumer's tissue, paleoanthropologists have focussed attention on the chemical
analysis of human skeletal remains. Through study of trace elements such as
strontium and the isotopic ratios of carbon and nitrogen, it is often possible
to gain insight into foods consumed during an individual's lifetime. In most
archaeological excavations food remains especially plant foods - are absent
because of poor preservation, and, therefore, skeletal analysis provides the
only means to reconstruct subsistence. While, in practice, these techniques
seems to work well, the exact mechanisms by which elements are incorporated into
tissue such as bone are poorly understood, and without such knowledge, it is
difficult to place a high degree of reliance on the results of such studies. Dr.
Stanley Ambrose and his colleagues will continue their work to elucidate these
mechanisms. They will conduct an integrated program of research comprising a
series of experiments. These include controlled diet experiments using small
mammals fed naturally labeled carbohydrates and proteins in different
combinations under different simulated environmental conditions. This will
define the relationship between the stable isotopic composition of diet,
biochemical fractions of diet, and consumer tissues. It will also provide
insight into the effects of protein nutrition on collagen and apatite turnover
rate. The team will also analyze the isotopic composition of hair of six human
populations in natural environments whose diets have been accurately quantified
in longitudinal nutrition study. These will provide a practical situation in
which to evaluate the results of the laboratory experiments. Bones samples from
prehistoric population will also be examined. This research is important because
it will increase our basic understanding of the nutritional process. It will
yield analytic approaches of use in a wide variety of archaeological situation.