* 9212790
* Engineering Research Equipment:  A Modified STM/AFM for     Complex Fluid Investigations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1993
* Joseph Zasadzinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1993
* USD 35,565.00

The proposal requests equipment to upgrade the scanning tunneling and atomic
force microscopic capabilities in the PI's laboratory. The PI currently
possesses a Nanoscope II AFM/STM. He proposes to construct a sealed chamber to
contain the instrument that will allow constant temperature control, and will
permit experiments to be undertaken at low vacuum and under a clean gas such as
nitrogen or at a fixed humidity. He also proposes to upgrade the Nanoscope II
AFM/STM to a Nanoscope III; the upgrade instrument will allow for a larger
scanning field while still maintaining excellent molecular resolution, and will
also allow for the measurement of frictional forces as well as normal forces at
the cantilever tip. The PI also requests funds for the purchase of a image
analysis system independent of the Nanoscope software which will enhance the
visual inspection of images, and will enable better quantification of structure
characteristics such as periodicity. The PI uses the AFM/STM apparatus primarily
to image self assembled monolayer and bilayers of amphiphillic molecules at
fluid-fluid and fluid-solid interfaces with nanometer scale resolution. The
research activity of the PI in this area is of the highest quality, he has
produced several notable achievements such as the identification of a ripple
phase for the biological surfactant DMPC. The fundamental imaging studies of
bilayers and monolayers will lead to a better understanding of the relationship
between the chemical structure of an amphophil and the structures it forms in
self assembly. This information is of importance in cell membrane research, and
in the research on the technological applications of Langmuir-Blodgett films.
The upgrade for the existing equipment will significantly improve the quality
and reproducability of the PI's studies. With the environmental control upgrade,
experiments in clean atmospheres can be undertaken which will remove capillary
force effects arising from pendular bridges which can form at the cantilever
tip.