* 9212460
* Marine Biotech Fellowship:                                  The Development and Use of Molecular Genetic Techniques for the Study of Fe Reduction in a Marine Eubacterium
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1993,09/23/1994
* Kenneth Nealson, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Fellowship Award
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/23/1994
* USD 84,000.00

Physiological data suggest that a thermodynamic hierarchy for the utilization
of oxidants could be written for Shewanella putrefaciens alone from aerobic
growth in the oxic zone to thiosulfate reduction at the interface between
sulfide-free and sulfitic zones of suboxic/anoxic marine basins and porewaters.
With its versatile carbon metabolism and facultative nature, S. putrefaciens and
organisms like it may well out compete sulfate- reducing bacteria for the
consumption of thiosulfate and other sulfur intermediates in marine anoxic
basins and sedimentary porewaters. These organisms may play a substantial role
in the control of sulfur speciation in the marine environment. By utilizing
organic carbon and producing sulfide, these organisms would be intimately
involved in the poise of the chemocline. This project will provide new, basic
scientific data on the molecular genetics of a widespread and very versatile
anaerobic- respiring organism. By isolating and sequencing genes that code for
sulfur reductase, this project will be able to study the regulatory mechanisms
of gene expression. Manipulation of the genes in vivo will lead to a better
understanding of the relationships between the various sulfur reduction pathways
in S. putrefaciens and possibly other marine eubacteria. Genetic manipulation
could also aid in comparing the regulation of sulfur reductase activity to that
of nitrate reductase or Fe reductase in S. putrefaciens. This work will lead to
the collaborative development of a probe for nonsulfate-reducing bacteria which
utilize sulfur intermediates in natural sediments. Such a probe along with data
on the mechanism of sulfur intermediate reduction could be used to explore the
potential contribution of nonsulfate-reducing bacteria such as S. putrefaciens
to the geochemistry of S, Fe, and C in a variety of suboxic/anoxic marine
environments where these sulfur species exist.