* 9212441
* Brain Catecholaminergic Function During Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1994
* Cheryl Harding, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Comer
* 01/31/1994
* USD 40,000.00

Factors which interact with and influence complex learned behavior include
circulating hormone levels, brain neurotransmitters and changes in neuroanatomy.
In this award, Dr. Cheryl Harding will quantify levels and turnover of two
transmitter substances, norepinephrine and dopamine, in a variety of brain
regions involved in avian vocal learning. The studies will be done at critical
times during brain development and the sensitive period for vocal learning. In
adults, levels and turnover of these neurotransmitters in the brain areas under
study are strongly modulated by circulating hormone levels. Therefore,
circulating hormone levels will also be assessed to determine if changing
hormone levels during development have similar effects on neurotransmitter
function. This research will look for evidence that these neurotranmitters might
be involved in stimulating some of the dramatic neuroanatomical changes which
occur in these brain areas during early development and the period of vocal
learning. The potential contributions of norepinephrine and dopamine in these
areas to the learning of a complex social beahvior and the modulation of this
process by circulating hormones will also be assessed. The knowledge gained in
these studies will be important in understanding the factors which are involved
in the development and learning of vocalization and communication.