* 9212906
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Electronic Structure in  Dynamic Environments:  Clusters and Condensed Phases
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Sherwin Singer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1995
* USD 9,296.00

9212906 Singer This award provides funds to permit Dr. Sherwin J. Singer,
Department of Chemistry, Ohio State University, to pursue with Dr. Sungyul Lee,
Professor of Chemistry, Kyunghee University, Korea, for 24 months, a program of
cooperative research on the electronic structure in dynamic environments -
clusters and condensed phases. These collaborators will study solvated metal
atoms in rare gas clusters and will perform mixed quantum/classical theoretical
calculations on these systems. They hope to stimulate further overlap between
theory and experiments on clusters. The proposed research is part of a broad
effort combining quantum chemical and condensed phase simulation techniques. The
U.S. and Korean collaborators are highly respected scientists with proven
ability in the field of this research. Under this project, Dr. Lee will make
extended visits for cooperative research in Dr. Singer's laboratory. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
Korean participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). This project adds an international cooperative
dimension to the PI's research under NSF Grant No. CHE-9115615. ***