* 9212267
* Occasion Setting in Conditional Discriminations
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Peter Holland, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 01/31/1996
* USD 233,851.00

This research provides a bridge between traditional analyses of simple
conditioning and the study of more complex cognitive and organizational
processes in behavior. Previous research has yielded a set of procedures and
phenomena that capture many of the more cognitive aspects of learning while
building on the simplicity of simple conditioning. In simple conditioning, an
insignificant event, the conditioned stimulus (CS), comes to control behavior as
the result of the formation of connections between neural representations of
that CS and of another, biologically significant event, the unconditioned
stimulus (US). Under some circumstances, an event acquires the ability to
modulate the effectiveness of connections among other events. Although this
modulatory process (called occasion-setting) is based on simple conditioning, it
is functionally distinct, and in some cases follows different rules. This
occasion-setting process has much in common, both neurally and behaviorally,
with more complex memory phenomena studied by neuropsychologists. The present
research uses a variety of conditional-discrimination tasks (those in which a CS
signals one event in one circumstance but another event in another circumstance)
to (1) more precisely specify the conditions under which occasion-setting
occurs, including the development of mathematical models, (2) further explore
what organisms actually learn about in conditional- discrimination tasks in
which occasion-setting has been implicated, (3) examine the relation between
simple Pavlovian conditioning (in which the CS signals the occurrence or
nonoccurrence of the US), occasion-setting (in which an occasion- setter signals
the validity of a relation between another CS and the US), and operant
conditioning (in which a CS indicates when particular behavior will produce the
US). The existence of occasion-setting suggests that important changes and
expansions to our current theories of conditioning are in order. Those changes
may well lead to a more profitable integration of relatively well-understood but
simple conditioning phenomena and more complex but poorly understood phenomena
of cognition. Furthermore, given the popularity of conditioning- based theories
of phobias, eating disorders, substance abuse, and other socially-significant
phenomena that are surely under conditional or contextual control (and hence
more analogous to occasion-setting than to simple conditioning), it is important
to understand the differences in the actions of simple conditioned stimuli and
occasion-setters.