* 9212701
* Dissertation Research:  Spatial Patterns During Succession  in Abandoned Agricultural Wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* NONE NONE, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1994
* USD 5,178.00

The proposed research investigates the relationship of vascular plant species in
abandoned agricultural wetlands to factors of the physical/chemical environment
by analyzing their respective spatial patterns. Large areas of forested
peatlands have been cleared for agriculture in the Lake States and in New York.
These wetland ecosystems undergo extreme alterations upon drainage, clearing,
and cultivation, until eventually abandoned. Currently, state and federal
regulatory agencies and the muckfarming industry debate whether abandoned
mucklands are irreversibly altered or revert to naturally functioning systems.
Although much information exists on old-field and forest succession, no studies
have investigated successional patterns in abandoned agricultural wetlands. In
1991, investigations of abandoned mucklands in Oswego County were initiated.
Examination of photographic records and preliminary field surveys have revealed
large variation in species response to mucklands abandoned for different lengths
of time. Measured or observed variability in surface water depth soil solution
pH, marl sublayer features, calcium ion concentration, and soil profile
characteristics further indicates nonhomogeneity. Recognition of spatial
heterogeneity of plant distributions is fundamental to understanding processes
of succession. Patterns and trends will be identified and quantified by using a
combination of geostatistical and geographic information systems (GIS)
techniques.