* 9212244
* Effects of Lifeline Interaction on Seismic Performance of Telecommunications Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1995
* Jeremy Isenberg, Weidlinger Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/28/1995
* USD 119,954.00

Telecommunication technology has advanced to the point where direct failure of
critical equipment is unlikely in modern central offices. However, increasing
robustness of equipment is partly compromised by other trends: fewer trunks and
more concentration of switching offices (fiber optics technology), more complex
switching/signaling hierarchies and disparate hardness in the equipment and
their host facilities. The result is that failure is now more likely to be
caused by collateral hazards and failure of supporting lifelines, and as a
result the impact of the failure on an urban system would be much greater than
in the past. This project studies the effects of these trends. By applying
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technology to lifeline modeling, a range of
assumptions concerning earthquake scenario, geological and collateral hazards,
and interaction with supporting lifelines will be considered. The computer-based
method developed to address the issues of concentration and interactions,
including the use of GIS as a platform for combining complex topologies of
interacting lifelines with hazards, will be used in network design, emergency
planning and preventive risk management. The project will advance engineering
capabilities to determine the lifeline interaction effects under seismic hazards
through a GIS based network design system.