* 9212910
* Dissertation Research:  Direct and Indirect Effects of      Mermithid Parasites on a Stream-dwelling Mayfly
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* NONE NONE, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 02/28/1995
* USD 9,514.00

The objectives of the proposed research are 1) to investigate the impact of
mermithid parasitism on depression of mayfly host population size, 2) to
investigate the ecological effect and the possible source of parasite induced
behavioral alterations of larval host behavior, and 3) to test that behavioral
alterations are caused by, rather than correlated with, parasitic infection.
Proposed methodology includes: 1) extensive field sampling to estimate mermithid
prevalence combined with predictive mathematical models; 2) microcosm
experiments to a) quantify ecological effects of parasite induced behavioral
alterations on larval mayfly vulnerability to predation from stoneflies and
trout, b) infer possible role of host nutritional stress and physical
obstruction of host internal function by parasite in producing the behavioral
alterations; and 3) the development of a laboratory culture to control and
monitor parasite development in the larval host. The key contributions of this
research will be 1) an understanding of immediate and long term consequences to
host fitness of parasite infections and 2) a consideration of the evolutionary
source of behavioral alterations, the importance of side effects of the
infection as mediators of the alterations, and the possible constraints acting
on the evolution of parasite induced behavioral alterations.