* 9212928
* Science in the Negotiation of Quality in Agricultural       Subsectors
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Lawrence Busch, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1997
* USD 165,783.00

This project will examine ethical and political dimensions in new developments
in agricultural science, and illuminate the values imbedded in the intersection
of ethical, social and scientific priorities. Two different crops in two
different cultures will be selected for intensive study. Contemporary
agriculture is often divided into subsectors, i.e., social networks of people
and things organized around given commodities and held together through
negotiations. Subsectors are also vehicles for transforming nature and
(re)distributing income, wealth, status, and power. Different actors within a
subsector define the good differently. A good scientist, farmer, processor,
etc., must each pass different tests to demonstrate their goodness. Similarly,
the commodities must pass different quality tests. The common good may be served
by a compromise among the different actors. This project examines ethical
commitments and values as they manifest themselves in subsector maintenance and
transformation, and how conflicts are mediated. It examines how ethical and
value issues enter into scientific and technical processes and, conversely, how
various actors use such processes and other strategies to further certain
values. Using historical studies, interviews, and content analysis of the
literature, the project follows two commodities through the complex path from
production to consumption. It notes how the transformation of both the commodity
and the social actors is negotiated at each step. Several audiences --
agricultural scientists, administrators, policy makers, and scholars who study
the relationships of science, technology and society -- will be interested in
the results of this project. Different routes will be used to address results to
these different audiences and the general public.