* 9212615
* National Survey of Academic Research Instruments and        Instrumentation Needs:  Cycle IV (FY93 Pre-funding)
* SBE,NCSE
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1996
* THOMAS TRUMBLE, MACRO INTERNATIONAL
* Contract
* Mary J. Golladay
* 09/30/1996
* USD 1,259,913.00

This contract is to conduct Phases I and II of Cycle IV of the National Survey
of Academic Research Instruments and Instrumentation Needs during the period
1992-1995. This survey, a sample survey of higher education institutions, will
be conducted in two phases. Phase I will collect and process only the
department/facility survey questionnaire, which will survey academic departments
or nondepartmental research units that contain at least one research instrument
system costing $20,000 or more. During Phase II the contractor will collect and
process the full-scale survey, which consists of both the department/ facility
questionnaire, and an equipment questionnaire which will be used to collect data
for samples of research instrument systems within sampled
departments/facilities. The sample shall be limited to instruments with an
original purchase price of $20,000 or more. Contractor tasks for Cycle IV will
include conduct of data collection activities, tabulation of data results,
provision of technical support as required for the National Science Foundation's
own analytical uses of the data, and production of final analytical reports
summarizing the results of the study. The 96th Congress (Public Law 96-44,
Section 7) directed NSF to "...develop indices, correlates, or other suitable
measures or indicators of the status of scientific instrumentation in the United
States and of the current and projected need for scientific and technological
instrumentation." This study, initiated in response to the above mandate,
measures changes and trends in the instrumentation needs and the national
inventory of scientific research equipment in academic institutions.