* 9212542
* Dissertation Research:  The Roles of Metabolic Adaptation,  Allochemical Sequestration, and Invertebrate Predation in   the Evolution of Dietary Specialization in a Lepidopteran
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,05/31/1995
* NONE NONE, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/1995
* USD 8,000.00

Narrow dietary specialization in phytophagous insects has been hypothesized to
evolve as a response to hostplant allelochemistry for nearly three decades, but
recent investigations have questioned this hypothesis. Genetic studies, in
particular, have failed to support the notion of trade-offs in insect
performance across plant species upon which the theory is based. While
ecological studies which take into account three trophic levels have supported
the hypothesis that predators may be a strong selective agent on insect host
range, there are currently no genetic studies of hostplant- mediated predation.
The research proposed here uses an adapted specialist lepidopteran herbivore,
Junonia coenia, which recycles plant allelochemicals as a defense against
predators to assess: 1) the responses of invertebrate predators to intraspecific
variation in levels of sequestered allelochemicals, 2) the genetic basis of
allelochemical tolerance and sequestration, 3) the genetic relationship of
oviposition preferences with physiological adaptation and protection from
predation, and 4) the interaction of adaptation to hostplant chemistry and the
plant's chemical defence. By combining field studies of predation with
quantitative genetic analyses of adaption to phytochemistry and predators, this
study will integrate these seemingly contradictory single-factor hypotheses. A
practical result will be a greater understanding of the biology of plant pests.