* 9212408
* Conference to Establish a Consortium of Sociolegal          Research Institutions; Oxford, England; March 1993
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* William Felstiner, Law and Society Association
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 02/28/1995
* USD 35,000.00

To aid in the effort to encourage transnational sociolegal research, the Law and
Society association through its Committee on International Activities is
sponsoring a conference to establish an international consortium of sociolegal
research institutions. The conference will organize the consortium and develop a
program of activities for it, including centralized research information,
personnel exchanges, research development, resources development, training, and
communications (newsletters and journals). Open invitations will be issued to
all sociolegal research institutions. Representatives will be able to
participate in organizing the consortium and to form transnational research
groups to carry out specific research projects which will be identified at the
conference. Possible research topics include immigration, HIV/AIDS, the legal
profession, bankruptcy, legal services, social protection, law and feminism, and
environmental regulation. The conference will not only provide an opportunity
for international collaboration and exchange among sociolegal scholars, it will
establish a viable and active consortium of research institutions from around
the world which will lead to a higher level of transnational research and a
greater multinational and multicultural sensitivity to sociolegal research than
would otherwise be possible. Also, it will initiate a system of international
data access which will reap substantial rewards.