* 9212518
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Laser Diagnostics    Imaging System for Turbulent Combustion Research
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Thomas Kreutz, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 12/31/1994
* USD 59,867.00

This equipment grant will be used for acquisition of a laser diagnostics imaging
system for research important to development of better understanding and
modeling of turbulent combustion. This system, which employs an intensified CCD
camera and an aberration-corrected monochromator in a two- dimensional
multiplexed detection scheme to simultaneously detect spectral and spatial
information, greatly reduces data acquisition time for characterization of
strained laminar flames by enabling the acquisition of simultaneous spectra at
multiple locations in such flames, removing the need for spatial scanning. This
imaging equipment will play a key role in a comprehensive program to construct
and test "libraries" of experimentally measured properties of strained laminar
flamelets for use in turbulent combustion modeling and engine simulations. Such
data is currently being collected using non-intrusive laser diagnostics to
measure spatially resolved temperature, velocity, and species concentration
profiles in well- controlled counterflowing premixed diffusion flames; however,
the current research is hampered by the massive amount of data required for each
"library" and the time required to obtain it. (For a given fuel, measurements
are required for a wide range of strain rates, pressures, temperatures, and
equivalence ratios.) This improvement will make possible the construction of
experimental laminar flamelet libraries for accurate modeling of turbulent
combustion of realistic fuels for which kinetic schemes are not yet available.