* 9212397
* Establishing a Dissolved Organic and Nitrogen Analytical    Facility at the UNC-CH Institute of Marine Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Brad Bebout, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1995
* USD 32,060.00

This project will support the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill's
Instituteof Marine Sciences (IMS) acquisition of equipment for an onsite
dissolved. This facility will support current and future needs of NSF-supported
projects at IMS and nearby marine laboratories (Duke University Marine
Laboratory; National Marine Fisheries Service Laboratory). Currently, IMS has 10
active NSF research grants in the areas of nutrient-productivity interactions,
nitrogen cycling, chemical ecology and land margin ecosystems research (LMER)
requiring on site DOC and DON analyses. IMS also serves as a field station
laboratory facility for various callaborating investigators from UNC-CH, N.C.
State University (Raleigh), East Carolina University and UNC-W. These
investigators routinely require rapid on site DOC/DON determinations to
compliment stable isotope (Cand N) geochemistry, nutrient cycling, water quality
and trophic interaction studies. At least 16 current NSF and 10 federaVstate
agency (NOAA, EPA, USGS, UNC Water Resources Research Institute, DOE'I-supported
projects will benefit from a DOC/DON analytical facility. Future expansion of
these analytical needs is documented within the scope of the recently-
established Duke-UNC-NOAA Cooperative Institute of Fisheries Oceanography
(CIFO). An Antek model 7000 analyses, plus accessories will be acquired.
Equipment is designed for rapid and efficient analyses of a variety of liquid
and gas samples and adaptable to abovementioned research needs. The
infrastructure for operation, maintenance and technical support is already in
place at IMS. This facility is of vital importance to successful completion of
existing and development of future NSF- supported research thrusts in coastal
North Carolina and the mid-Atlantic region.