* 9212471
* U.S.-Hungary Cooperative Research on Mathematical Models    of the Cell Division Cycle
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1996
* John Tyson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/1996
* USD 31,870.00

This U.S.-Hungary research project on "Mathematical Models of the Cell Division
Cycle" is between Dr. John J. Tyson of Virginia Polytechnic Institute &amp;
State University, and Dr. Bela Novak of the Technical University, Budapest.
Recent molecular studies have revealed four classes of proteins that participate
prominently in the division control mechanism. Two proteins (cdc2 and cyclin)
combine to form a heterodimer ("mitosis promoting factor," or MPF) that, when
activated, triggers all the major events of mitosis and cell division. The
activity of MPF is, in turn, controlled by protein kinases and protein
phosphatases that determine the phosphorylation state of MPF. The goal of this
joint project is to develop mathematical models of the cell division cycle, in
order to build secure, reliable connections between molecular details of the
control mechanism and classical observations of the behavior of the intact
regulatory system. The model will describe the regulation of the MPF activity by
phosphorylation, and how the phosphorylation state of MPF is determined by the
DNA-to-protein ratio of the cell. The research should yield a mathematical tool
to refine assumptions and guide reasoning about the essential events of cell
growth and division. This research in cell biology and mathematics fulfills the
program objective of advancing science by enabling leading experts in the United
States and Hungary to combine complementary talents and pool research resources
in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.