* 9212756
* The Effectiveness of Advocacy:  Comparing Lawyers and       Nonlawyers
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Herbert Kritzer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 06/30/1995
* USD 55,645.00

In the United States, paid advocates are usually members of the legal
profession. In many arenas, lawyers enjoy a legally enforceable monopoly on such
representation; in other arenas, lawyers share the advocacy function with other
professionals, paraprofessionals, and laypersons. Recent research has raised
questions about the wisdom of granting lawyers exclusive rights to deliver
services such as advocacy. However, there has been no systematic research that
has compared the work and performance of lawyer and nonlawyer advocates in
contexts where both are permitted to appear. Using a "taxonomic theory of
representation" as a conceptual framework, this study compares different types
of advocates in four settings, using a combination of observation, structured
interviews, and semi-structured interviews. The focus is on "case advocacy," as
distinguished from "policy advocacy," involving both adversary and nonadversary
(inquisitorial) processes. The study will evaluate the effectiveness of lawyers
and non-lawyers, isolate the factors that determine the variable effectiveness
of each type of advocate, and potentially demonstrate the advantages of getting
away from the simple dichotomy of lawyers versus nonlawyers. Focusing on the
question of the effectiveness of representation will not only advance theory in
this area but will allow consideration of some of the foundational arguments
that are used to justify the existence of the legal profession's monopoly on
advocacy representation.