* 9212775
* Dissertation Research:  Biological Diversity, Community     Structure, and Energetics of a Neotropical Forest Canopy    Ant Assemblage
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* NONE NONE, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1994
* USD 2,942.00

The investigators propose to study the biological diversity, community
structure, and energetics of a Neotropical rain forest canopy ant assemblage.
Although ants are thought to be, in general, predators and scavengers, they are
probably the most abundant arthropod group in tropical forests trees. Their
abundance poses an ecological paradox, because predators should not be more
abundant than the herbivores on which they feed. The investigators will test the
hypothesis that most rain forest canopy ants derive the bulk of their energy
from plant resources and function essentially as primary rather than secondary
consumers, which may enable them to support comparatively dense populations.
Small patches of forest canopy on the mainland adjacent to Barro Colorado
Island, Panama, will be treated with insecticidal fog to determine the
composition of the local arboreal ant assemblage and the relative contribution
of ants to the biomass of canopy arthropods; field observations of the foraging
behavior of several of the most abundant ant species will determine the relative
importance of animal and plant matter to their diets; and, the caloric content
of their major dietary components for these species will be quantified in order
to obtain an estimate of the degree to which they rely on plant matter as a
source of energy. By revealing the taxonomic composition of a rain forest canopy
ant assemblage, determining the relative abundance of ants in arboreal arthropod
communities, and exploring the extent to which the reliance of ants on plant-
derived energy may help explain their abundance, this comprehensive research
project will enhance our understanding of fundamental aspects of the biology of
tropical forest canopies.