* 9212925
* Labors and Laborers of the Loom:  The Impact of             Mechanization on Handloom Weavers and Weaving 1780-1840
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/1992,11/30/1996
* Gail Mohanty, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 11/30/1996
* USD 37,842.00

"Outwork," the practice of industries to employ laborers, frequently women and
even children, work on products at home, remains an issue among factory workers
today. Outwork is greatly affected by changing technology. At times, technology
negatively affects the ability of workers to practice their craft at home; at
other times it enhances it. Dr. Mohanty is studying the US textile industry and
the ways in which new machines upset the weaving processes, the ways weavers
worked, and the things weavers wove. She has collected data on a large group of
two different kinds of weavers in Rhode Island: men engaged in the traditional
practice of the craft and women engaged in outwork brought into existence by
changes in spinning technology. By comparing these two groups, Dr. Mohanty is
providing new insights into the complex ways in which mechanization alters labor
patterns. Her study also links how specific changes in loom technology causes
shifts in the different types of fabrics hand weavers use in order to profit in
the marketplace. She finds that, contrary to popular impression, the first
phases of mechanization actually increased opportunities for outworkers who
reacted differently to technical change than did traditional craft weavers. This
study promises significant contributions to our understanding of the interaction
of technology and the way we work during periods of rapid technological advance.