* 9212658
* Synchrotron Radiation Center (SRC)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/1993,03/31/1997
* Brian Tonner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* None
* 03/31/1997
* USD 13,450,000.00

The Synchrotron Radiation Center (SRC) operated by the University of Wisconsin-
Madison, is a national facility for the utilization of ultra-violet and soft
x-ray synchrotron radiation in scientific investigations. The studies carried
out at the SRC impact condensed matter physics, atomic and molecular physics,
chemistry, materials science and engineering, biology, and other disciplines.
The SRC is a user oriented facility which accepts proposals from all qualified
investigators. At present, more than 300 individuals make up 75 groups which
conduct research on the 26 operating beamlines at the SRC. Of these groups, 69%
are from universities, 19% are from national laboratories, and 12% are
industrial affiliates. The SRC operation includes nine public beamlines, sixteen
Participating Research Team (PRT) beamlines, one joint SRC/PRT beam line, and
three beamlines under development. Eighteen operating lines have monochromators.
They cover the photon energy range from a few eV to several keV. The SRC
operates at two electron energies: 800 MeV and 1 GeV. A clean room and a
chemical handling room are maintained for users. Several unique beamlines are
available including five beamlines operated by the Center for X-ray Lithography,
a beam line developed for high resolution photoemission x-ray microscopy
utilizing an undulator (Multiple Application X-ray Imaging Undulator Microscope-
MAXIMUM), a high resolution photoelectron spectroscopy beam line being developed
for band-structure measurements of Fermi- surface contours in high-Tc
superconducting materials, a high precision soft x-ray double-crystal
monochromator beam line which provides a tunable beam in the 1500-3700 Ev range
for Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure studies (EXAFS).