* 9212935
* Communication Technology and Tribal Values
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* George Baldwin, Henderson State University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1994
* USD 97,689.00

This research will examine the emerging uses of computer-mediated communication
technologies by American Indians and the subsequent cultural changes associated
with them. The researcher will study two on-line communities which have been
identified as having significant American Indian populations; the Electronic
Native American Network (ENAN) and NATIVEnet. ENAN is an on-line computer
network which serves Indian children and tribal educators from across the United
States. Funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs, ENAN resides on a desk-top
computer at the University of New Mexico and is accessed by four toll free
telephone lines. NATIVEnet is a "news-group" (list-serv) residing on the NSF-
funded INTERNET. It connects American Indians and scholars interested in
indigenous issues from around the world. These two networks will be studied
using theorems from convergence and network theory which have a bearing on
intercultural communication and cultural change. Techniques used in data
collection will include the experimental construction of sociograms of the
networked interpersonal relationships, content analysis of several years of on-
line discussions, and ethnographic data derived from participant observation.
Results will contribute to the development of network theory, as applied to
intercultural computer-mediated communication, and to understanding the
relationships of information and network social policy to cultural change.
Results will be disseminated to relevant Indian organizations, tribal leaders,
and appropriate scientific journals.