* 9212755
* Dissertation Research:  The Evolution of Eusociality in the Aphid Tribe Cerataphidini
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* NONE NONE, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1995
* USD 10,000.00

The evolution of eusociality presents a major paradox for evolutionary biology
because it requires the evolution of sterile individuals. The aphid tribe
Cerataphidini provides an ideal opportunity to investigate the evolution of
eusociality because the group is polymorphic for a relatively primitive form of
eusociality, the production of a reproductively sterile "soldier" caste. To
examine the origins of eusociality, the PIs will first reconstruct a phylogeny
for the cerataphidine aphids using DNA sequence data and then map onto this
phylogeny behavioral ecological data pertinent to the evolution of a soldier
caste. The PIs will test several hypotheses for the evolution of a soldier caste
by testing for significant associations among these variables and soldier
production using recently developed statistical methods. The PIs propose to
return to field sites where species of aphids included in the phylogeny have
been collected to measure variables that are believed critical to understanding
the evolution of their social behavior. The PIs will first sample colonies of
each species for later genetic analysis to estimate the average relatedness
within and between colonies. Taking into account both spatial and temporal
variation, the PIs will then measure individual birth rates, soldier production,
ant interaction, predation and parasitism. The information obtained will be
useful in understanding both fundamental questions about sociality and the
population success or failure it brings to this group of plant feeders.