* 9212674
* Educational Programs Panel at the Annual Technical Symposiumof the SIGCSE of the Association of Computing Machinery
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1992,11/30/1992
* A. Joe Turner, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 11/30/1992
* USD 3,752.00

Two years ago the National Science Foundation announced a number of new
programs that support undergraduate computer science education, including CISE's
Educational Infrastructure Program and EHR's Undergraduate Course and Curriculum
Development Program. These programs join the current EHR's undergraduate
programs of Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement, and Undergraduate
Faculty Enhancement. This request is to provide travel funds and a subsistence
allowance to allow Drs. David Dobkin, Chris Nevison, Juris Reinfelds and Joe
Turner to attend the ACM SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science
Education in March, 1992 in order to be members of a panel discussing NSF-funded
curriculum projects. Dr. David Dobkin will relate his progress with integrating
computer science and the arts at the undergraduate level. Chris Nevison will
present his experience over the past years with three NSF educational programs
and the development of parallel processing in the undergraduate curriculum.
Juris Reinfelds will describe a combined development effort in computer science
and mathematics for the first two pairs of courses. The efforts of Clemson
University, Bowdoin College, and the University of Connecticut to implement the
Computing Curriculum '91 in their three schools will be presented by a A. Joe
Turner.//