* 9212302
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Superconducting Magnet for Electron Waveguide Device Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Jesus del Alamo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/1993
* USD 16,205.00

This Engineering Research Equipment Grant will enable the Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology to purchase a superconducting magnet to be dedicated to support
research in engineering. The equipment will be used primarily to strengthen on-
going research on novel electron waveguide devices. The recent demonstration of
electron waveguiding in one-dimensional (1D) semiconductor heterostructures has
opened up entirely new possibilities for conceiving advanced electron devices.
Much like photons in optical waveguides, in an electron waveguide the modes of
electron propagation are determined by the geometry of the confining
electrostatic potential. Unlike photons, if a split-gate technology is used, the
electron waveguide modes can be easily tuned through the field-effect action of
metal gates. In this approach, coupled 1D systems can be synthesized. This
represents an entirely novel geometry for electron interaction never before
examined. The goal of our research program is the demonstration of electron
directional coupling between two closely spaced electron waveguides. Progress to
date, under the sponsorship of NSF, include the fabrication of the first
balistic dual electron waveguide device and the realization of the first
tunneling spectroscopy of an electron waveguide. Detailed magnetic field studies
will be instrumental in clarifying the physics of transport and tunneling of
electrons in these dual electron waveguide devices.