* 9212059
* Probe Techniques for Studying Mediated Reduction            Reactions of Organic Pollutants: Research Initiation Award
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Paul Tratnyek, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Continuing grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 08/31/1996
* USD 94,190.00

This is an award to support research to find a strategy for describing the
reduction kinetics of organic substrates in natural environments that is both
rigorously deterministic in theory as well as being amenable to practical
application. The approach will be to treat the substance directly responsible
for the reduction of organic pollutants as electron-transfer mediators that are
present at low steady- state concentration and can be assayed by their rate of
reaction with selective probe compounds. The first part of this project will be
to identify suitable probe compounds for likely reduction mediators, and to
verify that these techniques can be used in natural media. Later, the most
promising probe technique will be applied to show that the mediator to which the
probe technique responds is, in fact, contributing to reduction in environmental
systems. Finally, the utility of the whole approach for predicting the rate of
specific reduction reactions of organic pollutants in the environment will be
demonstrated. The proposal leading to this award was submitted in response to
NSF 88-99 as modified by changes dated 09/19/91 to make the Research Initiation
Award announcement consistent with changes in NSF 83-57 and published as NSF 90-
77. Despite recent research on the reduction reactions of organic pollutants in
anaerobic sediments, soils, and groundwaters, it is not yet possible to
quantitatively predict the rates of any of these transformations. This severely
restricts the consideration of reduction processes in regulatory decision-
making and contributes to the unreliability of remediation technologies that
rely on these reactions. If this research proves to be as successful as it was
for describing the kinetics of photooxidation in sunlit surface water, it is
likely to influence the way most research on the kinetics of reduction reactions
in anaerobic environmental systems is done in the future. Results of this
research are likely to be applied to engineering design of processes and systems
for decontamination of soils and groundwater.