* 9212300
* U.S.-Poland Research on Ethical Reasoning among             Public Administrators in the New Local Governments in       Poland:  A Study of Two Provinces
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1993,02/28/1997
* DEBRA STEWART, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 02/28/1997
* USD 34,380.00

This U.S.-Poland research project on "Ethical Reasoning Among Public
Administrators in the New Local Governments in Poland: A Study of Two Provinces"
between Drs. Debra W. Stewart and Norman A. Sprinthall of the State University
in Raleigh and Dr. Renata Siemienska of the University of Warsaw will
investigate ethical decision making among local public administrators in two
provinces in Poland. The study aims to understand: 1. how non-elected public
officials in the new Poland exercise discretion inherent in the public
administrative role when they confront ethical dilemmas; 2. the variables
associated with the exercise of alternative models of ethical reasoning among
this group; 3. the organizational, contextual, demographic and attitudinal
correlates of principled reasoning among these officials. Working
collaboratively with investigators in Poland, Dr. Stewart will survey 300 local
public administrators and conduct in-depth interviews with 20 of these civil
servants in five towns within each of two provinces in Poland. As power
increasingly devolves to local government, it is important to know how new
managers are using their newly sanctioned discretion and how the ethical models
they employ shape that action. Data generated in this study will lead to a
comparison of modes of ethical response across U.S. and Polish government
officials. This project in sociology fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and
Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence.