* 9212389
* Excimer Laser System for Pump-Probe Experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Akos Vertes, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* George P. Peterson
* 07/31/1994
* USD 65,312.00

An Excimer Laser System will be purchased and used to support several
established research programs in combustion chemistry, materials processing ,
and chemical analysis at George Washington University. These programs include
laser-solid interaction in synthetic diamond film formation, laser sampling of
glass and ceramic targets for chemical analysis, laser production of radical
species important in combustion processes, and photodissociation of chlorinated
hydrocarbons. In the first two areas, the goal will be to follow changes
occurring on the surface and within the bulk of the targets and to examine the
properties of the generated plumes. Methods of investigation will include time-
of-flight mass spectrometry, kinetic energy measurement of the ions produced,
and analysis of particulates in the plumes. In addition, laser-solid
interactions will be examined theoretically for a broad range of lasers and
selected materials. In the third area, excimer laser photolysis will be used to
prepare radical species which are important in combustion systems. Absorption
spectra for these species will then be obtained using an existing tunable diode
laser spectrometer. Use of excimer laser photolysis followed by IR absorption as
a diagnostic for chlorinated hydrocarbons in lab scale diffusion flames will
also be explored. The general objectives of the first two activities are to
enhance the understanding of laser-solid interactions and to use this knowledge
in preparative and analytical applications. This will include optimization of
laser sampling and pulsed laser deposition processes. In addition, a better
understanding of synthetic diamond formation is a goal. In the latter
activities, excimer laser photolysis has become the technique of choice for the
preparation of a number of gas phase radical species for fundamental
spectroscopic studies. Additionally, it is proposed that excimer laser
photolysis of chlorinated hydrocarbons might also be used for the detection of
undesirable combustion products.