* 9212590
* A Methodological Study of Mail Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1994
* Howard Schuman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/1994
* USD 13,569.00

This is a request for a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) to do a
study of mail survey response rates and response bias. The proposed study would
be linked to an already scheduled survey planned by the Detroit Area Survey
(DAS) in the spring of 1992. This study will use face-to-face interviews to
collect data on racial attitudes and related issues. The proposed study would
select an random sample from the DAS sample and send these respondents a mail
survey where some of the questions are identical to those asked in personal
interviews. It is the linkage to the DAS study that provides the rationale for
requesting a SGER grant rather than a regular research grant. The proposed study
will make two important contributions to the study of response rates and
response bias in surveys. First it will provide a measure of the response rates
that can be obtained with mail surveys compared to a highly professional face-
to-face survey. This is an important issue in survey research because mail
surveys are much less expensive than face- to-face interviews. The second
contribution of the study will be to test the hypothesis that with self-
administered questionnaires respondents are more candid about sensitive issues
than they are in face-to-face interviews. The topic of the 1992 DAS study is
racial attitudes--a topic that is known to be quite sensitive to the influence
of social desirability factors. The proposed mail survey would include some of
the same questions asked in the personal interviews thus providing a basis for
comparing the answers under two different data collections scenarios. A second
component of this part of the study would mail out the same questionnaire to
individuals who contributed money to the recent campaign of David Duke to become
governor of Louisiana. This part of the study will focus on the response rate of
a sample believed to be unsympathetic to many of the issues raised in the
questionnaire on racial attitudes and on a comparison of their stated views with
those of the randomly selected sample.