* 9212942
* Enforcement, Compliance and Performance: A Comprehensive Evaluation of Safety and Health Regulation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,05/31/1995
* David Weil, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 05/31/1995
* USD 37,045.00

The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSHA) regulates conditions in
private sector establishments and has been one of the most controversial
examples of social regulation of the past two decades. On the one hand, OSHA has
been charged with imposing needlessly high costs on firms. On the other hand,
the relative stability in the overall incidence of workplace injuries in the
last two decades since OSHA's passage suggests that it has had a negligible
impact on safety and health in the workplace. Yet, only a very limited amount of
independent, empirical research has been completed to date to link the
enforcement efforts of OSHA to health and safety in the workplace. This project
fills an important empirical gap by analyzing the underlying determinants of
OSHA performance. Specifically, this study draws upon a data set which contains
the complete records for inspections conducted by OSHA from 1971 to June of
1991. The analysis is pursued in two stages. First, the study empirically
examines the relationship between different levels of enforcement and firm-level
compliance with specific health and safety standards. Second, it measures the
relationship between compliance and health and safety outcomes, such as the
incidence of workplace injuries. In addition to answering a number of questions
concerning the efficacy of current methods of safety and health regulation, it
advances general understanding of compliance behavior in enforcement based
regulatory systems. While analyses to date typically assume perfect compliance
with promulgated regulations, this study tests notions of regulatory performance
from the perspective of limited enforcement and imperfect compliance.