* 9212419
* Mathematical Sciences: "Computer Intensive Methodology in   Classification and Regression"
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1997
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 03/31/1997
* USD 267,873.00

This is a three year research project which has as its purpose the study of
computationally intensive methods in classification (pattern recognition) and
regression (noisy prediction) where the data is high-dimensional and nonlinear.
The research involves new approaches to binary tree structured methods, with the
goal of significantly improving on the accuracy and flexiblity of the present,
widely used tree structured methods initiated by the book and software presented
by Breiman et. al. (1984). The advances in methodology will be useful in the
many and diverse areas that make use of classification and prediction. Current
areas of interest including speech recognition, image processing, medical
diagnosis, and handwritten and printed charactor recognition. There will be five
areas of concentration. Two of these are based on recent work by Breiman (1991)
for efficiently fitting very high dimensional noisy data by continuously joined
hyperplane segments. Similar algorithms will be used to construct trees by
fitting hyperplanes in the nodes, and by using multivariate "ramp" functions to
construct continuous approximations to prediction surfaces. The other three
areas include a promising method for optimizing trees, making them multi-step
optimal instead in one- step at present, hyperplane splitting for multiple
response trees and a new method for doing penalized linear prediction. This
latter method, called Bridge Regression, offers hope of providing uniformly
better prediction than ordinary least squares.