* 9212337
* Normative Economics:  Theory and Practice
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1997
* Amartya Sen, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1997
* USD 216,114.00

Analyses of applied problems and the nature of public interest in them is used
to motivate and strengthen the examination of the informational base of welfare
economics and choice theory. Particular attention is paid to the neglect in
traditional welfare economics of considerations other than utility, including
freedoms, rights, and liberties, on the one hand, and also health and morbidity,
in which the public take a prominent and direct interest. Similarly, the
concentration of traditional rational choice theory on intelligent pursuit of
self-interest leads to the neglect of other norms and values, such as loyalty,
commitment, and fairness, which figure more prominently in public understanding
of actual motives for action. These perceptual features require critical
scrutiny and discriminating assessment in the light of their practical relevance
as well as conceptual viability. The results of the theoretical investigations
will be applied to the study of policy responses to global environmental change.
Public discussions of environmental issues are often dominated by alleged
violations of rights and entitlement, and also by fear of increased illness and
death in addition to forecasts of economic disasters. These concerns sometimes
serve as the basis of unifocal recommendations and fairly extreme solutions
based on assessments involving the neglect of other aspects of the problem. This
project accepts the legitimacy of these concerns and then links them with other
concerns, with reasoned assessment of defendable trade-offs and relative
weights. Public discussions of global warming are often much influenced by the
rhetoric of equity and justice, e.g., between poor countries than cannot easily
afford to pay for the proposed policies and rich ones that are seen as having an
obligation to help. Since the gap between rhetoric and political feasibility can
be quite large, it can lead to proposals that deflect discussion from what might
really be possible to do. Equity considerations are important and will be
integrated within a framework of rational assessment and informed political
discussion, making them less ambitious but possibly more effective.