* 9212572
* Dissertation Research: A Hierachical Analysis of PhylogenticRelationships in Bufonidae
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1992,05/31/1995
* David Wake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1995
* USD 10,850.00

True toads of the large family Bufonidae are a rich resource for studying
pattern and process in species diversification, but the potential cannot be
realized without an understanding of the phylogenetic relationships among the
family's members. There is no robust phylogenetic hypothesis available for
Bufonidae. While the large size of the family prohibits the estimation of a
phylogeny resolved to the species level, this level of detail is not required to
answer many questions. Instead what is needed is an understanding of the
phylogenetic relationships among the major subclades of the family and within
small clades of recently diverged species. This study represents a hierarchical
approach to the elucidation of phylogenetic relationships within Bufonidae and
the application of this information to an understanding of species
diversification. DNA sequence data from representative species at two levels of
divergence within the family: among distantly related species and within one
species group, will be used to estimate phylogenetic relationships at these
levels. With a phylogenetic hypothesis for the distantly related taxa, two
questions will be addressed: 1) biogeographic relationships among continents and
2) morphological innovation. With a hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships
within one species group, patterns and processes of speciation will be studied.