* 9212997
* Quantum-Noise Propagation in Long, Traveling-Wave           Semiconductor Amplifiers and Superluminescent Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1997
* Thomas Plant, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Magdy F. Iskander
* 11/30/1997
* USD 109,188.00

The proposed research is a collaborative project between M. Raymer at the
University of Oregon and T. Plant at Oregon State University. The new research
will address spatial propagation of quantum light fields in traveling-wave
semiconductor amplifiers and superluminescent sources. Experiments will be
designed to probe questions concerning quantum noise in situations that are not
equivalent to cavity lasers, and that will challenge theorists to go beyond the
typical photon rate- equation models now being applied to similar problems. The
broad goal of the proposed research is to understand from a fundamental
viewpoint some of the intrinsic interactions and mechanisms responsible for the
quantum fluctuations of devices using semiconductor gain media, and to learn the
implications of these fluctuations for amplifier and SLD operation. Traveling-
wave amplifiers will be studied which have long (5-10mm) active regions, defined
by either a single long contact or multiple (segmented) contacts on a single
wafer. By using long amplifier structures attempts will be made to observe the
effects of gain saturation and amplitude-to-phase coupling on the optical
spectrum and intensity fluctuations of these sources. The studies will also
focus on whether saturation of a properly designed amplifier can lead to
intensity stabilization of the output of a SLD. The OSU group will provide
expertise in fabrication and characterization of semiconductor amplifiers and
the UO group will carry out noise measurements and theoretical modeling.