* 9212953
* REG: Equipment to Modernize a Subsonic Wind Tunnel for      Gust Simulation and Measurment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Earl Dowell, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 02/28/1994
* USD 19,526.00

A subsonic wind tunnel for gust simulation and measurement will be modified and
regimented with a new control system. The gust generator employed is a novel
device based upon a recently patented concept, the rotation slotted cylinder.
The control system and equipment will have wide applications for nonlinear
aeroelastic investigations for aircraft and rotorcraft, especially for the
application of aerodynamic feedback techniques to reduce aircraft and rotorcraft
response. There is also the potential for the use of this gust generator and
associated control system to provide a novel and improve aerodynamic or wind
excitation source for scaled models of bridges and buildings. By means of a
wind-tunnel gust generator, the harmonic components of aerodynamic loads acting
on a rotating blade can be simulated on a non-rotating blade model. Higher
harmonic control (HHC) concepts for reducing blade vibration response can
therefore be investigated using the gust generator to produce aerodynamic
excitation of the model at specified harmonics of a rotor blade system. The
rotor blade model feedback control system will be based either on a PC-based
controller similar to that planned for the gust generator system or on a simple
analog feedback controller. Regardless of the controller, the system software
will provide the ability to enter a simple control law algorithm or
coefficients.*** //