* 9212714
* Selective Ceramic-Supprted Polymer Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1995
* Yoram Cohen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Edgar A. O'Rear
* 03/31/1995
* USD 75,000.00

The Main objective of this project is the preparation and development of
inorganic-polymeric membranes for separation processes. These composites should
combine the structural strength of inorganic membranes with the high selectivity
of the polymeric varieties. Fabrication will start with a vinyl silanation of an
inorganic membrane substrate followed by free radical graft polymerization onto
these vinyl moiety surface sites. Properties of the final composite can be
altered through the structure of the inorganic support (e.g. pore size), the
density of graft sites, choice of monomeric species, and the reaction conditions
for the polymerization. Membranes will be tested for hydraulic permeability and
for basic separation performance. Certain membrane processes are well-suited to
separations involving dilute solutions like the purification and concentration
of biomolecules or the removal of heavy metals from wastewater streams. Others
like pervaporation of volatile organic mixtures have the potential to replace
distillation as the method of separation. Materials development is essential if
the expected potential of membrane separation methods to address important
environmental and industrial problems is to be realized and if the United States
is to continue as a leader in the production and sales of membranes worldwide.
The ceramic-supported polymeric hybrid membranes contribute to this effort.