* 9213865
* A Proposal to Create an Academic/Research Network for the   State of Louisiana
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Sammie Cosper, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Continuing grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 08/31/1996
* USD 588,400.00

The Louisiana Board of Regents on behalf of its member institutions, proposes
to establish an academic data network. The proposal requests partial funding for
participation in NSFNET through a connection with SURAnet, the regional network
attaching to NSFNET in the Louisiana Area as well as partial start-up funds for
the necessary routers, circuits, and operating support to facilitate the fullest
possible participation. The educational institutions that will participate
include: LSU-Alexandria, LSU- Eunice, LSU-Shreveport, Southern Univ.-New
Orleans, Southern Univ.-Shreveport, Delgado Community College, Grambling State
Univ., McNeese State University, Nicholls State University, Northwestern State
University, Centenary College, Dillard University, Central Offices of the Board
of Regents, Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium, and Loyola University. The
network will provide a consistent statewide architecture for NSFNET access for a
broad variety of entities engaged in education and research. This cooperative
network will provide gateways to regional, national, and international networks
and will be consistent with their standards. It will further the institutions'
work in enhancing the state's economic development through a well-educated
workforce, accessible training opportunities, and research and development
partnerships. Another goal of the network is to facilitate collaborative
projects and sharing of resources between institutions, including those outside
the state. The universities need greater functionality and network speed to be
able to access supercomputers, libraries, and make file transfers along with
being able to implement a more reliable mail system. Students and faculty
research will benefit from the link. This is also a unique opportunity for the
schools to explore innovative educational resources.***//