* 9213022
* Engineering Research Equipment: A Power Electronics and     Electric Power Quality Research Workstation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1994
* Juan Carlos Balda, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Arthur R. Bergen
* 02/28/1994
* USD 86,185.00

The laboratory facilities for performing research within the power systems -
power electronics area in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, do not have the capability of measuring
fast transients (in the nanosecond range) or calculating the harmonic spectra of
nonsinusoidal waveforms which propagate throughout an electric power system. To
this end, the area faculty believe that the above needs may be fulfilled by two
research workstations. The Department of Electrical Engineering will use the
grant to purchase the following pieces of equipment for each of the above
mentioned research workstations: a 500 MHz digital storage oscilloscope, a
Fourier spectrum analyzer, a data acquisition and instrument controller system,
three current probes and amplifiers, a time-to-voltage, a programmable digital
multimeter, and a 3 kV isolator. The listed equipment included with each
research workstation will be used for current and pending research projects;
namely: (a) Design and Implementation of a Digital Signal Processor-based
Indirect Vector-Controlled Induction Motor Drive, (b) A Microprocessor-Based
Charge Controller for Nickel-Hydrogen Batteries, (c) Design of a Multipurpose
Advanced Static VAr Compensator to Improve the Performance of Distribution
Systems, and (d) An Assessment of the Quality of Electric Power at the
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville Campus.