* 9213894
* Integration of Connectionist and Symbolic Computation for   Linguistic Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Paul Smolensky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 06/30/1995
* USD 157,158.00

This is the first-year funding of a three-year continuing award IRI-9213894. In
previous research, an approach to the formal study of language, Harmonic
Grammar, relies on a novel means of integrating connectionist and symbolic
computation. The current research studies extensions of this approach,
concerning formal grammars of natural languages and grammars of formal
languages. Specifically, the previous work is extended: to encompass recursive,
fully distributed connectionist representations; to develop an explicit symbolic
programming language to characterize the computations over these representations
carried out by a new class of connectionist networks; to study the expressive
power of Harmonic Grammar to describe formal languages, starting with a study of
context-free languages; to analyze the properties of connectionist networks that
lead to a recursive, embedding- invariant well-formedness (Harmony) function; to
test the ability of Harmonic Grammar to deal with linguistic problems crucially
involving embedding; to assess the effectiveness of our fully distributed
representations for encoding the features of syntactic/semantic structural roles
in linguistic representations; to extend the theory to incorporate the symbolic
computational notion of unification, and to apply it to unification-based
approaches to natural language grammar; to study the effectiveness and temporal
behavior of connectionist parsers that implement both the numerical and
nonnumerical formalizations of Harmonic Grammar; and to extend recent work on
connectionist learning of symbolic rule systems to the particular case of
Harmonic Grammar.//