* 9213959
* Interactions Between Cognition and Language in the          Transition from infancy to Early Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1997
* Alison Gopnik, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1997
* USD 224,988.00

About the time that children begin to talk, there are also important changes in
their problem-solving abilities. Are these two developments related? In
particular, does learning to use certain words allow children to solve new
problems? This research will explore two areas of problem solving that might be
related to language. When they are about eighteen months old, children begin to
classify objects in new ways. When they see a mixed-up group of different kinds
of objects, they may put each kind of object into a separate pile. At about the
same time, they often have "a naming spurt", suddenly beginning to name every
object they see. In earlier research, there was a relation between these two
developments, with children who had a naming spurt early also beginning to group
objects early. Also at about eighteen months, children begin to use words like
"in" and "out," while at about the same time beginning to understand how
containers work in a new way. This research will explore whether these two
developments are also related. The research will compare children who hear
different kinds of languages, in order to try to tell whether the new words are
leading to the new problem-solving abilities. Korean- and Japanese-speaking
mothers use many fewer names than English speakers, and they use more words that
talk about movement, particularly verbs. Korean- and Japanese-speaking children
may develop the ability to classify objects later, but may develop the ability
to understand containers earlier. In addition, the research will explore the
effects of exposing different English- speaking children to many names or
alternatively to many verbs. Children who are particularly exposed to names may
be advanced in classifying but not in understanding containers, while those
exposed to verbs may show the opposite pattern. Learning to talk may allow
children to think in new ways, and the specific words they hear may influence
the kinds of problems they can solve.