* 9213536
* CO2 GASPEC:  Design, Construction and Field-Testing of a GasCorrelation Spectrometer for Remote Measurement of CO2
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1995
* Stanley Williams, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 10/31/1995
* USD 223,275.00

This award provides support to develop and field-test a new remote-sensing
device which will be capable of quantifying the rate of emission of carbon
dioxide gas during volcanic eruptions. The prototype instrument, a portable
infrared absorption spectrometer, will be designed to measure the carbon dioxide
content in a line- of-sight through a volcanic eruption plume and to sort out
the signal (the carbon dioxide in the plume) from noise (the normal background
carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere). The instrument package will be
designed for use either in airplanes or ground locations. Although carbon
dioxide is the second most abundant volcanic gas (after water), little is known
about either the total amounts emitted by active volcanos during eruption or the
variation in emission level during the evolution of an eruption. The ability to
remotely measure the flux of carbon dioxide is of importance for a variety of
reasons. The origin of the Earth's atmosphere is ultimately related to volcanic
degassing, and we cannot understand the significance of anthropogenic
contributions unless we have a handle on the natural sources and their variation
over time. Major volcanic eruptions, well quantified, could be used as natural
experiments to evaluate the impact of greenhouse gases on climate. In addition,
monitoring of carbon dioxide emissions can be used to predict the course of
volcanic eruptions and their local, regional, and global consequences.