* 9213987
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research:  Growth and Morphology   in a Model Thin Film System
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Patricia Thiel, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1995
* USD 18,050.00

This award supports Professor Patricia Thiel, Dr. Luke Chang and a graduate
student from Iowa State University to collaborate in surface chemistry research
with Professor R. J>rgen Behm and others of the University of Ulm, Germany. Both
groups are actively pursuing research on metal film growth and structure.
Together, they have chosen to study the morphology of a particular metal-on-
metal system, and the mechanisms by which that morphology is achieved.
Specifically, they will use Scanning Tunneling microscopy (STM) to elucidate the
morphology of a system composed of Rhodium on Silver (Rh on Ag(100)). These
metals are immiscible and do not appear to form an alloy, but when combined they
exhibit very unusual behavior by forming a multi-layer sandwich of Ag-Rh-Ag. The
two research groups bring complementary expertise to this complex study: the
U.S. group contributes expertise in the particular metal system and the German
group offers experimental facilities and well-established experience with STM of
metals. Films of solid materials are used in applications which range from
corrosion-resistant coatings to magnetic recording devices. The characteristic
of a film that is most important in determining its physical properties and thus
its performance in a given application is its morphology. The research proposed
in this collaboration is directed at understanding the factors which control
film morphology, particularly in the complicated case where there is a mixture
of materials involved which may form an alloy or a sandwich.