* 9213995
* Elementary Coordination Dynamics of Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* J. A. Scott Kelso, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1995
* USD 112,846.00

This research aims to answer the following questions concerning the processes
that underlie the ability of human beings to learn new skills: What changes with
learning? What is the nature of change? What factors determine the form taken by
changes due to learning? What governs the rate of learning? Aside from the
obvious practical advantages that will accrue to areas such as education and
training, answers to these questions will yield a deeper understanding of
learning which is a fundamental feature of complex, living things. While it is
generally agreed that individuals are not tabulae rasae but instead bring
different backgrounds and capacities into the learning environment, satisfactory
concepts and methods to treat such individual differences in learning do not
exist. This research will introduce new methods to evaluate spontaneous
coordination tendencies on an individual basis and will study how such
tendencies are modified by the learning process itself. The research will use
perceptual-motor coordination tasks (visually specified relative timing patterns
between the limbs) as the window into learning. In a typical experiment,
individual coordination tendencies will be probed prior to the introduction of a
specific learning requirement. The probe will require people to match a phase
relationship (given by a computer generated visual metronome) between
rhythmically moving limbs, which will be changed in 15 degree steps every 15
seconds over the interval from 0 to 360 degrees. These subjects will then be
trained with a specific phasing pattern (e.g., 90 degrees) that does not
correspond to those coordination patterns that are well-performed in the probe
(e.g., 0 degrees and 180 degrees). Knowledge of results will be provided only
during the learning phase, which typically proceeds over a period of several
days. Further probes will allow learning to be interpreted in terms of the
cooperative or competitive interplay between the task to be learned and each
individual's preferred coordination tendencies. Kelso's specific theoretical
model captures the entire coordination dynamics as an equation of motion and
leads to a number of testable predictions about learning. This research will
examine empirically predictions concerning mechanisms of transfer and
generalization to other tasks involving other components, the form (abrupt vs.
smooth) that the learning process exhibits, the various routes or pathways
adopted in learning a new skill, and the factors determining learning rate. This
approach, by identifying dynamic constraints before, during, and after learning,
includes a level of description currently missing in learning theory and often
completely ignored in practical applications.