* 9213753
* Protein Structure-Function, Third Karachi Symposium;        January 1993; Karachi, Pakistan
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* David Smith, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1994
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This project provides support for the participation of five U.S.
scientists in the third Karachi Symposium and Workshop on protein Structure-
Function, planned for January 1993 in Karachi, Pakistan. The U.S. team will be
headed by Dr. David Smith, professor of medicinal chemistry at Purdue
University. The Pakistani organizer is Dr. Zafar H. Zaidi of the HEJ
Postgraduate Institute of Chemistry at the University of Karachi. The symposium
speakers include four each from Germany and India, three from the United
Kingdom, and one each from France, Sweden, Australia, Iran and China, in
addition to five from the U.S. and speakers from Pakistan. The four day
symposium will be followed by a ten day workshop for training graduate students
and junior scientists on isolation and identification of proteins, their
compositions and their functions. Proceedings of all symposium papers will be
published after the meetings. Scope: This project supports a significant meeting
on an important topic in basic science that has many direct applications in
health and agriculture. Previous meetings in this series had good results in
establishing links between Pakistani young scientists and U.S. and other western
scientists, and between scientists of the South Asia region especially Pakistan,
India, and Bangladesh. The host institute has excellent facilities for research
in this area of analytical biochemistry. The Karachi area is well suited because
of the concentration of the pharmaceutical and the natural medicines industries
of Pakistan there. The project fits well the guidelines of the Science in
Developing Countries program.