* 9213203
* Dissertation Research: Seasonal Clonal Succession in        Daphnia Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* NONE NONE, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1994
* USD 5,000.00

Plankton ecology has made considerable progress towards understanding seasonal
species succession in temperate lakes. The interaction of predation,
competition, and resource quality play a large role in forming predictable,
seasonal, changes in species abundance. However, the potential for genotypes
(clones) to respond to these same ecological factors within plankton species has
not been well studied. Previous research documented a strong pattern of clonal,
seasonal, succession in local populations of Daphnia pulcaria. This succession
was strongly associated with seasonal changes in population migratory behaviors,
the densities of a strong competitor, and the availability of a refuge from
predation. The proposed work seeks a mechanistic understanding of clonal
succession in D. pulcaria population. Specifically, it will address several
questions: 1) How consistently repetitious are seasonal clonal successions in
Daphnia populations? 2) Are there quantitative genetic differences among clones
in ecologically relevant traits such as habitat use? 3) How do predation
(including refuge availability), competition, and resource change affect
seasonal clonal succession? 4) finally, how does the frequency of sexual
reproduction affect the observed successional patterns? The crustaceans under
study here are key members of the food chains of lakes.