* 9213876
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Determination of Gas Phase Structures of Molecular Precursors to Solid State Materials by Electron Diffraction
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Mark Hampden-Smith, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 06/30/1995
* USD 12,350.00

This two-year award will support U.S.-U.K. cooperative research between Mark J.
Hampden-Smith of the University of New Mexico and David Rankin of the University
of Edinburgh. This interdisciplinary project involves solid state materials
preparation and chemical synthesis and characterization. The objectives are to
determine the gas phase structures of a variety of volatile and new organocopper
precursors, perform thermal decomposition studies and surface studies of
deposited copper films. The research is focused on deriving fundamental insight
into the formation of high- quality, patterned copper thin films. In studying
the gas phase aspects of the organocopper precursors, the investigators will
provide important new information about the gas phase and gas surface reactions.
Dr. Hampden-Smith brings to this collaboration his expertise in the synthesis
and characterization of organocopper precursors in solid state and in solution.
His group will synthesize the necessary compounds at the University of Mexico
for the gas phase studies. This is complemented by the unique instrumentation at
the University of Edinburgh and Dr. Rankin's expertise in gas phase structural
characterization using electron diffraction techniques. Together, their research
may allow the deposit of purer, low temperature, better quality copper films on
surfaces than is currently possible. //