* 9213072
* A Synoptic Climatology of Warm Season Convection in the     Southern Great Lakes Region
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1998
* Julie Winkler, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1998
* USD 149,657.00

The frequency, character, seasonality, and diurnal phasing of convection are
important components of the climatology of a place or region. The southern Great
Lakes region of the United States has been understudied in this regard. It lies
within a transition zone separating western regions where nocturnal
thunderstorms predominate during the warm season and eastern regions where
thunderstorms occur mostly during the daytime. This makes the southern Great
Lakes unique in that nocturnal and daytime convection are equally frequent
during the warm months of the year. The nature and extent of the influence of
lake breezes and land-water temperature differences and their relationship to
the occurrence, timing, and intensity of convection is unknown for this region.
This research will document, using lightning and radar observations, the
convective climatology of the southern Great Lakes region at a fine temporal and
spatial scale. The project will identify the differences in the statistical
properties of nocturnal versus daytime convective systems, and examine the
nature and extent of variations in convective frequency and timing. Differences
in the meso-alpha scale and synoptic scale atmospheric environment in which
nocturnal and daytime convective events form will be evaluated. This will assist
in an assessment of the relative hazard to human life and property posed by
convective storms in terms of potential lightning damage and the probability of
heavy precipitation. The improved convective climatology resulting from this
research will allow for a re-evaluation of currently proposed explanations for
differences in the diurnal phasing of convective storms. The linkages identified
between the statistical properties of convective storms and the large-scale
environments in which they form can be employed in the short-range forecasting
of convection.