* 9213007
* The Economics of Science
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Arthur Diamond, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/1995
* USD 15,000.00

The investigator will write a review essay on the economics of science that will
serve as the basis for a workshop discussion among a group of eight scholars
from economics and STS disciplines. The day-long workshop will consist of three
or four sessions focusing on broad questions of the application of economics to
science issues. Possible session topics are: "The Maximizing Model Applied to
Science," "The Organization of Scientific Inquiry," and "The Allocation of
Scarce Resources." The review essay, written responses to the review essay, and
perhaps other readings suggested by participants, will be distributed before the
workshop and will serve as the common starting point for the discussions. Based
on comments and the workshop discussion, the investigator will revise and submit
the review essay for publication. Participants will submit their thoughts on
whether further research in economics of science is promising and, if so, what
questions it should seek to answer. The investigator will also compile these
results in a form suitable for publication. The purpose of the project is to
allow exchanges to occur between scholars with overlapping research agendas and
complementary research methods. Results should lead to deeper and more useful
understanding of the behavior of scientists and organization of the scientific
enterprise, and to identification of areas where collaboration will be fruitful.
It may help to form a new subfield of scholars who specialize in the study of
the economics of science, whose issues range from the cognitive status of
scientific knowledge to the efficient allocation of scientific funds.