* 9213064
* Marine Biotech Fellowship:  The Population Genetic          Consequences of Histocompatibility in a Colonial Ascidian
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Douglas Stoner, Stanford University
* Fellowship Award
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1995
* USD 84,000.00

The genes governing allorecognition in both vertebrates and invertebrates can
be highly polymorphic. This project will examine some of the selective forces
that may have initiated and maintained this polymorphism in a model system, the
colonial ascidian, Botryllus schlosseri. In this ascidian, a single and highly
polymorphic allorecognition locus appears to govern the processes of colony
fusion and gamete incompatibility. It is argued that a precise allorecognition
system may have evolved in B. Schlosseri to reduce the costs of somatic cell
parasitism associated with colony fusion and/or to decrease the level of
inbreeding over that expected if male fertilities were a simple function of
sperm concentration. This project will test these ideas by asking the following
specific questions: 1) What are the genetic costs of colony fusion? 2) What is
the frequency of genetic chimeras in natural populations? and 3) To what extent
does gametic incompatibility lower male fertilities in matings among kin? To
answer these questions the research will: first, determine the best combination
of probes and restriction enzymes for the genetic typing of individuals by DNA
fingerprinting; second, genetically characterize what happens to the tissues and
germ lines of fused colonies over time; third, genetically type the tissues and
progeny of a random sample of colonies to determine what percentage of a local
population consists of genetic chimeras; and fourth, the project will use sperm
competition experiments and paternity fertilization success in matings among
kin. This project will provide two products. The first product will be a
description of the genetic consequences of histocompatibility. Such information
will be critical to our understanding of the adaptive significance of colony
fusion and gamete incompatibility in communities of clonal marine invertebrates
as well as for identifying the selective forces that initiated and maintained
the high levels of allotypic polymorphism that are necessary for a precise
allorecognition system. The second product will be the development of molecular
techniques for the estimation of paternity. In the future, this capability will
allow for more detailed genetic studies that attempt to reconstruct the
genealogy of populations and assess the evolutionary fitness of different
genotypes.