* 9213829
* Collaborative Research: DNA "Fingerprinting" to Estimate    Male and Female Fitness in Heliopsis helianthoides          (Asteraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Barbara Schaal, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 27,224.00

Most flowering plants function as both male and females, through the production
of either pollen or seeds. Theory suggests that female reproductive success is
usually limited by resources available for seed production. The male function in
plants is limited by the ability of the plant to disperse pollen. This leads to
the prediction that the attractiveness of flowers to pollinators has relatively
limited effect on the production of seed, but a large effect on the dispersal of
pollen, and hence the fitness of the plant as a male. Despite this predicted
importance of male fitness to the evolution of floral attraction, the
distribution of paternal reproductive success in natural populations has been
exceedingly difficult to measure. DNA "fingerprinting" can be used to determine
paternity unambiguously in plant populations, and therefore to estimate paternal
reproductive success. Methods will be developed to measure paternal and maternal
fitness in the prairie plant Heliopsis helianthoides in a collaborative study
that has both intensive field and laboratory components. The three objectives
are: 1) to document variation among H. helianthoides for hypervariable loci; 2)
to determine the mode of inheritance for these loci; 3) to use seedlings of
known percentage to determine if the hypervariable loci can be used to assign
paternity in a wild population of H. helianthoides. This work will contribute
the basic data necessary to apply the technique of DNA "fingerprinting" to the
evaluation of current hypotheses on the evolution of floral structures.