* 9213281
* Marine Biotech Fellowship: A Test of Alternative Speciation Hypotheses Using Molecular Systematic Analysis of           Lagenorhynchus Dolphins.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Frank Cipriano, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1995
* USD 84,000.00

9213281 Cipriano A variety of related plant and animal taxa, both marine and
terrestrial, are found to the north and south of an apparent tropical barrier.
The variety of these "antitropical" taxa includes many supposed populations or
species pairs of whales, dolphins and porpoises. This project will study the
relationships and divergence between dolphin species of the genus Lagenorhynchus
found in northern and southern temperate oceans and will test alternative
hypotheses of Pleistocene glaciation or mid-Miocene warming as explanations for
the currently observed anti-tropical species distributions. Sequence analysis of
portions of dolphin mitochondrial DNA, with supplemental use of nuclear DNA
markers, will be used to establish relationships within the genus, and for
comparison to related outgroup genera also within the the Family Delphinidae. In
order to place amounts of genetic divergence found between Lagenorhynchus
species into perspective, it will be necessary to sequence specimens from
populations within Lagenorhynchus species to provide a yardstick for
interpreting interspecific divergence. This project will also investigate the
population structure of white- sided dolphins (L. obliquidens) found
continuously distributed in the North Pacific, and of widely separated
populations of dusky dolphins (L. obscurus) from the southern oceans. This would
be the first attempt to establish genetic criteria for distinction of stocks of
these species, or to recognize potential specific status of L. obscurus from
different areas. This information may be useful to determine whether particular
stocks are at risk form fishing activities in certain regions. In order to
assess the approximate timing of the divergence between Lagenorhynchus species,
genetic distances will be interpreted using the perspective provided by
population structure analysis, comparison to published sequences for outgroups,
and comparison to genetic distances of other taxa known to have div erged in
Miocene and Pleistocene times. Because of the large difference between the time
scale of the two alternatives, identification of the congruence of
Lagenorhynchus divergence timing with one should thus be possible even without a
rate calibration. ***