* 9213814
* Challenging Sexual Harassment Through Collective Action:    Women, Unions and Title VII
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Marion Crain, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 12/31/1993
* USD 17,983.00

This planning grant will assist in the development of an in-depth study of the
influence of law on the role of unions in eliminating "hostile work environment"
sexual harassment of unionized working women. Although it is often thought that
the presence of a union facilitates group challenges to environmental sexual
harassment, the opposite pattern prevails in many unionized workplaces: sexual
harassment claims are typically brought by individual women, with the union
either refusing to intervene or representing the harasser. This study tests the
hypothesis that union practices and attitudes interact with labor law to impede
the realization of sex equality in the workplace, undermining the union's image,
and depriving women of a legally sanctioned avenue of collective action and
empowerment. Patterns of union practice relating to legal issues raised by
workplace sexual harassment of unionized women will be analyzed through
collection and analysis of reported cases. The issues will be further
illuminated through a case study where union women have challenged the hostile
work environment without the aid of the union. This project promises to generate
both new understandings and further studies of considerable value regarding
struggles for legal and social equality in the workplace. As such it will
further our knowledge of the use of law in correcting structural disadvantages
for female workers in organized workplaces.