* 9213227
* Origins of An American Science of Occuptional Chemical      Hazards
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Christopher Sellers, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 07/31/1994
* USD 34,915.00

Dr. Sellers is exploring the growing concern about occupational chemical hazards
in the United States. His study concentrates on the origins of this concern in
the period from 1900-1930 when a new community of experts arose to address this
problem. Dr. Sellers is examining the technological, economic and social changes
influencing the rise of this new community of experts and role they came to
play. He is focusing on: the changing rates of occupational poisonings in this
period and their roots in technological change; the evolving attitude of
corporate representatives toward this problem and their responsibility for
fostering the new expertise; and the new experts' shifting relations with
workers, the emerging compensation system for occupational disease, and the more
established profession of engineering. As part of his professional development
fellowship, Dr. Sellers is working at Johns Hopkins University with the economic
historian, Professor Louis Galambos, and the historian of technology, Dr. Stuart
Leslie who are providing training in their specialties and are helping to guide
his research. Dr. Sellers goal is to analyze the origins of the new science in
workplace change and in scientific professionals' efforts to establish an
autonomous role for themselves with a corporate and technology- driven economy.
This work will elucidate the importance of this science in environmental history
and in the emergence of modern "organizational society."