* 9213269
* Exospheric Studies and Geocoronal Applications
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1995
* James Bishop, Computational Physics Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 10/31/1995
* USD 329,095.00

This proposal outlines a three-year plan of research for (1) taking the final
steps toward formulating and applying a path- integral approach to the
collisional kinetics of the transition region between the thermosphere and
exosphere, and (2) constructing geocoronal models with the goal for assessing
the response of the exosphere to, and interaction with, thermospheric variations
and magnetospheric processes. Throughout, the applications are geared toward
observable or measurable quantities, based on the experience gained during the
CHARM project that is currently winding down. The specific tasks making up this
proposal are: o to complete the development of an algorithm for evaluating the
kinetic distribution function of exospheric constituents in the transition zone
between the exosphere and the collisionally-dominated thermosphere, and to
incorporate this into realistic kinetic models of the hydrogen geocorona taking
into account elastic collisions of atmomic H with O and He and charge-exchange
collisions with H+ and O+ using realistic topside ionosphere models, o to carry
out case studies of the interaction between the ring current and geocorona
(beginning with quiet-time cases, using AMPTE-CCE -derived empirical models) to
evaluate quantitatively the energetic particle flux onto the low- and mid-
latitude thermosphere (and airglow emissions arising thereform), and in the case
of storm-time ring current enhancements, to ascertain whether there is enough
energy deposited into the thermosphere to affect the geocorona globally (i.e. to
quantitatively investigated feedbacks), o to further develop a radiative
transfer code to address non- isothermal thermospheres and to carry out unified
analyses of Lyman and Balmer datasets collected over the last two decades, o to
compile geocoronal models into a consistent reference set, and to use this set
to determine values for parameters defined within a recently-developed analytic
modeling scheme as functions of geophysical and solar indices, thereby providing
workers in other areas of geospace research with a convenient representation of
the geocorona, o and to continue the theoretical development of exospheres
subject to non-gravitational forces to.