* 9213879
* High-Resolution Solar Imaging
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Richard Shine, Lockheed Missiles and Space Company Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 02/29/1996
* USD 164,994.00

This project will examine solar activity and solar flares during 1993 using
observations to be obtained at the Swedish Solar Observatory (SSO) on La Palma
in the Canary Islands and continuing analysis of existing data. The project
expects to obtain simultaneous observations with the Japanese Yohkoh (Solar A)
satellite. This would provide a unique and invaluable data set combining high
resolution magnetogram, dopplergram, and chromospheric movies with coronal
movies in soft x-rays. The data will be collected using an existing ultra-
narrowband tunable filter imaging system (50 m>) which has been developed for
the Orbiting Solar Laboratory (OSL). This filter and a 1024 x 1024 pixel CCD
camera and data system will now be committed to ground based observations for
the foreseeable future. Depending on available resources, the system will be
modified to adapt it better to ground based observing conditions. The
observations will be coordinated with Max '91 campaigns and the Yohkoh satellite
whenever possible. These data will consist of time sequences of very high
spatial and spectral resolution images which will allow the study of magnetic
fields, velocities, and energy release down to 200 km scales. Funds are
requested to support observing runs, and data analysis of these and previously
obtained data. Additional support for graduate students and visiting scientists
involved in the data analysis will come from Lockheed Independent Research (IR)
funds. The equipment will be borrowed from other programs or provided by
Lockheed or SSO.