* 9213563
* REG: Laboratory for Structural Response under Short         Duration Impulsive Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Theodor Krauthammer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/1995
* USD 104,000.00

Civil Engineering structures are subjected to short duration dynamic loads due
to vehicle impact, ice impact on bridge piers and off shore oil platforms,
debris impact during storms or earthquakes, pounding during earthquakes,
projectile impact from failed rotating machinery, accidental or intentional
explosions, and many other sources. The present equipment request is aimed at
augmenting a unique large scale outdoor pendulum test facility dedicated to
studies on the response of structures to short- duration dynamic loads. The
existing facility was completed in 1989, and is capable of testing full-scale
structures. However, this facility does not have an appropriate data acquisition
system and its use is significantly curtailed by weather conditions. The
requested equipment will enable the researchers to develop a smaller indoor
testing facility for precise parallel studies on small-scale models of the
prototypes tested in the outdoor facility. furthermore, the advanced data
acquisition system could be employed also for large scale tests. The combination
of accurate full-scale and reduced-scale experimental studies will enable the
researchers to develop scaling and loading realm of structural behavior.
Fundamental treatment of material and structural response under short duration
dynamic effects would be combined for precisely defining resistance mechanisms
and their contributions to observed structural behavior. ***