* 9213639
* Determination of Non-Exchangable Deuterium/Hydrogen of      Chemical Compounds of Geo-biologic Interest.
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1992,04/30/1996
* R. Krishnamurthy, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 04/30/1996
* USD 187,214.00

The D/H ratio of non-exchangeable Hydrogen atoms, primarily bound as Carbon-
Hydrogen, in plant materials, has been shown to reflect the D/H ratio of the
environmental water used by the plants. The D/H ratio of the environmental
water, which is invariably that of the local precipitation, is directly related
to the temperature at the site of precipitation. Therefore the D/H ratio of non-
exchangeable hydrogen in plant material can provide information about past
climate conditions. A simple equilibration technique that eliminates the lengthy
steps involved in the isolation of carbon bound hydrogen in cellulose and at the
same time permits the evaluation of the isotope fractionation factors of
exchangeable hydrogen in cellulose at any chosen temperature has been developed.
This award will allow the extension of this technique to the determination of
the fractionation factors of several organic compounds of biogeologic interest.
Knowledge of the fractionation factors will enable easier and speedier analysis
of the D/H ratio of the non- exchangeable hydrogen in the compounds that can be
isolated from biologic and geologic systems. In the geologic context, knowledge
of the D/H ratio of specific compounds will provide information on the
environmental conditions under which a certain compound was generated as well as
the post-depositional chemistry that might have affected it.