* 9213992
* Insulin Receptor Homolog
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Robert Garofalo, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/1995
* USD 67,316.00

Insulin is a protein hormone important in the regulation of blood sugar or
glucose. This hormone exerts its effects on cells by binding to a cell surface
receptor. This binding causes the receptor to transmit signals into the interior
of the cell which result in the uptake of glucose. While we know a great deal
about the insulin receptor structure, it is not clear how its signals are
transmitted within the cell or the components of its signalling pathway. Dr.
Garofalo is using Drosophila as a model to define the mechanisms of action of
the insulin receptor. Drosophila contain both an insulin-like hormone and an
insulin receptor which are strikingly similar to their human counterparts. Since
it is likely that the biochemical pathway involving this receptor has been
conserved, research in this species which offers an unique advantage over other
experimental systems will undoubtedly lead to a better understanding of the
components in the insulin receptor signalling pathway. To address this important
question, Dr. Garofalo is generating and characterizing mutations in the insulin
receptor. By examining the consequences of these mutations, he will begin to
unravel the function of the receptor. This will provide a better understanding
of the roles of the insulin receptor in development, and should also lead to the
identification of other genes encoding proteins important in signal transduction
cascades initiated by insulin or insulin-like growth factors. Basic research on
this fundamental mechanism is important for our understanding of the
pathogenesis and treatment of diabetes, a consequence of insulin deficiency and
may eventually lead to identity of possible targets for therapeutic
intervention.