* 9213861
* U.S.-Bulgaria Cooperative Research on Ion Beam Deposition   of Two Component Films
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1994
* John Rabalais, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1994
* USD 27,880.00

This U.S.-Bulgaria research project between Dr. J. Wayne Rabalais and Dr. S. S.
Todorov of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences will study the mechanism of low
energy ion beam deposition (IBD) of artificially structured materials. The focus
is the fundamental ion- surface interactions, including the influence of
substrate structure, defects, diffusion, annihilation, and temperature along
with ion energy, type, and charge. Deposition of two-component films will be
studied by using a new, unique, pulsed, dual-beam, mass- selected ion beam
deposition system. The films will be characterized in situ by electron
spectroscopy and ion scattering and ex situ by XRD, TEM, RBS, and Raman. The
objectives are to determine the mechanism of ion beam synthesis of epitaxial and
ordered structures and new materials with interesting electrical and/or
mechanical properties. The goal is to understand and control ion beam processes
for low temperature synthesis of new multicomponent materials and metastable
solids. This work should lead to an improvement of our fundamental understanding
of film growth processes that occur during deposition of hyperthermal species
and the resulting film structure and properties. This project in materials
science fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine
complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence.