* 9213688
* Oligomers and Polymers from Dehydrocoupling of Hydrosilanes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Joyce Corey, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 07/31/1997
* USD 157,900.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research on catalysts for silicon polymerization to be carried out by
Dr. Joyce Y. Corey of the Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri-Saint
Louis. She will develop improved organometallic compounds to promote coupling of
hydrosilanes to form silicon-functional chains, rings, and polymers. Combination
catalysts of dichlorobis(cyclopentadienyl)metal compounds, where the metal is
Zr, Ti, or Hf, with butyl lithium have been used for this purpose, but control
of chain length and structure have not been achieved. Corey will vary the
structure of the catalyst as well as the metal used in order to target the
synthesis of specific catenated compounds and, in the process, improve
understanding of the catalytic requirements for dehydrocoupling. New types of
monomers will also be used in the dehydrocoupling reactions to form novel
oligomers and polymers. %%% Polymers formed from chains of silicon form a
variety of materials which have potentially useful electronic properties. Some
applications in photoconduction, microlithography, and photoinitiated
polymerization of vinyl monomers have been reported. Manipulation of the
properties of these materials will require synthetic methods which can control
the length of the polymer chain, its shape, and the attachment of functional
groups. Dr. Joyce Y. Corey will explore additional synthetic methods which
control some of these factors in the formation of silicon polymers.