* 9213812
* What Have We Done To The Land? Studies In Soil Depletion    And Reforestation
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1992,10/31/1995
* Michael Singer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1995
* USD 132,284.00

This project assembles historical measures of soil degradation and its effects
on agricultural productivity in India and China, countries containing 44 percent
of the population of all developing nations. Now that population growth is near
the fastest rate in all history, how fast is productive land being lost to
erosion, aggradation, salinity, alkalinity, and cities? How fast has the net
soil loss really been? How much has it cost? The techniques developed here can
become a model for solving other debates over trends in soil quality. Most
estimates of soil degradation are erosion estimates. These estimates suggest
enormous losses. For example, it is estimated that rivers carry 24 billion tons
of sediment to the ocean each year, compared with only 9 billion tons before the
introduction of agriculture, grazing and other human activities. But such
studies give gross measures of soil loss, not the net measures that are closer
to the productivity measures needed in order to assess the productivity effects
of erosion. These measures lack information on the earlier amount and quality of
soil, for comparison with water levels. Instead of a chain of snapshots over
time, we are asked to judge movement from a single snapshot. In contrast, this
project assembles and analyzes six main data sets on soil qualities and
agricultural productivity in China from the 1930s to the 1980s and three main
data sets for land quality in India from 1950 to 1984. Considerable time is
spent on direct comparisons of soil data from cultivated lands within each
county in China and India. The productivity consequences of land attributes will
be estimated from these data. Finally a range of related hypotheses about land
tenure and the role of specific policies will be rigorously tested.