* 9213038
* ENGINEERING RESEARCH EQUIPMENT: Equipment Dedicated to      Research in the Engineering of Hybrid Optoelectronic        Devices and Components
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1995
* Kristina Johnson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 02/28/1995
* USD 56,000.00

The purchase of this equipment will be dedicated to the research in the
engineering of hybrid optoelectronic components for insertion into 3D optical
image processing architectures. Three integrated research projects will utilize
the research equipment to realize a compact, high throughput optical image
processing module, based on the Hughes 3D computer architecture. This electronic
processor consists of stacks of silicon wafers interconnected through ohmic
contacts. Power dissipation limits the processing speed. The PI proposes to
replace the electronic contacts with power efficient VLSI-based optical
interconnects. Fabrication of VLSI optical interconnect devices and their
alignment into multi-chip modules are crucial technologies for increasing the
computational power of 3D computers. Equipment to be purchased under this
research project includes computer workstations, a source generator and spectrum
analyzer for the design, layout and testing of VLSI devices. Optical
interconnections are realized by filling the VLSI chips with electro-optic
materials. Equipment required to accomplish this task includes vacuum ovens,
hotplates, temperature controllers, vacuum spinner and water purification
system. Aligning the optical interconnect devices into multi-chip modules
requires vacuum evaporators and a fluxless solder reflow unit. Testing the
multi-chip modules for insertion into the Hughes 3D computer architecture
requires a visible laser, associated optical hardware, floatation table and
legs.