* 9213611
* The Formation and Significance of New Industrial            Districts:  A Study of Four Countries' Experience
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Ann Markusen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 12/31/1995
* USD 124,788.00

Accompanying the increasing integration of global production and trade
connections has been the rise of new industrial districts. These are spatially
distinct areas of economic activity dominated by a specialized set of trade-
oriented industries which induce in turn population and employment growth. The
literature on new industrial districts focuses on agglomeration forces and
externalities, the networks and relationships among firms, and the functioning
of local labor markets. Because of the wide variety of forms such industrial
districts take on, and because disagreement exists over which districts to
designate as new and specialized, this research will amplify and generalize the
theory of their formation and location. The theoretical portion of the study
will concentrate on non-place embeddedness, non-local externalities,
interdistrict labor mobility, and the role of the State in new industrial
district formation. The empirical portion will examine districts in four
countries: the United States, Japan, Korea, and Brazil. A typology of industrial
districts will be developed, and specific hypotheses will be tested which
reflect the theoretically expected attributes attributed to each district type.
Data for the analysis will come from published statistics available in each
country. An international team of researchers will work on case study districts
in each country, and they will compare and contrast their findings across
national contexts. This research will produce a fuller basic theory of new
industrial district formation based on a broader analysis of embeddedness,
externalities, and developmental agents. It will result in a typology of new
industrial districts which is more comprehensive and adaptable to various
national situations. The four nation comparison of new industrial districts will
permit an interpretation of how national differences in political structure,
stage of development, economic strategy, and corporate structure, condition
their growth and formation.