* 9213901
* The Effect of Pressure on Hydrocarbon Oxidation Through     the Negative Temperature Coefficient Regime
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1992,11/30/1996
* Nicholas Cernansky, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 11/30/1996
* USD 245,726.00

This program (an extension of a current NSF program) is directed to the study of
effects of pressure on hydrocarbon oxidation in low and intermediate (550-1000K)
temperature regimes, with acquisition of kinetic information at pressures up to
20 atmospheres for oxidation of pure hydrocarbons containing four or more carbon
atoms. A major part of the work will utilize a recently-developed pressurized
flow reactor test facility. The experiments to be conducted will provide
resolution of mechanistic details (and the effects of pressure on these)
associated with alkylperoxy radical reactions and definition of the role of
diperoxy radicals as branching agents. Other separate complementary bench-scale
experiments will also be utilized to elucidate mechanistic details controlling
the oxidation of straight and branched hydrocarbons in the low and intermediate
temperature regimes. Gas chromatography, GC/MS, and GC/FTIR diagnostics will be
used for chemical analysis of stable reaction intermediates and products, while
in-situ measurements of stable and radical species will be carried out using
FTIR spectroscopy. Specific objectives are: (1) Obtain kinetic information for
oxidation of pure hydrocarbons between 550 and 1000K at pressures up to 20
atmospheres; (2) Determine effects of pressure on oxidation mechanism(s) in each
temperature regime and how pressure affects boundaries separating the regimes;
and, (3) Suggest and refine mechanisms for modeling the alkylperoxy radical
reaction system and the diperoxy radical reaction system. Hydrocarbon oxidation
chemistry at low to intermediate temperatures (below 1000K) plays a significant
role in operation of many combustion devices, notably internal combustion
engines, in some cases accounting for a significant fraction of the overall heat
release as well as strongly affecting input boundary conditions for the higher
temperature regions in these devices. Since such devices operate at elevated
pressures, fundamental research on low and intermediate temperature hydrocarbon
oxidation at pressures well above atmospheric is important to furthering the
understanding of many practical internal combustion engine phenomena, including
engine knock, preignition fuel decomposition, pollutant formation, and general
autoignition processes.