* 9213339
* Dissertation Research: A Phylogenetic Analysis of ProteaceaeUsing Ontogeny of Flowers
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1992,03/31/1995
* NONE NONE, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/1995
* USD 6,325.00

Floral development will be compared in representative taxa of the monophyletic,
morphologically diverse and unique flowering plant family Proteaceae. The
proposed study will determine the relationship between flower development and
hypothesized phylogenetic patterns of Proteaceae. This will be done by
establishing a robust phylogenetic tree of the family using principles of
systematic theory. Using the phylogeny, important morphological trends in the
flowers will be identified and studied ontogenetically. The ontogenetic study
will utilize scanning electron microscopy and anatomical techniques. Comparative
ontogenetic analyses among proteaceous taxa will provide an invaluable data base
to test putative intra-familial relationships, by establishing homologies of
characters from early developmental stages, which in flowers tend to be
conserved and phyletically informative (cladogenic) compared to later
developmental events, which are generally associated with functional limitations
like seed dispersal and pollination. The combination of ontogenetics and
phylogenetics will elucidate the peculiar floral morphologies of Proteaceae
which contribute to its isolated position among angiosperms. Preliminary results
contradict the established classification of Proteaceae. The study will also
provide evidence to clarify the taxonomic position of Proteaceae among other
angiosperms.