* 9213458
* A Study of the Transport Processes and of the Generation of Defect Centers in Optical Fiber Drawing
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1996
* Yogesh Jaluria, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jay Lee
* 11/30/1996
* USD 329,788.00

The project is directed at the optical fiber drawing process in an effort to
improve the quality of the fiber, by reducing the defects and irregularities
generated in the process, and to increase the draw speed, by enhancing the
cooling rate. The thermal transport and material flow processes associated with
the drawing of optical fiber play a very important role in determining the
quality of the fiber obtained and the optimum draw speed. A detailed numerical
and experimental study will be performed to investigate the effect of the
transport phenomena on the quality of the fiber, particularly on defect
generation, and the enhancement of the heat transfer rate to increase draw
speeds and reduce distances needed for cooling the fiber to a desired
temperature level. The temperature distribution in the material, the surface
profile in the neck down region, heat transfer rates and material distribution
in the process are to be determined numerically, using the finite volume
approach for the axisymmetric problem under consideration and employing the
experimental results for the validation of the model and of the numerical
scheme. The detailed results obtained are expected to contribute to a better
understanding of the basic transport processes involved and to provide a
scientific basis for improving existing procedures, impacting on processes such
as high speed drawing, low cost of fiber fabrication, draw induced defect
generation, ultra low loss fiber development, thermally induced phase separation
and crystallization during drawing of non-oxide glasses, residual stress
generation, etc.