* 9213833
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Relation between Water   Input, Water Pressure, Surface Speed and Basal Till         Deformation
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Roger Hooke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1995
* USD 18,250.00

This two-year award supports collaborative research in polar glaciology between
Roger LeB. Hooke of the University of Minnesota and Wibjorn Karlen of the
University of Stockholm. The investigators will conduct research on
Storglaciaren, a small valley glacier in northern Sweden. Their principal
objective is to develop a global model for predicting glacier motion from
meteorological data. Dr. Hooke and his team, including an advanced graduate
student and postdoctoral researcher, will spend several months in the field to
work on three interrelated projects with their Swedish counterparts: (1) a water
input model for the glacier, (2) studies of the relation between glacier
velocity and water pressure, and (3) subglacier till rheology. Dr. Hooke brings
to this collaboration his extensive expertise in glacier dynamics and hydrology.
This is complemented by Dr. Karlen's work on Holocene climate changes, glacial
and deglacial chronology. Both investigators are very familiar with
Storglaciaren, the field site in Sweden and have been collecting data in this
region for several years. Data from Storglaciaren will contribute to overall
global studies on glaciology. In particular, the study on the rheology of basal
till could be applied to other glacial areas including the fast-flowing ice
streams of the Antarctica. These investigations will also be useful to modelers
studying climate change effects on present day ice masses.