* 9213870
* RUI:  Venom Expenditure by Crotaline Snakes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* William Hayes, Southern Adventist University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 02/28/1995
* USD 34,000.00

The cottonmouth is one of several species of venomous (poisonous) snakes in the
United Sates. Although they use their venom primarily to obtain food, it also
serves as an important defensive weapon. Dr. Hayes will investigate how
cottonmouths use their venom when feeding, in particular whether or not they can
control the quantities of venom they inject, and whether or not they inject more
venom into larger prey. Perhaps more important, we need to understand how snakes
use their venom when striking defensively. Because many human snakebite victims
are fortunate to have received "dry" bites, with no apparent injection of venom,
it is widely held that snakes attempt to conserve their venom supplies when
biting defensively. However, experimental data are lacking. Thus, two
experiments will be conducted to examine how cottonmouths use their venom when
feeding on prey of different sizes and when striking defensively. From a
biological perspective, this study should provide important insights into how
the remarkable feeding and defensive adaptation of venomous snakes have evolved.
It should also shed light on the biological roles and evolution of snake venom.
Defensive bites in particular are of medical significance to humans. At present,
physicians simply treat the symptoms of snakebite victims, with no knowledge of
how much venom was injected. This research may provide important baseline data
and techniques for future studies on how much venom snakes inject when biting
humans.