* 9213691
* The Evaluation of the NCSA Video Macintosh Concept          for Interpretation of Chemical Process Information
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1992,08/31/1993
* Kenneth Bishop, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1993
* USD 19,710.00

The PI spent a year at the National Center for Supercomputing (NCSA) looking at
the potential applications of high performance computers to the solution of
chemical engineering problems. Since then he has worked with NCSA in the area of
developing network access to supercomputers. The Dow Chemical Company is an
industrial partner of NCSA. The PI has also been working with Dow on the remote
use of supercomputers via high speed, wide area networks. As a result of these
activities, the PI and Dow are establishing a cooperative research program in
the area of chemical process applications of high performance computers. The
specific purpose of the project is to evaluate the current technology associated
with frame accurate video recording applied to the interpretation and archival
storage of scientific databases. Two databases: computed results from a complex
chemical reactor simulation and measured data from an experimental investigation
will provide the information used for the evaluation. Equipment and software
assembled at Dow as an implementation of an NCSA project called "NCSA Video
Macintosh - Producing Scientific Visualizations on a Desktop" will be used in
the project. Four specific activities are planned: 1. Daily contact among the
principals during the planning period for the initiation of the program; 2.
Familiarization of graduate research assistants with the procedures and
equipment employed in industrial laboratories; 3. Training of graduate research
assistants in the use of contemporary high performance computing equipment; and
4. Design of the experimental apparatus involved in evaluating the performance
of a flow reversal reactor.//