* 9213165
* Dissertation Research: Craft Production and Political       Centralization: Iron Working in Central Madagascar
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Sigrid Gabler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1994
* USD 7,075.00

Under the direction of Dr. Henry Wright, MS Sigrid Gabler, a graduate student
at the Univeristy of Michigan, will collect data for her doctoral dissertation.
She will conduct archaeological research in the eastern region of Madagascar and
focus on the emergence and development of iron working technology. Both
historical records and archaeological evidence indicate that iron smelting was
once widespread. Ms. Gabler will examine three sites in the Ankay region. She
will map surface finds in terms of artifact densities, locate potential slag
heaps and collect a sample of surface artifacts. In a second phase she will
undertake subsurface testing for features, especially iron working locales. In
the final field phase careful horizontal exposures will be made to uncover iron
working locales. Size of slag heaps will be measured to determine production
output. Carbon samples for dating and samples of plant remains will also be
collected. Ceramic analysis will be conducted to establish both relative age of
sites and to determine activities which occurred. Subsequent metallurgical
analysis will serve to reconstruct the smelting process. Madagascar was
originally settled by Southeast Asian peoples and not from the mainland
continent of Africa. In prehistoric times chiefdoms developed and the earliest
European observers found highly centralized societies. The means by which
chiefdoms emerged on this isolated and circumscribed island however are not
understood. Archaeologists have focussed much attention in recent years on how
complex societies arise since this process is seen in many parts of the world.
They believe that specialization and control over labor together with social
stratification plays a major role but whether it serves as a cause per se or is
a secondary manifestation is not known. Ms.Gabler's research will address this
issue. Because the byproducts of iron smelting are so archaeologically visible
and because they preserve well in the archaeological record, the Madagascar data
provide an excellent entree to this issue. Extensive historical records give a
context to interpret the prehistoric data. This research is important for
several reasons. It will add significantly to our knowledge of a poorly
understood region of the world. It will shed new light on the origins of complex
society and will assist in the training of a promising student.