* 9213439
* Graphs with Bounded Treewidth and Complexity of Restricted Discrete Optimization Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Andrzej Proskurowski, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Dana May Latch
* 03/31/1995
* USD 123,229.00

The concrete complexity behavior of some NP-hard discrete optimization problems
will be investigated, with instances restricted to graphs having tree-
representable structure (for instance, k-trees, series-parallel graphs, or
interval graphs.) A major tool in this research is the concept of treewidth of
graphs. Families of graphs with bounded treewidth admit a special type of non-
serial dynamic programming approach leading to algorithms efficiently solving
many difficult discrete optimization problems. The work of Robertson and Seymour
on well-quasi orderings of graphs implies existence of low-order polynomial time
solution algorithms for many inherently difficult optimization problems, when
instances are restricted to wide classes of graphs. However, such algorithms
suffer a double weakness: they require knowledge of a finite obstruction set,
and the general design paradigm constructs algorithms that execute in polynomial
time but with multiplicative constants of astronomic magnitude. The proposed
research will deal with these deficiencies in two ways: investigating means to
construct obstruction sets for families of graphs with uniformly bounded
treewidth and streamlining solution algorithms for particular discrete
optimization problems, as the full generality of the algorithm design paradigm
often is not necessary.