* 9213807
* Comprehensive Investigations of Piezocone Penetration       Tests in a Clay Calibration Chamber and Comparison with     Field Test Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* George Voyiadjis, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* MEHMET T. TUMAY
* 08/31/1994
* USD 35,000.00

The use of the electronic piezocone penetrometer (PCPT) as a potential insitu
testing device to evaluate engineering soil parameters is gaining wide
acceptance. Improvements in the design of this device have made it possible to
measure simultaneously pore water pressure, cone resistance and sleeve friction.
However, interpretation of piezocone (PCPT) data is often complex as it is
influenced by a number of variables related to the design of the cone, testing
procedures and soil characteristics. No standards have been accepted regarding
the pore pressure element size and location, which has a significant effect on
the magnitude of the measured pore pressures. This research program is a
comprehensive experimental investigation using homogeneous and reproducible soil
specimens instrumented to monitor the spatial distribution of pore water
pressure. Piezocone penetration tests are performed under strictly controlled
boundary conditions in a clay calibration chamber system. The objectives are: 1)
To conduct very comprehensive and detailed parametric studies to expand the
currently available limited data base of piezocone penetration tests in clay, 2)
compare existing theories and interpretation procedures to assess their relative
merits and demerits, and 3) to compare the results with available field data.
The aim is to resolve the complexities currently met during the interpretation
of piezocone test data and to assist in the verification of future proposed
theories.