* 9213251
* Polarized Specular Reflectance Spectroscopy on              Metalloprotein Models and One Dimensional Conductors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1996
* Ronald Musselman, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 07/31/1996
* USD 124,000.00

With the support of the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program, Dr.
Ronald L. Musselman of the Chemistry Department, Franklin and Marshall
University, will continue investigations of the electronic structure of oxygen-
bridged iron and copper metalloproteins and of one dimensional conductors
containing metalloporphyrins and square planar complexes. Single crystal
specular reflectance spectroscopy will be utilized in characterizing intense
charge transfer transitions in these transition metal complexes. The information
obtained can help clarify the extent of movement of electrons through the metal
backbone or through the pi-system of stacked macrocycles in conductive polymers.
Similar information is also useful for understanding the mechanism of reactivity
at the active site of non-heme binuclear proteins and enzymes, for which the
bridged species are models. Electronic transitions in the visible, ultraviolet,
and mid- infrared regions will be accessible on newly acquired instrumentation.
%%% The information obtained from polarized reflectance spectroscopy assists in
characterizing the energy and movement of electrons in solids. It is thus
helpful in determining the optical properties of crystalline materials or other
solids and films. The technique will be used here to explore the movement of
electrons in systems related to biologically important proteins involved in
oxygen and electron transport, and in conducting polymers. A number of
undergraduate students and high school teachers will be involved in the conduct
of the research.