* 9213603
* Property Rights and Land Use on the Brazilian Frontier:     Analysis and Lessons from U.S. Economic History
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1992,10/31/1995
* Gary Libecap, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 10/31/1995
* USD 108,197.00

The purpose of this research is to analyze the property rights system and land
use on the Brazilian frontier. The Brazilian frontier, especially the Amazon
region, has been the focus of world-wide attention owing to concerns about the
rapid destruction of the rainforest and the loss of soil nutrients when these
lands are converted to agriculture. The Amazon represents the largest remaining
tropical rainforest stand in the world, and its loss or severe depletion could
have serious effects on global warming and biodiversity. Further, Brazil is one
of the largest and most influential developing countries and it faces many of
the problems endemic in development--rapid population growth and corresponding
pressures to raise standards of living, for land reform, and at the same time
for protection of the environment. This project will entail the assembly and
analysis of land tenure policies in Brazil beginning the 1940's. These policies
will then be compared to land tenure and the expansion of the U.S. frontier
during the 1800's. The project will construct measures of land tenure
uncertainty and analyze these tenure conditions in four Brazilian states from
1940-1980, and six Amazon states from 1960-1985 using the Brazilian Agricultural
census. Particular attention will be paid to the effects of land tenure
uncertainty on agricultural investment, the use of fertilizers, the value of
permanent structures, and the extent to which permanent crops were grown.