* 9213813
* The High Performance Computing and Communications           Visualization Project
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Thomas DeFanti, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michael McGrath
* 01/31/1994
* USD 402,000.00

This award supports a project under the direction of Dr. Thomas DeFanti, U of
Illinois at Chicago. Faculty, staff and graduate students at the National Center
for Supercomputing Applications in Champaign-Urbana and the Electronic
Visualization Laboratory in Chicago have been actively working with discipline
scientists to develope prototype software and user interfaces for doing remote
computational science and visualization. The High Performance Computing and
Communication Visualization Project (HPCCV) is a combined exhibit and theater
area designed for demonstrating computing, communications and visualization. The
project is a human resources and technology transfer project, one that transfers
computer science methods to the field of Computational science and one that aims
to aggressively drive the acceptance of this methodology by showcasing real
applications. HPCCV will demonstrate what it is like for scientists and
engineers to have gigaflop-per-second computing brought to the desktop on light
fiber. The exhibit will be displayed at "SIGGRAPH '92 at McCormick Place in
Chicago on July 28-30, 1992. High speed networking within the exhibit and to the
NSFnet will tie vector and parallel supercomputers all over the nation to the
SIGGRAPH 92 exhibits floor. FDDI, HiPPI and TC technology will be extensively
explored and utilized. The exhibit will also be displayed at Supercomputing 92
in the fall of this year.