* 9213246
* Time Course of Object Recognition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Thomas Sanocki, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1995
* USD 207,886.00

Despite the ease with which humans recognize everyday objects, the processes by
which this occurs have become a central concern in cognitive science, because
object recognition is actually very difficult; for example, computer scientists
have only been partially successful in creating computer programs for
recognizing objects, and even those programs stretch the computational limits of
the most sophisticated machines. Since humans are "good at" object recognition,
this research will focus on human abilities, with emphasis on how computational
complexities might be handled. Human recognition takes place over a time span of
about 100 ms., and the research will use newly developed techniques to control
exactly what information is available during that period of time. The working
hypothesis underlying this research is that for humans computational burdens are
reduced because the brain uses certain types of information early in that time
period and other types of information later in that time period. For example,
early in time general information about the shape or orientation of an object
might be used to narrow down the possibilities, whereas later in time
information about more idiosyncratic details would be used to arrive at the
proper identification. The research will examine a number of possible types of
information that have been suggested in the psychological and computer science
literatures. The research will also use several related techniques, because each
has its own strengths and weaknesses. Initial work will use relatively simple
objects for exploration; later work will use large samples of common objects.
Later work will also seek to extend principles of earlier work to the perception
of objects within scenes, and to the process of word perception. The knowledge
gained will help in the design of robots for a variety of purposes and of aids
for visually disabled persons.