* 9213932
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research:  Development of a New Diagnostic for Hydroperoxy Radical Measurement
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1993
* David Miller, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 09/30/1993
* USD 60,000.00

An experimental program aimed at development of a laser-based technique for non-
intrusive in-situ measurement of the hydroperoxy radical (HO2), a reaction
intermediate which controls the rate of hydrocarbon oxidation in the
intermediate temperature regime and which is important in hydrocarbon combustion
in general, will be carried out. The technique utilizes the non-linear
interaction between a light source and an absorbing medium called degenerate
four-wave mixing (DFWM). An existing laser system will be tuned to interact with
a low lying electronic transition which is unique to HO2. This spectroscopic
feature does not have the spectroscopic interference problems of other methods
proposed for measurement of HO2. The program will consist of four major tasks:
(1) assembling a reliable, quantifiable HO2 source; (2) developing a ClO
titration scheme for quantification; (3)measuring HO2 concentrations produced by
the calibrated source for definition of spectroscopic constants and effects of
such parameters as pressure, temperature, etc; (4) measuring HO2 in a flow
reactor and a flame facility. Successful completion of this program will provide
a new diagnostic tool to probe hydrocarbon oxidation and to provide new insight
into the chemistry which limits efficiency and controls emissions from
hydrocarbon combustion systems.