* 9213206
* National and Transnational Competitive Market Forces        in the Land Transfer Process
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Michael Braunstein, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 08/31/1995
* USD 85,100.00

This is an empirical study of interprofessional competition in the residential
land transfer process in the United States and the United Kingdom. The study
focuses on competition between professionals to secure monopolies within each
country and barriers to globalization of the real property services market. The
study has the following theoretically derived research objectives: (1) to
identify and describe the claims that are being made by competing professions in
the two countries, the current allocation of tasks between competing
professions, and the extent to which similar tasks are performed by different
professional groups; (2) to assess the results of different divisions of labor
in the two countries in relation to outcomes and to the claims that
professionals make concerning the efficacy of their services; (3) to explain why
lawyers currently have a monopoly over conveyancing services in the UK but not
in the US; and (4) to explain apparent local barriers to transnational
competition for the real property legal services market. The primary means of
data collection will be open-ended tape recorded interviews with lawyers, real
estate agents, title insurance companies, licensed conveyancers, lending
institutions and house purchasers and sellers. Data will be collected in two
areas of each country, one urban and the other rural. The house purchase
transaction, perhaps more than any other, brings the general population into
contact with the formal legal system. Nevertheless, no comprehensive study has
been made of the land transfer process from a sociolegal perspective. This
research will further understanding of competitive market forces across
traditional professional boundaries and across transnational boundaries. As such
it will illuminate a number of important questions regarding the roles played by
lawyers and other professionals, the factors that condition those roles, the
factors that cause those roles to remain embedded or to change over time, the
ways in which regulation and market structure can affect the organization and
cost of professional services, and the alternative ways in which markets for
housing can be organized.