* 9213145
* Strategic Information Manipulation as a Model of Assets     and Aggregate Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1992,04/30/1995
* Bart Taub, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/1995
* USD 52,883.00

Economy-wide fluctuations of employment investment and output can occur because
of the way information flows in the economy, and the incentives individuals have
to restrict those flows. This phenomenon is studied by bringing together
mathematical building blocks developed separately in the investigator's earlier
work. The first building block uses contract theory to show how information
flows in asset markets. The second building block uses contract theory to show
how feedback of information about economy-wide fluctuations of output flows to
individuals. The novel element in this research is that a theory of assets is
embedded in a rational expectations based model of aggregate fluctuations. This
permits the investigator to study long standing questions about the relationship
between asset behavior and business cycle fluctuations. Joining the two building
blocks causes spillover effects in the form of economy-wide fluctuations-the
business cycle-that cause asset markets to function less efficiently than they
would in the absence of the fluctuations. Despite their adverse effect on asset
markets, the fluctuations might nevertheless be desirable, and it might also be
desirable that the fluctuations be long lasting, because they improve the flow
of information.