* 9213204
* Development of Neuronal Excitation - Secretion Coupling and Its Regulation by Target
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* D. Bruce Gray, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1994
* USD 69,350.00

The brain, spinal cord and nerves are made up of individual cells including the
type called nerve cells or neurons. For the nervous system to function, neurons
have to communicate with each other and with the cells they control such as
muscle cells. The most important type of communication is via secretion of
chemical messengers called neurotransmitters which can excite or inhibit other
cells. Most secretion of neurotransmitters requires that calcium, which is
present in the fluid which surrounds cells, enter the neuron at a site just
prior to secretion. This calcium enters the neuron through structures called
channels. Since neurons have many kinds of calcium channels, and since many
substances in the nervous systems can control neurotransmitter secretion by
affecting calcium channels, it is important to know which types of calcium
channels directly affect or are coupled to transmitter secretion. It is also
known that cells around the neuron can affect which channels are coupled to
secretion at different times of development. Dr. Gray will study the
relationship between specific types of calcium channels and the secretion of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine in neurons during development, using direct
measurement of release of radioactively-labeled acetylcholine and electrical
recording of calcium influx through channels. The mechanism by which cells such
as muscle cells affect coupling between these types of channels and
acetylcholine secretion will also be studied. The control of secretion at
synaptic sites in the nervous system is of fundamental importance to the
understanding of brain function.***//