* 9213528
* Japan Long-Term Research Visit:  Melt Coupling of ImmisciblePolymers by Chain End Reactions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,10/31/1994
* Chris Macosko, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 10/31/1994
* USD 154,804.00

This award will support a twelve month long-term visit by Professor Chris
Macosko, Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of
Minnesota, to Japan for a cooperative research project with Professor Takashi
Inoue, Department of Organic and Polymeric Materials and Professor Seiichi
Nakahama, Department of Polymer Chemistry, Tokyo Institute of Technology. The
researchers plan to undertake a study of melt coupling of immiscible polymers by
chain end reactions. Polymer blends are the fastest growing area of the plastics
market. The researchers will form diblock coploymers by reactively coupling
chains during melt blending. Polystyrene and poly(e-vinyl-pyridine) will be
synthesized anionically and then terminated with functional groups. Two reactive
pairs will be studied: cyclic anhydride with amine and epoxy with carboxylic
acid. They will then directly add an amine to the end of a living anionic chain
and then extend this approach to the other groups. This process will be followed
by size exclusion chromatography as a function of mixing intensity, time and
temperature, as well as the type of functional group and size of the attached
polymer chain. The interfacial thickness will be measured by an automated
ellipsometer. Morphology development during melt mixing will be followed by time
resolved light scattering. Electron microscopy will be used on quenched samples.
Samples prepared with and without coupling reaction and with premade diblocks
will then be compared. Results of the research should contribute to development
of new strategies for creating and controlling the morphology of immiscible
polymer blends. Professor Inoue's strengths are in the area of polymer physics
particularly light scattering, morphology and thermodynamics. He has also done
excellent work on mechanical properties of immiscible polymer blends. Professor
Macosko's expertise lies in the areas of rheology, process flows and neutron
scattering methods. It is expected that this research project should provide a
fruitful collaboration. It is also expected that there will be industry
participation in this project since each of the researchers have strong
industrial contacts.