* 9213379
* GEM: Study of Solar Wind-Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Coupling
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1992,04/30/1995
* Christopher Russell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 04/30/1995
* USD 132,000.00

This proposed investigation examines energy and momentum flow across the
magnetopause using in-situ observations of magnetic field and plasmas obtained
by the ISEE 1 and 2 spacecraft and ground based data from the IGS magnetometer
chain. The average potential drop across the magnetosphere when the
interplanetary magnetic field is southward will be measured using both the
magnetic field normal to the magnetopause surface and the flow velocity along
the surface. By repeated individual measurements across the surface, both the
region of reconnected field and the total potential drop can be estimated. In
order to determine the normal component an accurate model of the 3-D shape of
the magnetopause will be derived. The pressure dependence of this model will
allow us to test if pressure pulses can cause crater FTE's as has been
suggested. When the IMF is northward and reconnection is weak, energy transfer
can still take place by wave processes. We will examine the waves present from
Pc 3 to Pc 5 periods to determine if significant wave energy flux crosses the
boundary. We will examine simultaneous ground based data from the IGS
magnetometer chain at 2.5s resolution to determine how this wave energy spreads
through the magnetosphere. We will also examine the response of auroral and
subauroral zone current systems to dynamic pressure changes. Finally, we will
examine each of the boundary layers inside and outside the magnetosphere to
determine how each of them depends on solar wind conditions and position on the
magnetopause in order to determine what processes are responsible for these
boundary layers. In particular we will examine their formation as a function of
solar wind conditions.