* 9213402
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny and Diversification of     Electric Organ Structure and Function in the Neotropical    Hypopomid Fishes (Gymnotiformes: Teleostei)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1992,05/31/1996
* John Lundberg, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1996
* USD 10,829.00

This research combines phylogenetic study of the Neotropical electric fish
family Hypopomidae (Gymnotiformes: Teleostei) with comparative study of electric
organ discharge (EOD) and electric organ morphology. EOD, electric organ,
distributional and ecological data, collected from field work will be mapped
onto a phylogenetic hypothesis. The hypothesis of genealogical relationships
will be constructed from a morphological character data set excluding electric
organ morphology. Application of character optimization methods will allow
historical sequences in the diversification of the EOD/electric organ system to
be identified. The following questions are addressed: (1) Are EODs species
"markers" as some research suggest, i.e. what is the taxonomic value of EODs and
how variable are EODs within a species? (2) Is phylogenetic distance or
community association a better predictor of EOD divergence? (3) Are complexly
structured EODs and accessory electric organs primitive or derived, and how many
times have they arisen? (4) Are particular EOD features consistently associated
with particular electric organ morphologies? (5) Are particular EOD/electric
organ features consistently associated with particular habitats/water
characteristics?