* 9213903
* First Africa-USA International Conference on Manufacturing Technology - Nigeria - Science in Developing Countries
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,10/31/1993
* Bartholomew Nnaji, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 10/31/1993
* USD 20,000.00

This conference grant supports sessions on the theme of design and manufacturing
integration in a four-day Africa-USA International Conference on Manufacturing
Technology, to be held in Lagos, Nigeria, in January, 1993. The sessions are
entitled: Design and Integration Issues in Electronics Manufacturing Technology;
Process Technology Planning, Design, and Integration in Large Scale
Manufacturing, Expert System Design for Manufacturing Control, and Product
Modeling Systems that Capture Design and Manufacturing Information. Subjects to
be addressed include: concurrent or simultaneous engineering; design theory;
design for feasibility in manufacture, assembly, and inspection; and planning
and control issues in modern manufacturing. The meeting will bring together key
researchers in design and automated manufacturing from industry, national
agencies and universities in Africa and the U.S., to share ideas on the
practicalities of the new advanced design and manufacturing technologies. The
conference promises mutual benefit to the U.S. and African engineers by exposing
the participants to new perspectives on both problems and solutions in
industrial development. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
Science in Developing Countries (SDC) Program with regard to strengthening the
scientific and engineering infrastructure in developing countries, and
increasing the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and
their counterparts in developing countries.