* 9213362
* An Ethnographic Analysis of the Impact of Globally          Significant Ideologies on Legal Consciousness and Gender    Relations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Susan Hirsch, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 06/30/1994
* USD 60,278.00

Hierarchical relations between men and women are maintained, resisted, and
transformed in large part through legal processes. Legal consciousness plays a
critically important role in the dynamics of gender domination and its
resistance by women. This project aims to increase understanding of how legal
consciousness is shaped in historically and culturally specific contexts and to
assess its complex role in the transformation of gender relations in the late
twentieth century. The project uses ethnographic methods combined with
techniques of discourse analysis developed in the law and language literature to
examine the impact of globally significant ideologies on legal consciousness and
gender relations in two East African communities. The project is centrally
concerned with examining how two ideologies, feminism and Islamic
fundamentalism, shape the legal consciousness of Swahili Muslims in coastal
Kenya and Tanzania. The project explores (l) how globally significant ideologies
are instantiated at state and local levels, through institutions associated with
law, Islam, and women, and events such as conferences, speeches, and media
portrayals; (2) how legal consciousness is shaped through encounters with global
ideologies mediated through Islamic and secular courts as well as through
community organizations; and (3) how gender relations in Swahili society reflect
shifts in legal consciousness and the struggle over ideology more generally in
the post-colonial period. Of particular concern is the hypothesized contrast
between the two communities with respect to the impact of these ideologies and
the transformation of gender relations. This contrast should be useful in
developing a theoretical model--attentive to local and global phenomena--of the
complex interaction among globally significant ideologies, legal consciousness,
and gender relations.