* 9213310
* Unemployment Dynamics in Czechoslovakia During the          Transition
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1994
* Jan Svejnar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1994
* USD 152,472.00

This study undertakes a rigorous analysis of unemployment dynamics in the
transition from central planning to a market economy. As unemployment rises
rapidly in all the transforming economies, the issues of the determinants of
unemployment and the optimal policies to cope with the explosive situation have
come to the forefront of the public policy debate. The project makes two major
contributions toward these issues. First, it uses unique Czechoslovak data and
combines traditional with frontier statistical analysis to examine three sets of
important research questions. The first set relates to the origins and incidence
of unemployment. What are the characteristics of the unemployed? Are certain
types of workers (e.g., older, female or poorly educated workers) at greater
risk of being laid off than others? The second set of questions focuses on
identifying the determinants of the duration of unemployment spells. In this
context, the study examines how unemployment duration varies with enterprise
characteristics, individuals' demographic and regional characteristics, changing
demand conditions, and changes in important elements of the unemployment
insurance system. The third set is concerned with estimating and explaining
variations in the transition rates out of unemployment to other states (in or
out of the labor market). For example, what is the probability that a worker
with certain characteristics and who was previously employed in a given sector
will leave unemployment for the small scale private sector or for training,
etc.? Unlike many previous studies of unemployment, this project relates the
incidence and duration of unemployment to firm specific characteristics. The
second contribution of the study consists of developing, in conjunction with the
Czech and Slovak Ministries of Labor and Social Affairs and the Federal
Statistical Office, sampling schemes and estimation methods for further analysis
of the inflow to unemployment. The main question to be addressed is how the
large public and newly privatized firms make their layoff decisions. Moreover,
the new data set would allow for the estimation of the transition rates from
employment to unemployment. The major scientific value of the proposal stems
from its ability to collect and analyze informative data sets related to one of
the most important economic phenomena in this century. The dramatic changes in
the Central and East European economies in this period provide us with much
greater variation in the explanatory variables than has been witnessed in any
middle income or advanced economy. The study will hence be able to capture major
behavioral patterns and contribute significantly to our understanding of the
dynamics of labor markets moving towards an equilibrium during the transition.