* 9213568
* Engineering Faculty Internship:  Study of Turbulent Double- Diffusive Transport and Macrosegregation During Continuous  Ingot Casting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1993
* Wei Shyy, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/1993
* USD 15,000.00

The goal of the project is to develop a theoretical model capable of predicting
the turbulent double-diffusive transport during the continuous alloy ingot
casting process, and its implication on macrosegregation. These issues, while
critical to meeting demands for enhanced performance of the US aerospace and
power industries, have not been properly addressed. The motivation of the work
is that for the ingot casting processes of the production scales, their physical
sizes and operating conditions cause the convection field to be in the turbulent
regime. Consequently, contrary to the information gathered from the small scale
laboratory studies that the mushy zone is generally thin everywhere, evidences
indicate that turbulent convection makes the instanteous mushy zone thickness
and local solutal/thermal distributions vary considerably. The classical way of
deducing the materials structure based on the casting speed and mean temperature
gradient is largely based on the conduction analysis alone, and hence may no
longer be valid for the large scale production. The new model to be developed
attempts to address the scaling issue and will be validated by the experimental
information specifically designed for the present collaboration. The research
will contribute to the production of defect free metal ingots, which will
improve the productivity of the ingot casting process.