* 9213905
* Collaborative Research on Legitimacy, Judicial Power and    the European Court of Justice
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1995
* James Gibson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 06/30/1995
* USD 98,415.00

This is a collaborative project, with Gregory Caldeira of the Ohio State
University, to investigate the processes through which transnational legal
institutions acquire mass political legitimacy and attain compliance with their
decisions. The project focusses on the European Court of Justice, which is
emerging as one of the most powerful judicial institutions in the world, and is
based on a survey of the mass publics in the twelve nations of the European
Community. The survey constitutes part of the Autumn 1992 Eurobarometer. Several
hypotheses will be tested about the acquisition of legitimacy by transnational
institutions, as well as the consequences of that legitimacy for compliance with
both national and international courts. The project is one of the first research
efforts investigating processes of the acquisition and maintenance of the
legitimacy of transnational legal institutions. The analysis will contribute to
the development of theories of institutional legitimacy through (1) determining
whether the theoretical frameworks are useful beyond the confines of the nation-
state;, (2) exploring the connections between legitimacy and compliance, relying
heavily on theories of procedural justice; (3) testing a serious of conventional
hypotheses about courts, legitimacy, and compliance for which there are no
previous comparative inquiries; (4) providing a benchmark for future research
into the processes through which institutions acquire a reservoir of good will;
and (5) contributing to the development of democratic theory by analyzing how
courts contribute to and profit from the legitimacy of transnational political
and legal institutions. Overall, the project will contribute to prominent
questions in comparative politics, the workings of legal systems, and in
international relations.