* 9213642
* Production of Educational Modules for the Teaching          of Research Ethics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Deni Elliott, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1995
* USD 146,630.00

Scientists, engineers, humanities scholars and social scientists from the Acadia
Institute, California Institute of Technology, Dartmouth College, Illinois
Insititue of Technology, Loyola University-Chicago, and Massachusetts Institute
of Technology are forming a two-year consortium to create teaching materials to
teach academic research ethics to graduate students of science and engineering.
The consortium includes a team of two from each institution, and will create at
least six modules on specific topics in research ethics. The modules, paperbound
books consisting of 100 to 125 pages, will address such issues as research
methodology, professional honesty, reporting on research, whistleblowing and
loyalty, and animals and human subjects in research. Each module will contain
reprints, cases, analyses, appropriate federal and professional guidelines and
bibliographies. Authorship for each module will be interdisciplinary and inter-
campus, and the content will benefit from the uniquely collaborative approach of
this project. During the grant period, each campus team will facilitate a
seminar on research ethics. The seminars will include faculty members, post-
doctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate students. Seminar participants will
evaluate modules in progress. Ultimately, the modules will be published as a
series through University Press of New England and offered individually to
scientific and engineering professional societies.