* 9213382
* Dissertation Research: Protohistoric Interaction and CultureChange in the Central Ohio River Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1994
* Gary Wright, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1994
* USD 11,960.00

Under the direction of Dr. Gary Wright, MS Penelope Drooker will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will try to understand the effects of early
indirect contact between European colonists and Native Americans in the
midwestern United States and will focus on the analysis of materials excavated
from two Ohio archaeological sites. The Madisonville village/cemetary in
Hamilton County, Ohio dates to the early contact period and contains some 1400
burials within the same area as almost 1000 storage pits. It yielded several
hundred European-derived metal and glass artifacts. Excavated primarily over a
period of three decades at the turn of the century, it is the most populous and
most completely excavated protohistoric site of the Fort Ancient culture. It
probably spans the period from 15th to 17th centuries. MS Drooker will also
examine a nearly site, Hahn's Field which is very similar but slightly earlier
in time. No European derived artifacts were recovered and thus the two sites
taken together span the pre-contact to early-contact period. MS Drooker will
visit museums which curate the relevant materials and study these remains. She
will integrate all available data - documentation, maps, artifacts and human
remains - into a cross- referenced computer data base so that spatial
relationships can be determined. She will clarify the chronoloigcal
relationships and analyze early and late components to establish baseline social
characteristics and exchange relationships. She will attempt to determine how
these changed over time. Finally she will evaluate the results to obtain a
better understanding of intra- and inter-regional interaction and change during
the early contact period in eastern North-America. While it is clear in the long
run that Native American cultures were destroyed in the colonization process, it
is less often realized that, in some areas at least, an interactive process took
place in which Native American groups adapted in a positive way to European
influence and integrated new elements into their own culture. Areas such as the
midwest where direct contact was relatively late provide an excellent context in
which to study this process. The two Fort Ancient sites are unique because they
provide a large data base which include both mortuary and cultural remains. In
particular they offer material which allow MS. Drooker to study changes in
social organization, especially social stratification, over time. This research
is important for several reasons. It will shed new light on the American past.
It will increase our understanding of the general processes which underly
culture contact and change, and will assist in the training of an extremely
promising scientist.