* 9214067
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Behaviour of Vortices and  Monopoles in Classical Gauge Theories
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1993,02/29/1996
* David Stuart, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/29/1996
* USD 58,809.00

This project is on the time-dependent Yang-Mills-Higgs equations. These are
nonlinear hyperbolic partial differential equations which are invariant under
the Lorentz group and the infinite dimensional gauge group. The investigator has
proved that under certain situations it is possible to construct solutions to
the equations which correspond to motion of the vortices or monopoles according
to a finite dimensional Hamiltonian system on the configuration space. These
approximations are known to be valid on long but finite time intervals. The
present aim of this investigation is to extend this understanding to more
general situations, in particular to monopole scattering which is described by
geodesics with respect to the Atiyah-Hitchin metric on the moduli space. A
longer term aim is to extend the understanding to infinite time -- it is
conceivable that asymptotically the solution approaches a combination of
vortices and monopoles moving according to the Hamiltonian system on the
configuration space in the maximum norm. The reason for this conjecture is the
dispersion of radiation. Another long term aim is to extend the understanding to
the equations of general relativity in which black holes take the place of
vortices and monopoles. The work has possible applications to superconductivity
and particle physics in addition to being of mathematical interest.