* 9214239
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research:  Quantum Coherence inFluids and Solids at Ultralow Temperatures
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Mark Meisel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1996
* USD 15,750.00

This award supports Professor Mark W. Meisel of the Microkelvin Research
Laboratory at the University of Florida to collaborate in low temperature
physics and cryogenic engineering research with Professor Georgio Frossati and
others of the Ultralow Temperature Group at the Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratorium of
the University of Leiden, Netherlands. The proposed research in physics will
focus on several difficult problems associated with the study of phase
boundaries and polarization in superfluid Helium-3 and highly polarized forms of
normal liquid and superfluid helium-3. Their efforts in cryogenic engineering
will address the problems of achieving ultralow temperature in continuous and
pulsed ultra-high magnetic fields and on the design of heat exchangers which are
tuned to cool pure Helium-3/Helium-4 mixtures to heretofore unattainable low
temperatures. The field of experimental ultralow temperature physics, by its
nature, requires careful attention and innovative thought in both physics and
cryogenic engineering. The proposed international collaboration links two
leading ultra-low temperature research groups which are interested in pursuing
both the science and the technology necessary to attack fundamental problems in
this field. Together, they will be in an even stronger position to design new
approaches to questions that require novel techniques to advance the state-of-
the-art.