* 9214004
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research: Development of       Immunological Detection Systems for Plant-Associated        Bacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Joseph Kloepper, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 07/31/1997
* USD 18,150.00

This award supports Dr. Joseph W. Kloepper and a graduate student of Auburn
University to collaborate in biological research with Dr. Jim W. L. van Vuurde
of the Bacteriology Department of the Research Institute for Plant Protection in
Wageningen, the Netherlands. Their goal in working with the Dutch group is to
acquire state of the art experience in research related to detecting and
monitoring bacteria in complex ecosystems, and to apply these techniques to
future research in the U.S. In particular, the objectives of their work are to
learn and evaluate advanced immunological techniques to quantify and
differentiate introduced wild-type plant-associated bacteria. They will evaluate
selected immunological methods and compare them with model genetic marking
systems for assessing overall bacterial colonization of plants. The project
links two research groups with complementary expertise: the Dutch have been
innovators in immunological approaches to bacterial detection and the U.S. group
has particular expertise in the microbial ecology of beneficial plant-associated
bacteria. The U.S. graduate student will gain research experience at a European
center of excellence which will contribute to his dissertation project. In situ
detection of and monitoring the population dynamics of specific bacteria in
complex ecosystems has historically been an important aspect of microbial
ecology with natural populations of bacteria. These processes have recently
received renewed emphasis for studying introductions of genetically engineered
microorganisms. The principal limiting factor in such ecological investigations
has been the difficulty of differentiating the target strain from indigenous or
other background microflora. Genetic markers are currently used to provide such
differentiation, but marking may cause other genetic changes which alter the
strain's behavior in natural environments. Immunological techniques such as
those to be studied in this collaboration offer a promising alternative for
marking strains without causing genetic alterations.