* 9214778
* The Changing Household in Latin America
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1996
* Susan DeVos, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/1996
* USD 71,832.00

This is a proposal to study changes in household and families in Latin America
during the period 1970-1985. The project will first describe the nature of
changes in household and family configuration in 14 countries and examine
whether these changes can be accounted for by changes in fertility, nuptiality,
mortality, and migration, or whether changes in preferences for living in
certain types of households, such as female headed households, also is a source
of change. The second goal of the project is to compare household changes
between different socio-economic strata and between countries in order to test
hypotheses about the effects of social and economic changes as the societal
level on changes in household structures. Finally, the project will project
household structure in these Latin American countries for the period 1995-2050
to assess the changing importance of demographic components. Particular
attention will be paid to the living arrangements of the elderly and the social
demands they entail. The project will use census data for the early 1970s and
for the 1980s. These data will be analyzed by a combination of methods and
techniques including multivariate models to quantify the contribution of changes
in composition and changes in effects, generalized stable population models to
obtain information about intercensal flows, and modified macro and micro
simulation models to assess the magnitude of he contribution of demographic
factors and of non- demographic characteristics. This study will provide a much
needed study of changes in households and families in Latin America. The study
will provide very valuable descriptive information, but it will also broaden the
current theoretical debate about the causes of change in families and households
which has been based largely on research done in North America and Europe. The
study will also contribute to the development of simulation models for the
projection of changes in household structure.