* 9214115
* U.S.-United Kingdom Cooperative Research:  Fluids in        Micropores
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Keith Gubbins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1997
* USD 14,500.00

WPC 2 B V V Z Z #| w le) 8 w C ; , WX w P 7 X P " m ' ? ^;C dd CCCd
CCCCddddddddddCC Y ~ ~w CN ~ s k~ CCCddCYdYdYCdd88d8 ddddJN8dd ddYYdY C dd
dddCCCC dddddd ddd8 Y Y Y Y Y Y~Y~Y~Y~YC8C8C8C8 d d d d d d d d d d Y d d d d
dsd Y Y Y Y Y Y Y d~Y~Y~Y~Y d d d d d d d dC8C8C8C8 oN d~8~8~8~8~8 d v d d d d J
J JkNkNkNkN~8~8~8 d d d d d d d Y Y Y d~8 d JkN~8 d d d d d C dd C CC/ N d
ddCYQQdd ddd dFdddd F CC hhd 44 ddzz d d d w oo dCh d F" d h dÕ dCC z xC d dod
dCd Yds z Uw d Y Y C C C C z~o zo Y~N Y d YC8 Y o o Y d Y zsdzd d~Y Y z o
zzzzNd88YYYzYz z zz CCddddd dd zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzNNNNNNNdddddddddddddddddddd888
888888888YYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzC s ~ C zC d dYC xHP LaserJet
III HP_LJ_3.PRS X w P 7 , \ , X P 2 j V #| w CG Times (Scalable) 8 w C ; , WX w
P 7 X P 2 Z J R " m ' ? ^;C dd CCCd CCCCddddddddddCC Y ~ ~w CN ~ s k~
CCCddCYdYdYCdd88d8 ddddJN8dd ddYYdY C dd dddCCCC dddddd ddd8 Y Y Y Y Y
Y~Y~Y~Y~YC8C8C8C8 d d d d d d d d d d Y d d d d dsd Y Y Y Y Y Y Y d~Y~Y~Y~Y d d
d d d d d dC8C8C8C8 oN d~8~8~8~8~8 d v d d d d J J JkNkNkNkN~8~8~8 d d d d d d d
Y Y Y d~8 d JkN~8 d d d d d C dd C CC/ N d ddCYQQdd ddd dFdddd F CC hhd 44 ddzz
d d d w oo dCh d F" d h dÕ dCC z xC d dod dCd Yds z Uw d Y Y C C C C z~o zo Y~N
Y d YC8 Y o o Y d Y zsdzd d~Y Y z o zzzzNd88YYYzYz z zz CCddddd dd zzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzNNNNNNNdddddddddddddddddddd888888888888YYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzC s ~ C zC d dYC xHP LaserJet III HP_LJ_3.PRS X w P 7 , \ , X P 2 9214115
Gubbins This three year award supports U.S. U.K. cooperative research in
chemical engineering involving Keith Gubbins, Cornell University, and David
Nicholson and Neville Parsonage at Imperial College of Science, Technology and
Medicine, Nicholas Quirke at British Petroleum research in the United Kingdom.
The objective of the research is to understand the behavior of fluids confined
to narrow pores (micropores) using statistical mechanics and molecular
simulation. They will study adsorption and diffusion in micropores; the behavior
of simple fluids and mixtures in microporous carbons; and the behavior of
microporous carbons and aluminophosphates. Using experimental data, the
investigators will calculate pore size distributions and pore connectivities.
Porous materials and processes are widely used in industry to carry out chemical
reactions and purification and separation processes. The proposed research will
advance our understanding and lead to new porous materials and improved and more
efficient processes. The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration
expertise in molecular dynamic simulation and computer simulation of adsorption
and diffusion in micropores. This is complemented by British expertise in the
methods of statistical mechanics of confined fluids and British experimental
studies on fluids' behavior and the synthesis of porous materials.