* 9214491
* Midgap States in Tantalum Triselenide
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1993,05/31/1994
* Joseph Brill, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 05/31/1994
* USD 18,265.00

The presence of soliton states with energies below the single particle gap in
charge-density-wave (CDW) conductors is of great theoretical importance, but as
yet, they have not been measured directly. Such states should have fractional
charge, and are expected to exist at equilibrium in commensurate or nearly
commensurate systems. They are also implicated in the conversion between CDW and
normal (band) carriers at electrical contacts. Two experiments are proposed to
optically observe such states in TaS3. They combine the expertise of
investigators from the Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics, Russian
Academy of Sciences and the University of Kentucky; the experiments will be
undertaken at the University of Kentucky. Bolometric specta will be taken as a
function of uniaxial strain to look for changes in the equilibrium density and
energies of solitons. Transmission spectra near electrical contacts will be
taken as functions of CDW current. %%% Experimental and theoretical research on
charge-density-wave (CDW) conductors such as tantalum trisulfide (TaS3)
continues to be of current interest. Like superconductors, these materials
exhibit collective electron transport; i.e. the current is carried by coherent
motion of all the electrons. Unlike superconductors, however, this motion is
strongly affected by impurities and other crystalline defects, leading to a
number of unique and surprising properties. Defects in the CDW itself, (called
"solitons") have energies less than the CDW energy gap. Such defects are
necessary to convert "normal" electrons into CDW electrons at electrical
contacts; furthermore, fractional electric charge (i.e. less than the charge of
a single electron) is localized at each soliton. However, such defect states
have never been directly observed. This proposal describes two experiments, to
be carried out at the University of Kentucky. The work is a collaboration
between the host institution and the Institute of Radio Engineering and
Electronics (Moscow), to look for "midgap" soliton states in TaS3 using infrared
spectroscopy. In the first experiment, changes in the spectra caused by
straining the sample, which changes the defect concentration, will be sought. In
the second experiment, changes in spectra near electrical contacts as functions
of current will be explored.