* 9214789
* Surface Fluxes over the Warm Pool of TOGA-COARE
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1997
* T. Krishnamurti, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar-Rao Mopidevi
* 05/31/1997
* USD 275,400.00

Air-sea interaction studies require surface fluxes of momentum, heat and
moisture. This research will determine these fluxes by using a sophisticated
physical initialization procedure that invokes detailed "observed" rain which is
based on a mix of SSMI (Special Sensor Microwave Instruments), OLR (Outgoing
Longwave Radiation), and rain-gauge data sets. The powerful rainfall algorithm
calibrates the rain rates for ground truth as the daily fields are produced. The
fluxes, in turn, are obtained by using a series of reverse physical
parameterization algorithms within the initialization of a high resolution
numerical prediction model. This physical initialization technique is one of the
most powerful and consistent procedures for determining surface fluxes. Fluxes
for the western Pacific warm pool region will be determined for a five year
period starting in January 1987. In addition, this research will include a
detailed comparison and critical evaluation of the following fluxes obtained
during the TOGA COARE observation program: a) Bulk aerodynamic fluxes, b) Fluxes
based on surface similarity theory and corrected as needed for low/high wind
speeds and the free convection limit, c) Fluxes based on the physical
initialization technique discussed above, d) Fluxes based on the NMC (National
Meteorological Center) operation forecast model, e) Fluxes based on the ECMWF
(European Centre for Medium-range Weather Forecasting) operational forecast
model. This research is important because it is one of the TOGA/TOGA COARE
studies that investigates air-sea interactions, particularly surface fluxes, in
the context of the numerical representation of the physical processes that
impact climate variability in an especially climate sensitive region of the
world, the western Pacific Ocean, the field site of the TOGA COARE program.