* 9214434
* Image Analysis Facility Expansion:  Acquisition of Confocal Microscope System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Mary Scanlon, Morehouse School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 08/31/1994
* USD 170,042.00

An inverted Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope (CLSM) system is requested. There
is no confocal system at the medical school nor, to the best of our knowledge,
in the entire Atlanta University Center Complex ( includes the Atlanta
University Center, Morehouse College, Selman College, Clark- Atlanta University,
Morris Brown College). The requested instrumentation will greatly expand the
research capabilities at the medical school and provide a resource for minority
graduate and undergraduate schools in the complex. Within the medical school,
the requested instrumentation will be used to support five major research
projects headed by senior investigators plus occasional used by a number of
other investigators. All laboratories in the proposal are presently, or have
plans to be involved in the training of graduate students and/or postdoctoral
fellows with an emphasis on the training of minorities. Several laboratories
have also participated in summer programs to expose minority medical students to
research. Area of research (major projects) the requested instrumentation will
support include fluorescent immunolocalization/co- localization/ 3-D
reconstruction of cytoskeletal and other cellular proteins in tissue sections
and fixed cell layer (Chew, Lo, Bailey, Scanlon), detection and 3-D
reconstruction of transcripts detected using fluorescent in situ hybridization
technique (Bond), and fluorescent localization of intracellular calcium
storage/release sites in living cells along with co-localization of relevant
cellular structures (Scanlon, Chew. ). The 3D reconstruction capabilities of the
system will provide investigators with insights into cell structure that cannot
be obtained with conventional fluorescent microscopy.