* 9214350
* Acquisition of Equipment for the Study of Defects in II-VI  Semiconductor Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Larry Halliburton, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1995
* USD 300,000.00

The II-VI semiconductors feature bandgaps ranging from the ultraviolet to the
far infrared, creating the potential to form the basis of a wide variety of
electronic and optoelectronic devices. II-VI semiconductors are not as developed
as their III-V counterparts, primarily because of difficulties encountered in
understanding and controlling defects arising during growth. This proposal is
for acquisition of equipment to address the common problem of defects in wide
bandgap II-VI semiconductors. To address this problem, we propose to (1) build a
custom Molecular Beam Enitaxy system with in-situ instrumentation to investigate
growth kinetics; (2) assemble a high resolution optical spectroscopy system for
low temperature photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy using a double
monochromator and tunable laser system; and (3) assemble an optically detected
magnetic resonance system which allows magnetic resonance identification of
point defects in semiconductors. The magnetic resonance experiments will involve
use of the double monochromator and tunable laser system, in addition to a 4
Tesla magnet dewar with optical access and associated microwave bridge.
Acquisition of the proposed equipment allows original research to improve the
understanding of the optical, electrical, magnetic, and defect properties of
these difficult materials. In particular, special emphasis will be placed on
understanding the relationship between growth mechanisms and defect formation in
these materials, thus leading to both improvement and better control of basic
properties. This equipment will immediately contribute to the research programs
of the three principal investigators. The planned research efforts will involve
two postdoctoral scientists and six or more graduate students. It has always
been the practice of investigators to include undergraduates, thus it is
anticipated that this equipment will also influence the career of two to three
undergraduates each year.