* 9214094
* International Conference on Advances in Computational       Mathematics, New Delhi, January 4-9, 1993, Award in Indian  and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1992,10/31/1993
* Ronald DeVore, University of South Carolina Central Office
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 10/31/1993
* USD 22,000.00

Description: This proposal is for group travel to an international conference
"Advances in Computational Mathematics" to be held in New Delhi, India from
January 4-9, 1993. Co- organizers of the meeting are H.P. Dikshit, pro-vice
chancellor of Indira Gandhi National Open University and Charles Micchelli, IBM
T.J. Watson Research Center. Most Indian participants come from a wide spectrum
of Indian researchers in Applied Mathematics. The main purpose of the meeting is
to foster the development of research in Computational Mathematics in India
through the exchange of the latest developments in this field. The technical
subjects that will be highlighted include: wavelet analysis, solution of
nonlinear equations, information based complexity, finite element analysis for
the solution of partial differential equations, computational complex
approximation, applications of orthogonal polynomials, multivariate data fitting
and spline functions, and computer aided geometric design. These are among the
most active fields in numerical computation. Scope: This proposal will support
the cost of airfare for eight distinguished research mathematicians and computer
scientists from the United States. This is one of the most active fields in
Indian science. As the attendance of Ph.D. students and young faculty members
will be encouraged explicitly, this conference should make an important
contribution to the training of young Indian scientists in computation. Applied
Mathematics offers a developing country, particularly India, the tools to
address some of their important technological problems. It also provides a
natural context to make best use of their scientific and mathematical talents.
This meeting should contribute to this process and encourage US-Indo
collaborative research.