* 9214685
* U.S.-Japan Collaborative Project on Microbial Evolution
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* James Tiedje, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 02/28/1997
* USD 776,211.00

This award will support a series of short and long-term visits to Japan by
students and faculty located at the Center for Microbial Ecology at Michigan
State University. These visits will be under the auspices of a five-year
agreement that the Center has with the Japan Research and Development
Corporation (JRDC). The joint research project is headed by Professor James
Tiedje, Director of the MSU Center for Microbial Ecology at the University of
Michigan and Professor Keiji Yano at the Nagaoka University of Technology. In
Japan the research will be preformed at Nagaoka University of Technology and at
the Institute for Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN) in the Tokyo area. The
Center for Microbial Ecology is dedicated to understanding the underlying
principles of microbial and function of microorganisms in natural and managed
habitats. Research projects will include identifying microbes that have some
ability to degrade pollutants, examining the genetic chemistry that gives them
that ability and determining what evolutionary changes may be taking place to
make them more effective. Research results should reveal new information about
natural gene transfer among microbial species. Although the focus of the
research is on basic knowledge, it is also expected to produce practical
benefits in areas of environmental protection such as the microbial degradation
of toxic wastes, groundwater quality, plant productivity and the regulation of
agricultural and environmental biotechnologies. Americans are generally
acknowledged leaders in microbial ecology whereas the Japanese's expertise lies
in the area of molecular biology of genes involved in biodegradation. It is
expected that this research, and the exchanges, will provide intellectually and
culturally broadening experiences for every researcher taking part in the
program.