* 9214955
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Synthesis and Reactivity ofNew Ruthenium Coordination Complexes
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Kenneth Takeuchi, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1997
* USD 16,250.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-U.K. cooperative research in inorganic
chemistry between Kenneth J. Takeuchi of the State University of New York at
Buffalo and James Cameron of Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland. The
investigators propose to synthesize new ruthenium (II) complexes which utilize
novel macrocyclic ligands. Dr. Takeuchi brings to this collaboration his
expertise in the synthesis of novel catalytic systems and ruthenium complexes.
This is complemented by Dr. Cameron's background in organic chemistry and his
expertise in the design and production of these unique organic ligands. Within
the context of this collaboration, Dr. Takeuchi's advanced graduate students
will travel to Scotland to work with Dr. Cameron and his group. Initially, the
collaborative research will take place at Heriot Watt University, where Dr.
Cameron and the U.S. graduate students will jointly synthesis and characterize
the macrocyclic ligands. At SUNY Buffalo Dr. Takeuchi and his group will then
substitute ruthenium into the macrocylic ligands to produce new ruthenium
complexes. Subsequently, kinetic studies of inorganic and organic substances
using the new complexes will be initiated. This collaborative effort on
ruthenium complexes will enhance our general understanding of catalytic systems.
The new ruthenium complexes could lead to more effective catalysts and further
understanding of effects of catalytic performance.