* 9214089
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research:  An Analysis of      Peptide Release from Cerebellar Afferents
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Georgia Bishop, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 07/31/1996
* USD 7,800.00

9214089 Bishop This award supports Professor Georgia A. Bishop of Ohio State
University and a postdoctoral associate to collaborate in neurobiological
research with Dr. K. Q. Do of the Brain Research Institute of the University of
Zurich, Switzerland. Dr. Bishop has been studying the anatomical distribution,
brainstem origin and electrophysiological effects of several chemical messengers
in the mammalian cerebellum. Dr. Do and her research group have worked on
defining mechanisms of release and reuptake of various amino acids and peptides
from brain tissue in vitro. Together they plan to study the mechanisms which
regulate the release of the neuropeptide corticotropin releasing factor (CRF)
from nerve terminals within the rodent cerebellum. Their approach combines their
complementary expertise and facilities for physiological methods (Dr. Bishop)
and biochemical techniques (Dr. Do). Dr. Bishop will work for several months in
Dr. Do's well-equipped laboratory to begin the joint research and learn certain
techniques which she will carry back to her research group in the U.S. for
further use in coordinated but parallel studies. This research is an attempt to
resolve technically challenging analytical problems in order to further our
understanding of the role of neuromodulators in the central nervous system. CRF
has been ascribed such a role; however, to date, there are no data available on
the conditions under which this peptide is released from axon terminals. The
goal of the proposed cooperative research, determining how CRF is released from
terminals in the cerebellum, is a necessary step toward understanding how
neuromodulators regulate the activity of neurons.