* 9214280
* Renovation of Materials Chemistry Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Joseph Ackerman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1995
* USD 1,041,687.00

The Washington University Departments of Chemical Engineering, Chemistry,
Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Physics have entered into a
cross disciplinary program that seeks to advance the state of modern materials
research at the University. Modern materials science requires that traditional
disciplinary boundaries be broached and that researchers from a range of core
areas join together to focus on modern material problems such as the design and
control of nanostructure, and novel processing and fabrication strategies.
Although Washington University has an ongoing interdisciplinary materials
science effort, critical infrastructural deficiencies exist. The present
conditions in the materials chemistry laboratories are hazardous and unsuitable
for modern chemistry. This award will provide funding for the renovation of
synthetic laboratory space that is used entirely for research and research
training activities. Renovations will include substantial hood space needed for
the conduction of synthetic procedures critical to developing new experimental
materials with novel and important properties. A single network of continuous
ducting with vertical risers will provide the laboratories with proper
ventilation and a safe environment for studnets and staff. Open modular work
spaces will be provided to promote interaction among colleagues. Modern
interdisciplinary material research will become a strong and thriving enterprise
with revitalized facilities.