* 9214521
* Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer and Establishment of the Mississippi Resonance Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Kenneth Brown, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas C. Farrar
* 07/31/1994
* USD 480,500.00

This award from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will help the
Department of Chemistry at Mississippi State University acquire a 500 MHz
spectrometer which will be used in research. The research activity to be
supported includes NMR studies of the conformation of derivatives of vitamin B12
in solution, bound to a vitamin B12 binding protein, and bound to a coenzyme B12
requiring enzyme. Also to be studied are the solution conformation of
catalytically active fragments (5-10 kDa) of the enzyme glutamine
cyclotransferase in the presence and absence of enzyme inhibitors; the
distribution of leaf chloroplast water and the effects of environmental
parameters on leaf chloroplast osmoregulation; conformation and tautomeric
equilibria in carboxylic acids, tin carbamates, N-alkyl formamides, alkyl
thioformates, alkyl thionitriles, N-tert-butylnitramine and N-tert-
butylformamide; chloroheptafluorodirhenium dianion; cis-and trans-cyclodecene by
1H, 13C, 17O, and 19F NMR spectroscopy; the geometry and dynamics of the
reversible binding of anilinoacridines and the geometry of the covalent binding
of photo affinity probes; and the solution structure of the 49 amino acid
residue neuropeptide, corticotropin-releasing factor and the conformational
changes thereof. %%% Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the most
powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometry is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The results from these NMR studies are useful in areas such as polymers and
catalysis, and in biology.