* 9214048
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Recursion Theoretic Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Leo Harrington, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Beverly Diamond
* 12/31/1996
* USD 180,000.00

A set is recursively enumerable (r.e.) if there is a computable enumeration of
its elements. An r.e. set also has an information content called its Turing-
degree; an r.e. set with maximum information content is called Turing complete.
The collection of r.e. sets form a lattice, and this lattice is the most natural
setting for studying r.e. sets as sets. A property of r.e. sets is invariant if
it is respected by all automorphisms of this lattice. This project will study
invariant sets, and automorphisms of this lattice, and their relationship to the
degrees of r.e. sets. In particular it will continue the recent research with
Soare studying r.e. sets which are not automorphic to any complete set (with the
hope of finding some general classes of invariant sets), and studying r.e. sets
which are automorphic to a complete set (with the hope of finding some general
constructions of automorphisms). Recursion theory treats an abstract model for
computability that ignores practical limitations of time and space. In other
words something is theoretically computable according to this model if memory
and run-time requirements can be shown merely to be finite without regard to how
large they might actually be. This simplification permits a deeper understanding
of the nature of computability. Furthermore, it is also clear that in cases
where something can be shown not to be recursively computable, it has certainly
also been shown not to be computable in any practical sense. Finally, the habits
of mind developed by the study of recursion theory turn out also to be of
practical value, and former students of this investigator can be found in
industry doing software development as well as in mathematics departments
training another generation of logicians.