* 9214760
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research (INRIA):  Geometric        Reasoning About Three Dimensional Objects
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Gerard Medioni, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1997
* USD 44,250.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in computer
vision. The projects involves U.S. investigators, Gerard Medioni, University of
Southern California, Eric Grimson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dan
Huttenlocher, Cornell University, Jean Ponce, University of Illinois and French
investigators, Nicolas Ayache and Olivier Faugeras of INRIA (French National
Institute for Computer Science and Applied Mathematics). The research addresses
vision research concerning geometric reasoning in a three dimensional
environment. Current research in computer vision has advanced from reasoning in
two dimensions to reasoning about three dimensional objects in the physical
world. The objective of the research is to simultaneously investigate the themes
of segmentation, representation of visual information and matching models with
real images and vice versa. The collaboration takes advantage of complementary
U.S. and French expertise. The U.S. investigators have extensive experience in
the computer vision. This is complemented by French investigators expertise in
three-dimensional representation and their approach utilizing differential
geometry of surfaces and variational methods. Geometric reasoning in a three
dimensional environment will bring computer vision closer to reality. It has
broad applications in many fields such as navigation, automatic planning,
assembly and inspection in manufacturing.