* 9214457
* Renovation of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences/Environmental  Engineering Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Chia Kiang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/29/1996
* USD 746,861.00

The concern for environmental contaminants in all media continues to expand as
greater emphasis is placed on environmental problems. Global climate change,
groundwater contamination, potable-water quality, photochemical smog, sludge
reclamation and disposal, indoor air quality, and toxic and hazardous substances
are environmental problems which are pertinent to multiple environmental media.
These problems demand multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary approaches to
research if adequate, comprehensive solutions are to be developed. The challenge
is to develop the capacity to manage environmental changes effectively in a
manner that facilitates opportunities for economic development. The goal at
Georgia Tech is to foster environmental management and economic development by
establishing a nationally and internationally significant research base in
environmental technologies. The high quality of the Georgia Tech faculty and
students, and the commitment of Georgia Research Alliance to endow chairs for
eminent scholars will provide the human resources to respond to this challenge.
However, the major hurdle faced by the university and its researchers in
accomplishing these goals is the improvement of inadequate facilities. This
award is the first step toward overcoming this hurdle; it will modernize
research facilities, and consolidate several research programs into the
modernized facilities.