* 9214513
* School on Particle Physics and Cosmology at the Interface,  Puri, India, January 2-20, 1993, Award in Indian and U.S.   Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1992,04/30/1994
* Jogesh Pati, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/1994
* USD 27,500.00

Description: This project provides support for U.S. scientists to participate in
the Puri Winter School on: "Particle Physics and Cosmology at the Interface"
which will take place from Jan.2-20, 1993. It proposes to emphasize the rich and
exciting frontiers that are at the crossroads of these two major research areas.
This area of physics has not been covered in recent years in India from a
unified perspective. The topics to be covered include the standard models of
particle physics and of cosmology; neutrino physics; fermion masses and mixings;
physics beyond the standard models including (a) grand unification, (b)
supersymmetry, (c) superstring phenomenology and (d) dynamical schemes on the
origin of masses and families; inflation, dark matter, baryogenesis and related
areas. Lecturers are from the U.S., Europe, FSU, and Asia. Students are from
Bangladesh, China, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, India and Nepal (BCSPIN). Fifty percent
of the students will be from India. Scope: The exposure of students and young
researchers to lectures by world renowned scientists greatly strengthens the
scientific potential in these countries, and fosters scientific cooperation
between the developing countries and the U.S. and, particularly, between India
and the U.S. This school is the fourth in a series of highly successful schools
that were designed to promote interest in physics research in the BCSPIN region.
It is supported financially and organizationally by leading institutions of
India including the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, S.N. Bose National
Centre for Basic Sciences, the Indian Institute of Science and the Inter-
University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (Puna).