* 9214308
* Theoretical and Simulational Modeling of the Growth &amp;       Deposition of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Fereydoon Family, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/1996
* USD 255,000.00

A research program will be undertaken under the Materials Synthesis and
Processing Initiative to develop and apply new theoretical and simulational
modeling techniques to problems of growth and deposition of materials. With the
development of high resolution experimental techniques as well as recent
advances in our theoretical understanding of noneqilibrium surface growth
phenomena, it is possible to develop a better understanding of the growth and
deposition of materials using theoretical ideas based on continuum models as
well as realistic molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations. In particular,
the following projects will be undertaken: order-disorder transition in
epitaxial growth; strain relaxation in thin film growth; theoretical models of
thin film growth; microscopic modeling of chemical vapor deposition and growth
instabilities; and, modeling the formation of porous silicon. %%% Analytical and
computational modeling will be done to understand the deposition of materials
onto substrates and their subsequent growth. This work has an impact on
fundamental condensed matter physics and on materials science. In the latter
category it directly relates to many materials in which thin films play a
critical role such as coatings for corrosion and wear protection; optical
coatings; and, microelectronics. This reserach project is part of the FY92 NSF
Materials Synthesis and Processing Initiative.