* 9214178
* Physics Facilities Replacement at Montana State University
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* John Hermanson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1997
* USD 946,000.00

The Physics Department at Montana State University is utilizing National
Science Foundation support for a research facilities replacement project. Their
current facilities do not meet the requirements of modern laboratory research
projects. The building which houses these facilities was constructed nearly
forty years ago to provide classrooms and faculty offices for the Mathematics
and Physics Departments, neither of which had significant research activities at
that time. Since then, Physics has become recognized as a pinnacle research
department within a university that is dedicated to excellence in research and
scholarship as well as instruction and outreach. Their laboratory research
programs are focused in three areas: surface science, nonlinear optics and laser
spectroscopy, and solid state physics. Since the initiation of a vigorous
graduate program in the early 1960's, their faculty has had to cope with
antiquated laboratory facilities including inadequate utility services and
crowded conditions. Their modernized facilities will tremendously expand their
research horizons and help attract more qualified graduate and undergraduate
students to programs, including women and minorities. Further, these facilities
will enhance aggressive outreach activities in science education,
telecommunications, and technology transfer, and deepen collaborations with
engineering faculty.