* 9214844
* SGER:  Dynamic Scheduling and Resource Allocation in        Hetergeneous Computer Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1994
* Mary Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 01/31/1994
* USD 48,328.00

This research addresses the operation of networked multi-user, multi-computer
systems encompassing a variety of architectures and computing capabilities. The
problems of particular concern are assignment of software to computers jobs to
avoid unbalanced loads, and dynamic scheduling of jobs assigned to a set of
identical processors. Resolution of these problems is vital to progress from
networked heterogeneous computing environments to a "meta-computer," i.e., an
efficient, convenient computing environment which automatically allocates job
among a variety of available computers. A startup grant is being requested to
facilitate initial research over one year to study the feasibility of the
development of such a meta- computer. The issues described above are of great
interest to the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the
University of Illinois. NCSA will provide the data required to analyze and build
models of heterogeneous systems and will serve as a test bed for the ideas
developed in this research. The co-investigators by addressing the problems of
software assignment and dynamic scheduling of jobs assigned to a set of
processors. They will analyze NCSA's wealth of data on system operation, bring
together determinitic and stochastic operations research to develop solutions,
use simulation modeling to test their solutions.