* 9214180
* Renovation of Chemical Engineering Research Laboratories
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Richard Golden, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/1997
* USD 1,315,081.00

9214180 Russel The Chemical Engineering department at Princeton University,
noted for it's top rated research, remains as one of the leaders in the filed.
In order to maintain this status, it is imperative that Princeton's chemical
engineering research facilities be modernized. This ARI award provides funds to
renovate and modernize the chemical engineering research facilities located in
the A-wing of the Engineering Quadrangle and the G- wing of the Energy Research
Laboratory. Present conditions within the laboratories are ill-suited for modern
computational and experimental research. Renovations to these facilities will
improve services to insure proper electrical supply, chilled and deionized
water, high pressure nitrogen, compressed air and ventilation. With the
refurbishment of obsolete research laboratories, efforts in the fields or
ceramic processing, complex fluids catalysis and surface science, nonlinear
dynamics, and polymer science and materials will significantly expand the
Department;s influence in the field. Renovated facilities will sustain the
momentum acquired by the Chemical Engineering department over the past decade
through major senior appointments and the development and promotion of
outstanding junior faculty. The department's influence on the profession through
its leadership in the field, collaborations with industrial laboratories, and
producing studnets who continue to pursue advance degrees will strengthen with
modern facilities. ***