* 9214455
* Replacement of Research Laboratories 2, 4 &amp; 5 Buildings
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Kenneth Paigen, Jackson Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1994
* USD 615,000.00

This project replaces obsolete research laboratories and research support
facilities at The Jackson Laboratory which cannot be rehabilitated cost-
effectively. The new scope of the project affects only Laboratories that are in
direct research use, and involves the replacement of 5,408 net square feet
located in our Research Laboratory-2, Reserach Laboratory-4 and Research
Laboratory-5 buildings (hereafter known as RL-2, RL-4, and RL-5). The research
programs at The Jackson Laboratory encompass four areas: Genetics, Developmental
Biology, Molecular Biology and Biochemistry and Physiology. Our training
programs are designed to meet the needs of high school and college students,
postdoctoral trainees, graduate students and established scientists. In
addition, this space houses the Transgenic Mouse Service, Flow Cyometry Service,
Microchemistry Service and Gene Targeting/Cell Biology Service. The project will
provide state-of-the-art facilities to improve the creativity and productivity
of research, and enhance the quality of our training programs. The new
facilities will correct overcrowded conditions and critical safety and fire code
deficiencies; they will also provide mechanical, electrical and ventilation
systems required to support our current and future research and research
training activities. Accessibility to the new facility by disabled persons will
be fully addressed. The modernization of this research space will not only
create a healthful and safe work place for the staff, it will also significantly
reduce high operating costs associated with the operation and maintenance of
outdated research facilities.