* 9214569
* Structurally Engineered Photoredox Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Jay Winkler, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 01/31/1997
* USD 480,000.00

Doctors Gray and Winkler of CalTech will investigate the photochemistry of
modified metalloenzymes with support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organometallic Program of the Chemistry Division and the Biophysics Program of
the Molecular and Biochemical Sciences Division. These workers will combine
methods and systems from inorganic chemistry, physical chemistry, and molecular
biology to custom design light-driven multielectron redox enzymes. They will
photoinitiate single-electron-transfer reactions that will result in formation
of oxo-iron (ferryl) species in variants of cytochrome c and myoglobin. These
proteins will be tailored for ferryl formation by use of semisynthetic and site-
directed mutagenesis techniques. Histidine residues for ruthenium binding will
be introduced at surface sites on the proteins, and alterations in the protein
heme environments will adapt the protein to support ferryl species in the active
sites. Upon photolysis, electron transfer between the ruthemium and heme
moieties will lead to ferryl formation. %%% An important intermediate species in
many reactions of dioxygen that are catalyzed by heme proteins is one that
contains the iron atom of the heme bound to an oxygen atom. These "ferryl"
species in the past have proven difficult to characterize because of their high
reactivity. A novel and powerful method to generate and detect them will be
developed that depends first on using methods of molecular biology to engineer
the proteins so as to facilitate electron transfer reactions that can be driven
by a short flash of laser light. The ferryl species will then be detected by use
of their optical properties, and information on their reactivity will be
obtained directly.