* 9214234
* Policymaking for Global Change Research:  A Pilot Project
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* W. Henry Lambright, Syracuse Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1994
* USD 28,000.00

The U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) was the first "presidential
initiative" in science under the administration of President George Bush. It
began early in 1989. As the first such initiative it has pioneered
institutionally. In 1993, the the Global Change Program involves eleven
different agencies and about $1.3 billion in support of research and related
activities. The U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) has played a leadership
role in the USGCRP. This pilot project will develop the theoretical and
methodological tools to examine the development of this program. The pilot will
allow the principal investigator to conduct a reconnaissance to determine who
were the key actors in the interaction of federal agencies with each other and,
possibly, with relevant parties in other countries, in the development of this
new program. It will allow him to identify major projects sponsored under the
program and criteria by which to select some for further study. The pilot will
use actor-network theory to consider how NSF has worked with others to construct
and maintain a coalition of diverse support behind this program. Findings will
advance knowledge concerning the federal role in the social construction of
science by linking actor-network theory with an important issue in science
policy and by considering whether and how accountability for "good science" and
for "policy relevance" can be reconciled.