* 9214292
* Renovation of Olin Hall
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1997
* Clement Shearer, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1997
* USD 409,952.00

This proposal requests funds to renovate research space (4,328 net square feet)
in Olin Hall for the Departments of Physics/Astronomy and Psychology. The
renovation is part of a detailed, long- range plan developed by the College. In
1993 construction will begin on a new biology building that will be attached to
Olin. When the Biology Department leaves for its new quarters, Olin will be
renovated to provide modern research and teaching facilities. The remodeling of
the physics/astronomy facilities will provide the department with a computer
laboratory and greatly improved research facilities in the areas of molecular
biophysics, condensed matter physics, and atomic and nuclear physics.
Reconfiguration of space and modernization of services will allow for greater
flexibility and efficiency which will lead to increased productivity. Graduating
an average of 20 majors per year, the Physics/Astronomy Department typically has
10-15 students working with 6 faculty on research during the academic year and
summers. These collaborations will be greatly enhanced by the modernization of
research facilities. Currently the Psychology Department labors in facilities
that are extremely small and poorly designed for experimental work. With this
renovation the Psychology Department hopes to obtain the research facilities
that can support properly the level of research activities currently taking
place. As in Physics/Astronomy, students are a major part of the Psychology
Department research program. Psychology graduates an average of 30 students a
year, and in a typical year, 10-15 students work with 6 faculty on research.