* 9214251
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research on the Behavior of Window  Glass Panels during Earthquakes, (Science in Developing     Countries).
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,12/31/1993
* C.V Girija Vallabhan, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 12/31/1993
* USD 19,000.00

Technical Narrative: This U.S.-Turkey collaborative research project involving
civil engineers from Texas Tech University and Middle East Technical University
(METU) in Ankara, Turkey will develop a simplified model for the dynamic
behavior of window glass panels during an artificially simulated earthquake.
Project funding will enable Dr. Haluk Sucuoglu of METU to participate in a data
collection survey on the behavior of window glass panels during earthquakes in
both the U.S. and Europe, especially Turkey; he will then spend three months in
the laboratory of Dr. C.V.G. Vallabhan at Texas Tech University jointly
interpreting the survey data and developing the mathematical model. The research
will continue when Dr. Sucuoglu returns to METU; Dr. Vallabhan will travel to
METU and spend one month with Dr. Sucuoglu to complete the project. This project
is important because understanding and predicting the dynamic load properties of
window glass panels during earthquakes has widespread implications for
construction planning and safety. This project in structural systems and
construction processes fulfills the program objective in advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and Turkey to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.