* 9214993
* Constrained H-infinity Optimiztion:  An Approach for the    Robust Control of Systems with Time-Domain Constraints
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1995
* William Schmitendorf, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1995
* USD 101,086.00

We propose to develop an Hoo optimization approach which will allow in addition
to the customary frequency-domain specifications, explicit time-domain
specifications. The latter specifications include shaping of the transient
characteristics of the system by requiring that the step response lies in a
given envelope, specifying that actuator signals do not exceed certain hard
bounds in order to avoid saturation, etc. We refer to this approach as
Constrained Hoo optimization. In the proposed approach the time-domain
specifications are introduced as constraints onto the Hoo optimization. We
expect to establish a decomposition of the latter problem to i) a finite
dimensional convex optimization problem and ii) a standard Hoo optimization
problem. This method will be capable of handling structured model uncertainty in
as much the same way as Hoo optimization methods such as u-synthesis do. The
approach will also inherit the algorithmic nature of Hoo optimization methods
and systematically provide trade-offs between conflicting specifications,
including specifications posed directly in the time-domain. It will be capable
of revealing the achievable performance limits at a reasonable computational
cost. We expect to establish that the controllers produced within this framework
will have properties that guarantee effective degree reduction to the level of
standard Hoo optimal controllers and specialized controller reduction schemes
will be developed. In summary, our expected results should provide a general,
systematic and practical approach for robust multivariable control system design
with structured uncertainty, in which established measures of performance in the
time-domain are incorporated explicitly, while the applicability of standard Hoo
methods is retained in full. We believe that the proposed research offers a
unique approach to the important subject of Robust Control of Constrained
Systems.