* 9214370
* Acquisition of Instrumentation to Fabricate Low-Dimensional Artificial Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1998
* Ronald Gronsky, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1998
* USD 1,607,560.00

This project will provide new instrumentation for the growth, processing and
characterization of lowdimensional artificial structures for teaching and
research on the campus of University of California-Berkeley. The new equipment
will be linked to an existing molecular beam epitaxy chamber, and represents new
infrastructure in the field of nanostructured materials, which is important for
microfabrication. The equipment will be housed in the Microfabrication
laboratory, and includes one ultra-high vaccum (UHV) chamber for deposition of
metals, one UHV chamber for focused ion beam writing and low energy electron
irradiation, one UHV chamber for photo-luminesence and scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM). These three chambers will be linked (UHV) to an existing
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system. This facility will provde capability for
conventional fabrication of quantumconfined nanostructures, novel processing
methods such as STM lithography, engineered sitespecific phase nucleation, and
in-situ surface modification, which will be available to campus faculty,
students, and interested industries. Three departments and two Colleges of the
university will undertake research in nanoscale physics, nanostructured
optoelectronic devices, processing of nanoscale materials, and diagnostics of
nanostructural degradation mechanisms.