* 9214135
* The Mechanism of Desensitization of Chromaffin Cells to     Repeated Stimulation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Edward Westhead, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1994
* USD 115,770.00

A common characteristic of nerve cells is that as they are repeatedly
stimulated, their responses are diminished. Less commonly, nerve cells will
respond to repeated stimulation with enhanced activity. Such changes can be
observed at all levels from a single cell to a complex organism, and are thought
to represent a form of memory. This behavior is being studied in cells isolated
from the adrenal gland of the cow. These cells are widely used as models of
nerve cell behavior since they can be isolated and grown in culture, are
embryologically related to neurons, synthesize and secrete neurotransmitters and
provide sufficient material for biochemical studies. A special technique has
been developed by the investigator to stimulate these cells repeatedly and
reproducibly and to measure neurotransmitter secretion in real time. By
manipulating the cellular control mechanisms that regulate protein
phosphorylation, the cells can be make to respond to repeated stimulation by a
steady increase in secretion, rather than a decrease. To further understand the
cellular mechanisms regulating this response, the role of intracellular calcium
levels in the phosphorylation of specific proteins will be studied. These
studies promise to increase our understanding of cellular processes underlying
the formation of memory.