* 9214805
* Kinetic Effects in Radical, Diradical, Carbanion, Carbene,  and Pericyclic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* William Dolbier, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Richard A. Caldwell
* 12/31/1995
* USD 326,350.00

The effect of fluorine substitution on radical, diradical, carbanion, carbene,
and pericyclic reactions will be conducted. By strategic placement of fluorine
on a substrate, the kinetic, stereochemical, and regiochemical effects will be
evaluated. Processes to be investigated include Cope rearrangements,
electrocyclic reactions, cyclopropane and vinylcyclopropane rearrangements, and
methylcyclopropane and methylcyclobutane rearrangements. A highlight of the
investigation will be the use of intramolecular cyclization reactions to examine
steric, polar, and stereoelectronic reactivity effects of fluorine substituents
on reactions of radicals, carbanions, carbenes, and 1,3-dipoles. %%% This grant
from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the studies of Professor W. R.
Dolbier at the University of Florida on fluorocarbon chemistry. The
incorporation of fluorine into a variety of substances can enhance their utility
and provide materials with superior properties for use in a variety of different
applications ranging from chemically resistant fibers to polymers which resist
penetration of water in high humidity environments. In order to maximize the
impact of fluorine on the substrate to which it is attached, it is necessary to
fully understand the effect that fluorine has on chemical reactions under a
variety of different conditions. The studies of Professor Dolbier will provide
invaluable information which will help accelerate the development of fluorine
based materials and insure that full advantage is taken of the unique properties
of fluorocarbons.