* 9214942
* CISE Educational Infrastructure:  MULTI: Multimedia User-   interface Laboratory for Teaching and Instructional MaterialDevelopment
* CSE,EIA
* 11/15/1992,04/30/1996
* Philip Lewis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 04/30/1996
* USD 210,000.00

This award is for the development of an interdisciplinary undergraduate
curriculum in multimedia, user interfaces, and computer-human interaction. Six
new undergraduate courses will be developed covering user interface development,
human information processing, computer graphics, computer-supported cooperative
work, scientific visualization and human factors in Interface design. This
curriculum development is a collaborative effort between the Department of
Computer Science and the Department of Psychology. An R&amp;D laboratory will be
established to develop software and course materials needed to support the new
curriculum. Each course development will include a CD-ROM with a printed
monograph. All educational materials will be made available to other academic
institutions and results of the project will be presented at professional
workshops and conferences. SUNY, Stonybrook proposes to develop an
interdisciplinary undergraduate curriculum in multimedia, user interfaces, and
computer-human interaction. This will be a collaborative effort between the
Department of Computer Science and the Department of Psychology. Course
materials, software, a set of monographs and CD-ROM's , which will be produced
as part of the project, will be widely disseminated in the academic community.
The results of the curriculum and materials development will be disseminated
through publications, and presentations at professional meetings.