* 9214996
* Geometric Modeling and Artificial Intelligence for Design   and Manufacturing Automation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Aristides A. Requicha, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1996
* USD 195,060.00

This project is centered on three-dimensional spatial reasoning and its
applications in intelligent engineering systems. Theories and techniques from
the fields of geometric modeling and artificial intelligence (AI) are integrated
so as to attack difficult problems that arise in design, manufacturing and other
activities in the life cycle of mechanical and electromechanical products. The
main body of the research is a natural sequel to previous, National Science
Foundation supported work on automatic recognition of machinable features, and
on accessibility analysis for the inspection of mechanical parts with Coordinate
Measuring Machines (CMMs). USC's feature recognizer will be integrated
downstream, with experimental process planners and with commercial NC (Numerical
Control) cutter-path generators for driving machine tools. It will also be
integrated upstream, with feature-based design systems. The existing feature
finder is very promising because it can handle complex volumetric interactions
between features, and produces removal volumes that satisfy stringent conditions
for machinability. It will be redesigned so as to operate incrementally, thereby
providing immediate manufacturing feedback to a designer. It will also be
extended so as to extract the geometric information required by process planners
and NC code generators. Research on inspection planning will seek to produce,
fully automatically, complete programs for driving CMMs (and potentially other
equipment such as laser probes), given toleranced solid models of mechanical
parts. Dimensional inspection is closely related to tolerancing, and will build
upon on-going work at USC on the semantics of tolerance specifications. Issues
of measurement interpretation (soft gaging) also will be addressed.