* 9214025
* Floods in Bangladesh, Alternative Solution Strategies,      Seminar at the University of Illinois, Urbana, December 1992
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Mir Ali, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1994
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This project supports a seminar on "Floods in Bangladesh,
Alternative Solution Strategies" to be conducted at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) by the Bangladesh Environment and Flood Committee in
America (BEFCA) in conjunction with the Institute for Flood Control and Drainage
Research (IFCDR) of the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology
(BUET). The Water Resources Center and the International Programs and Studies
Unit of UIUC are both collaborating in the organization and conduct of the
conference. The conference is to address the currently proposed ideas to deal
with the floods and resulting destruction in Bangladesh with special
consideration to the impact on life protection, environmental issues, and
availability of needed resources. Sessions will include: existent plans; pre-
feasibility studies; engineering and hydrological issues; agriculture and
economy; and environment and society. Summary and recommendations will be
discussed in a separate session. The meeting is to include in addition to the
U.S. and invited Bangladeshi scientists, experts from France and Japan, and from
other European countries. The results will be published in a Proceedings Volume
to be made available to international agencies and to the Government of
bangladesh for consideration and implementation. Scope: The flood problems in
Bangladesh are well known for their frequency and wide destruction. Less known
is the main benefits to food production that they normally provide. Learning to
minimize one and maximize the other is part of national and international
efforts. A sound scientific basis for these efforts is what is planned for this
meeting. The results could be of more generic benefit for countries with similar
problems.