* 9214215
* Acquisition of a Flexible, Massively Parallel Computing     Platform for Computational Biology.
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Michael Levine, MPC Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 08/31/1996
* USD 1,257,754.00

This award provides funds to the Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center (PSC) to aid in
the purchase of a massively parallel computer (Cray T3D). The purchase is part
of a project that includes operations and systems support of benefit to
biological researchers around the country via network access to the PSC. In
recent years, efforts to improve the speed of the largest and fastest general
purpose computers has focused on the use of so-called "massively parallel"
architectures. In these computers, a very large number of processors are
interconnected so that complex calculations can be broken into a number of
component problems that are solved separately and simultaneously by the
processors. The earliest computers of this type employed very large numbers of
the relatively slow processors typical of personal computers. The most recent
designs, such as the T3D, use a smaller (but still large) number of the very
powerful processors typically found in advanced scientific workstations.
Although the use of parallel computers for analysis of computationally intensive
problems in biology is still in its infancy, many of these problems are well-
suited to "parallelization"; the availability of this computer to all
researchers through the auspices of the PSC is expected to have a significant
impact on understanding of biological problems as diverse as the structures of
individual proteins and the function of the nervous system.