* 9214655
* A Technique for Incorporating Uncertain Environmental       Factors into the Utility Planning Process
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Saifur Rahman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chanan Singh
* 12/31/1995
* USD 138,793.00

The proposed research effort attempts to develop a technique to model and study
the effects of uncertain environmental factors in the electric utility planning
process. The electric utility deals with uncertainties with respect to the
availability and costs of alternative generation, fuels, and new emission
reduction technologies. There are also uncertainties in demand an energy
projections, and the impact of demand side management programs. Emissions caps
and emissions trading features provide for by the Clean Air Act Amendments
(CAAA) of 1990 have added a new dimension to the problem of uncertainty. There
are wide variations in estimates on the market price of emission allowances. At
the same time experts disagree on the extent to which government legislation and
regulations should and will be used to limit emissions. In the light of those
uncertainties, the utility planner must explore a variety of probable scenarios
in order to settle on a robust generation plan. The evaluation tools which are
currently being applied assume the availability of the measures of uncertainty
and of experts furnishing them. This is obviously not always the case. The
proposed technique is designed to facilitate the strategic power system planning
under uncertainty by generating probability estimates for expert opinions using
the interdependent data analysis (IDA) technique being developed at Virginia
Tech. This enables the decision maker to model opinions which are still forming.
Applied with decision tree/influence diagram analysis, this can result in a
robust methodology to quantify uncertainties related to environmental factors in
the utility planning process.