* 9214944
* RUI:  Spatial Models for Improving Integrated Circuit       Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1994
* Winson Taam, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 02/28/1994
* USD 29,510.00

Effective use of quantitative information from manufacturing processes of
integrated-circuits (IC) is crucial in monitoring process potentials,
identifying optimal settings, and improving the quality in general. Although
process yield is the primary concern in the IC manufacturing industry, spatial
dependence among chips on a wafer provides an opportunity to learn more about
the process. Design of experiments has been proven to be effective for examining
numerous factors simultaneously in industrial processes. The major objective of
this project is to investigate the impact of factorial experiments on both yield
and spatial dependence, especially when the outcome of each chip is coded as
either good or bad in routine testing. This project will begin by studying log-
linear models that are successfully implemented in the social sciences and
biomedical research. This class of models will be adapted to incorporate both
yield effects and spatial effects under factorial experimentation (more recently
referred to as Taguchi experiments). Proper use of this model provides an
opportunity to better understand the IC manufacturing process. In addition to
incorporating design of experiments for quality improvement in IC manufacturing,
the approach will be compared with some existing techniques in yield modeling.