* 9214699
* School on Instrumentation in Elementary Particle Physics,   Bombay, India; February 15-27, 1993, Award in Indian and    U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1993
* Marleigh Sheaff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1993
* USD 16,600.00

Description: This proposal requests partial support for the 1993 School on
Instrumentation in Elementary Particle Physics, sponsored by the International
Committee for Future Accelerators (ICFA) and the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research (TIFR), Bombay where the school will be hosted. The program includes a
series of lectures covering many topics in particles physics instrumentation
that will be augmented by "hands-on" participation in six laboratory experiments
designed to demonstrate the material presented. The opportunity to participate
in the experiments sets this school apart from others aimed at the same audience
of graduate students and young Post Docs from developing countries. The 1993
IFCA School is the first held in Asia, and it is expected that most of the 70-80
students will come from the Pan-Asian region. Its goal is to encourage young
physicists from developing countries in elementary particle physics experiments
and provide them with the knowledge and skills that will enable them to
undertake detector development for these experiments. Scope: The purpose of the
school is foster initiatives in detector development at the participants' home
institutions and to initiate collaborative efforts that involve physicists from
both technically advanced and developing countries. The goal of increased
foreign collaboration is timely considering two factor: 1) the ambitious program
of detector develop- ment in the US during the next decade that is linked to the
commissioning of the Super- conducting Supercollider and 2) the shortage of
trained scientific manpower in the US in the field of experimental elementary
particle physics.