* 9214653
* Bio-Molecular Thermodynamics of Protein Precipitation in    Aqueous Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1995
* John Prausnitz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/1995
* USD 180,000.00

Experimental and theoretical bio-processing studies are directed toward the
development of a molecular-thermodyamic model for separationg a target protein
from a mixture of proteins in aqueuous solution. Protein separation is achieved
by precipitation induced by salts, nonionic polymers, or both. The resulting
system consists of two liquid phases in equilbrium, with one enriched in the
target protein. A molecular-thermosynamic model is outlined for describing
protein-precipitation phase equilibria. This model is derived from an
understanding of the intermolecular forces in the precipitating solutions; it
uses the mean-spherical- approximation to define the reference system as a
mixture of charged hard spheres. Pertubations to this reference system result
from the dispersion forces, dipole-dipole forces and perhaps, specific
association forces. Osmotic pressures calculated from the model will be compared
to osmotic-pressure data obtained from membrane osmometry and to osmotic second
virial coefficients measured by low-angle laser-light scattering. Experimental
phase-equilibrium (precipitation) measurements will provide data against which
the molecular- thermodynamic model can be compared. Protein aggregate size
distribution data from light scattering will be used to augment the theory when
significant aggregation occurs. The goal of this reech is to establish an
engineering-oriented correlation for the rational design of protein-
precipitation processes. The long-range benefit of this research is that it is
likely to provide useful knowledge for a better understanding of protein
crystallization bioprocesses.