* 9214031
* Participation of American Physiologists in Inaugural        Congress of African Association of Physiological            Sciences, Nairobi, Kenya, September 21-28, 1992.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1993
* Daniel Richardson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 06/30/1993
* USD 6,000.00

The purpose of this request for an International Travel Grant is to help offset
the costs involved in enabling four (4) members of the American Physiological
Society (APS) to attend and participate in the Inaugural Congress of the African
Association of Physiological Sciences (AAPS). The venue for the Congress will be
Nairobi, Kenya from September 21 through 2, 1992. All four individuals have been
specifically invited to participate in the Congress by either the Secretary-
General of the AAPS, Dr. K.O. Adeniyi of the University of Jos in Jos, Nigeria,
and/or the Congress Chairman, Dr. John Ibu, also of the University of Jos. The
letter of invitation to Dr. Daniel Richardson, the PI of this grant proposal, is
attached. Letters to the other three invited individuals can be produced if
their specific rolls in the Congress are provided in this proposal. The purpose
of the AAPS Congress is to provide a forum for scientists from the African
countries to interact with their International counterparts. The Congress will
consist of invited lectures, research symposia and a considerable number of
education workshops. As such the interactions between American and African
physiologists is expected to lead to the formation of joint scientific and
education projects that would be executed in Africa with the aim of fostering
biomedical science teaching and research in African nations. According to K.O.
Adeniyi, AAPS Secretary- General, one potential benefit of such interactions is
that they would help to stem the tide of scientific brain drain from these
regions. The invited American physiologists are expected not only to present
lectures on their invited topics, but to participate in the organizational
aspects of the congress as well. For the most part the latter will take the form
of chairing symposia and/or workshops. Finally, the Americans are encouraged to
interact with young members and help direct them towards achieving greater
heights in science and education. //