* 9214082
* Development of MEMS Technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1993
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/1993
* USD 2,110.00

The MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS) or Micro System Technologies field is
one of the most exciting technologies to be developed since the integrated
circuit. Already identified as a critical technology of national importance, the
MEMS area is attracting the interest of engineers and scientists in this
country. Research in industry (very little at present), government laboratories
(starting), and universities is starting to grow as evidenced by the ongoing
work at the University of California - Berkeley, the University of Wisconsin,
MIT, Georgia Tech, and Cornell. This effort coupled with newly formed research
centers such as the Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices (CAMD) at
Louisiana State University - Baton Rouge, and the Institute for
Micromanufacturing (IfM) at Louisiana Tech University will enable the United
States to keep pace with the burgeoning interest in Japan and Europe
(particularly Germany). The objective of this proposal is to enhance the
development of the MEMS field in the university environment. This will be
accomplished by contacting all U.S. colleges of engineering and providing them
with an informational package on MEMS and a copy of the Journal of
Microelectromechanical Systems. This joint ASME/IEEE publication has just been
released (first issue March 1992) and with developmental support should become
the lead publication for this technology worldwide.