* 9214090
* U.S.-Sweden-Norway Cooperative Research:  Measurement and   Interpretation of Postglacial Rebound-Induced Crustal       Deformation Rates
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1994
* James Davis, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1994
* USD 8,716.00

This one-year award supports U.S.-Sweden-Norway cooperative research between
James Davis of the Smithsonian's Astrophysics Observatory in Cambridge,
Massachusetts and Bernt O. Ronnang of the Onsala Space Observatory, Chalmers
University of Technology, Onsala, Sweden. The objective of the research is to
take measurements of three-dimensional crustal motion at locations in Sweden and
Norway (Fennoscandia). The estimates of crustal velocity will be used to
determine viscosity of the Earth's mantle beneath Fennoscandia and to correct
estimates of sea-level change associated with local vertical crustal motion.
Knowledge of the mantle's viscosity is required for understanding mantle
convection, the driving force of plate tectonic motion. The estimates of sea-
level change for crustal motion is required for determining global sea-level
change, an important gauge of global warming. Satellite surveying techniques are
to be employed for estimating crustal velocity. The project takes advantage of
complementary expertise of the U.S. and Swedish research groups and Swedish
coordination with the Nordic Council funding agencies. The U.S. investigators
have extensive experience in the processing of space geodetic data and using
this data to estimate geophysical parameters. This is complemented by the
Swedish group's knowledge of the region. They will plan the surveys, the site
reconnaissance and coordinate the effort with the Nordic Council.