* 9214707
* Weak Links, Interfaces and Mechanisms of High Temperature   Superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1993,08/31/1996
* David Larbalestier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* W. Lance Haworth
* 08/31/1996
* USD 2,047,000.00

This award is for the renewal of funding of the Materials Research Group at the
University of Wisconsin at Madison on the topic of weak links, interfaces, and
mechanisms of high temperature superconductivity. The original award
(DMR-8911332) provided funding for a period of forty two months. The research to
be performed under this award is a combination of continuation of research
started under the original award plus new areas under the same general topic.
Research to be continued includes coupled electromagnetic and microstructural
characterization of flux-grown yttrium-barium-copper oxide bicrystals, cation-
doped bicrystals, doped and undoped single crystals, melt-processed and solid
state sintered polycrystals, as well as development of a high-speed position-
sensitive atom probe. New programs starting under this award include coupled
local electrical and microstructural characterization by patterning of thin-film
and bulk-scale superconducting materials, coupled electromagnetic and
microstructural characterization of step-edge superconducting junctions, coupled
electromagnetic and microstructural characterization of grain boundaries in
bismuth-strontium-calcium- copper oxide bicrystals, studies of local
intergranular and intragranular compositional variations using the position-
sensitive atom probe, characterization of the grain boundaries using high-
spatial-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy, and investigation of the
superconducting gap as a function of temperature and location in the Brillouin
zone. %%% The research is aimed at understanding why and how grain boundaries
limit the transport critical current density of high temperature
superconductivity. This is one of the most important problems in high
temperature superconductivity. The challenging experimental procedures required
for this research have been demonstrated in the first three years of the
Materials Research Group. The group is the only one to have performed coupled
electromagnetic and microstructural characterization on the same specimen of
superconducting material. The issue of critical current density must be solved
to achieve the full potential of high temperature superconductivity for national
technological competitiveness.