* 9214472
* Metabolic Control of Intracellular Organic Solute           Accumulation During Salt Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Stephen Bishop, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 02/28/1997
* USD 210,000.00

A wide variety of plants, marine or estuarine animals, microorganisms and
certain cells in the tissues of higher animals (gut, kidneys, etc.) show
resistance to salt stress (highly concentrated salt solutions) by using a
variety of small molecular weight, electrically neutral organic molecules as
intracellular osmotic buffers. The mechanism of drought resistance is closely
tied to the mechanism of salt stress resistance. Cells that cannot regulate
these organic solute concentrations are not salt stress resistant. The proposed
research builds on previous work and focuses on the mechanisms used by cells to
regulate the intracellular concentration of these organic solutes. We propose
that production and metabolic turnover of these solutes are compartmentalized
within intracellular organelles such as the mitochondria and/or chloroplasts and
that the rest of the cell serves as the compartment of accumulation. Using gill
tissue from a highly salt stress resistant bivalve mollusc as a model system, we
plan to identify the elements (enzymes) regulating production of these solutes
in the mitochondria and study how the cell controls the regulation of these
elements so as to adjust the internal osmotic pressure of the cell to be more or
less equal to that of the media bathing cell. The research involves use of a
variety of analytical chemical equipment, radiochemical tracers, some tissue
culture studies, enzymatic assays and the separation of metabolic elements using
various centrifugation, chromatographic, electrophoretic, and antibody
precipitation techniques for specific analysis. The result will be a better
understanding of the mechanisms of cellular salt stress resistance and the
physiological controls regulating these processes.