* 9214131
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research on Genetic and        Biochemical Relationships among Strains of the Marine Alga, Phaeocystis
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Raymond Holton, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1995
* USD 4,400.00

9214131 Holton This award provides modest support to enable Professor Raymond
Holton of the University of Tennessee to collaborate in marine botany research
with Professor Wytze T. Stam of the Department of Marine Biology of the
University of Groningen, The Netherlands. Their cooperative research will begin
at the University of Tennessee with culturing of several strains of the
microscopic marine alga, Phaeocystis, which were collected from different
geographical regions. Dr. Holton will carry out several biochemical analyses on
the alga, including pigment and fatty acid composition, and will observe the
anatomical features via electron microscopy. He will then visit the University
of Groningen to work for several months with Dr. Stam and others to sequence the
ribosomal DNA genes in order to evaluate the genetic similarity among the
strains. The Dutch group is one of the few in the world that has applied these
new molecular biological techniques of ribosomal DNA sequencing to algae, so
their experience is invaluable to the joint research. Phaeocystis is a
cosmopolitan microscopic flagellated marine phytoplanktonic alga which also has
a colonial stage. It is important in causing blooms in polar seas but also in
producing sea foam which is a nuisance to fishing and oil industries and fouls
the beaches of the North Sea. Various strains or species have been isolated from
different parts of the world, but because of its extremely small size and
uncertainties about its life cycle, it is not known how closely related these
isolates are. The proposed collaborative research will contribute new knowledge
concerning the genetic relationships and basic biochemistry of strains from
several different geographical regions. It may also provide a basis for
predicting the ecological "behavior" of the various strains and, ultimately,
ameliorating some undesirable local impacts. ***