* 9214509
* Surveys of Federal Funds for Research and Development and   Federal Support to Universities, Colleges, and Non-Profit   Institutions
* SBE,NCSE
* 04/16/1992,09/30/1995
* George Nozicka, MACRO INTERNATIONAL
* Contract
* None
* 09/30/1995
* USD 609,598.00

The contractor for this project will conduct two surveys for the National
Science Foundation (NSF). The Survey of Federal Funds for Research and
Development (R&amp;D) provides detailed annual time series data on all federal
R&amp;D funding; and the Survey of Federal Support to Universities, Colleges,
and Selected Nonprofit Institutions provides detailed annual time series data on
federal R&amp;D and science and engineering (S&amp;E) obligations to individual
institutions of higher education, nonprofit institutions, and federally funded
research and development centers. The work will include development and
implementation of a new, integrated, state-of-the-art software system; data
processing services; and technical support for statistical information collected
with these two surveys. The contractor will be responsible for creating and
mailing the survey instruments, processing and editing the data, and generating
final data tabulations in the form of camera-ready detailed statistical tables.
The contractor shall also provide additional technical support and respond to ad
hoc requests, as required by NSF. The two surveys are conducted to fulfill
legislative mandates that require NSF to collect and disseminate data on federal
R&amp;D and S&amp;E activities. The availability of timely statistics depends on
an effective data processing system. Data collected with these surveys are used
by individuals in both the public and private sectors to address key questions
on Federal R&amp;D funding levels and activities.