* 9214746
* DNA Replication, Bacteria Cell Cycle, and Cell Growth
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Judith Zyskind, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 04/30/1996
* USD 341,000.00

The goal of this project is to understand how initiation of DNA replication is
coupled to growth rate. To understand how the frequency of the initiation event
is determined, the mechanisms that regulate the expression of the DnaA protein
must be understood. Both genetics and biochemistry are being used to elucidate
the regulatory circuits controlling expression of the dnaA operon promoters. The
growth rate regulator and alarmone, guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp), inhibits
transcription from the dnaA P2 promoter. The molecular basis of this inhibition
is being characterized in vitro. Mutants defective in the inhibitory response to
ppGpp will be examined for growth rate regulation and precise timing of
initiation of DNA replication in the cell cycle. We will determine whether the
dnaA gene is still under growth rate control in cells that lack ppGpp - is there
a growth rate regulation mechanism other than ppGpp that controls the expression
of DnaA protein? We will investigate DnaA protein-DNA interactions by isolation
and characterization of DnaA mutant proteins with altered DNA-binding
specificities. We will construct a chromosomal mutation with genes on either
side of oriC deleted, and the resulting mutant will be examined for loss of
precise timing in the cell cycle. %%% This research studies the control of a key
step in cell divison and should provide significant insights into a basic
question in biology, as well as abberant conditions suchs as uncontrolled cell
mutiplication.