* 9214903
* US-Hungary Engineering Research on Processing of Sweet      Sorghum for Value Added Products
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Robert Tengerdy, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/1997
* USD 32,600.00

This U.S.-Hungary research project in microbiology is between Drs. Robert P.
Tengerdy and James Linden of Colorado State University and Drs. Janos Schmidt of
the Pannon Agricultural University and Laszlo Nyeste of the Technical University
of Budapest. This project will combine the complementary expertise of Hungarian
and American research groups in developing a new integrated processing of sweet
sorghum for value-added products such as alcohol, protein, silage, and animal
feed. The key to the integrated process is a biological intervention, enzyme
assisted ensiling (ENLAC), that improves the storability of the ensiled crop for
year round processing and makes possible a higher cell content recovery by
countercurrent diffusion. Research efforts will focus on improving the
extractability of sugar and protein from ENLAC treated sweet sorghum and on
separating proteins from sugar in the extracted juice. By adjusting the
engineering parameters of the diffusion process, the researchers expect to
control the ENLAC process for maximum sugar and soluable protein yields. Results
should enhance the value of sweet sorghum as a crop, offering a potentially
profitable and sustainable economic activity to farmers and bioindustries in
both countries. This project in microbiology fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States
and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas
of strong mutual interest and competence.