* 9214163
* Development of Strongly Focusing Hard X-ray Optics for      Brilliant Synchrotron Radiation Sources
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1999
* Joseph Smith, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniel F. Weill
* 09/30/1999
* USD 1,395,052.00

This award provides one-half the funding necessary to develop instrumentation
that is needed to focus hard X-rays at the Advanced Photon Source (APS). The
remaining necessary funds are to be committed by the University of Chicago on
behalf of the Consortium for Advanced Radiation Sources (CARS). The capabilities
of existing X-ray focusing monochromators and mirrors are inadequate to take
full advantage of the extraordinarily brilliant radiation at APS. They use
either large focusing lengths, thus limiting their source demagnification, or
focus only a small fraction of the transmitted radiation into the required small
cross-section. Furthermore, they cannot withstand the high heat load imposed by
the APS X-ray beam. The purpose of this instrumentation development is to enable
new classes of experiments by providing significant improvement in the linear
spatial resolution and stability of X-ray optical instrumentation to be used at
the APS. Techniques which are affected include: X-ray absorption spectroscopy
from small or dilute samples ranging from geological samples to metallo-
proteins; microtomography and X-ray fluorescence microprobe analysis of samples
as diverse as plant roots and meteorites; micro-crystal diffraction from
zeolites and metal cluster compounds; in-plane surface diffraction from liquid
samples at grazing incidence; reflectivity measurements from liquid surfaces;
small angle scattering from polymers and macromolecular assemblies including
muscle; and time-resolved energy-dispersive spectroscopy from catalysts. All of
these techniques require focusing of the incident X-rays to a very small cross-
section and can tolerate only a minor increase in angular convergence of the
beam. The improvements in spatial resolution and brilliance allows use of
smaller volumes of materials, will permit time-resolved studies, and in general
improve the sensitivity of all techniques. The resulting instrumentation will be
used by scientists and research groups that are members of CARS, including
workers in the areas of earth sciences, chemistry, materials research and the
biosciences. All instrument design developments will be made available to the
entire science community with science applications at APS.