* 9214236
* Violent Events in Superfluid Three-Helium and a Collective  Model of Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,05/31/1996
* Anthony Leggett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/1996
* USD 270,000.00

A theoretical study will be carried out on various phenomena in superfluid
helium-three in which the liquid is thrown violently out of thermal equilibrium
and must then recover. In particular, in light of the recent discovery of
Osheroff and Schiffer that a gamma ray scource is an efficient nucleator of the
first order A to B transition, it is planned to elaborate the "baked Alaska"
mechanism for nucleation of this transition by high energy electrons which was
suggested earlier and to make detailed predictions of the dependence of the
nucleation rate on temperature and on magnetic field. In addition, studies are
planned of the nuclear magnetic resonance behavior in the highly supercooled A
phase in low field, with a view to obtaining previously unavailable microscopic
parameters of the liquid. It is also proposed to develop further a collective
model of amorphous materials for explaining the remarkable quantitative
universlaity of the thermal and acoustic properties of these materials at low
temperatures. %%% Theoretical research will be conducted in two areas for which
the Principal Investigator is the world leader: (1) research will continue on
models for amorphous materials to explain the common properties that occur at
very low temperatures among diverse materials; (2) work will continue on models
for the violent behavior of helium at very low temperatures. This behavior has
recently been observed and a theory, introduced earlier, will be further
developed in light of these recent and exciting experimental discoveries.