* 9214451
* Renovation of the Biology Building Into The Environmental   Sciences Research Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Eric Mintz, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,365,482.00

Clark Atlanta University, a historically black institution, is the recipient of
funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program to aid in the renovation
of the Biology Building. Built in 1961, and initially the only facility on
campus that housed all science classroom and laboratory activities, the facility
is inadequate to support modern research and research training. As a commitment
to the sciences, the institution has constructed a research center for Science
and Technology to meet the demand of a rapidly growing research and development
program and student training activities. Clark Atlanta University will further
improve the research infrastructure by renovating the Biology Building to
accommodate the Environmental Sciences Research Laboratory. Impediments in the
building that interfere with utilization include: asbestos-containing insulation
and floor tiles, poor operating condition of the HVAC, electrical, and plumbing
systems, lack of ADA compliance, and deteriorated laboratory casework and
benches. The renovation will correct the building's deficiencies and restore it
to a functional facility for the environmental sciences program. Environmental
research that will be conducted in the facility will encompass the use of
bioremediation with mixed microbial mats; thermodynamic modeling of chemical
speciation, chemically sensitive ion-selective field effect transistors for in
situ detection of toxic metals; and enhanced biodegradative remediation of
hydrocarbon contaminated aquifers. This modernization project will provide the
infrastructure required to create new environmental technologies to solve the
environmental problems of the 21st century. Not only will the project strengthen
the research program, but the new facility will also enhance the mission of
Clark Atlanta University in its efforts to train competent minority students in
science and technology.