* 9214474
* U.S.-Czechoslovakia Research on                             Information Theory and Mathematical Statistics
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Andrew Rukhin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/1996
* USD 11,977.00

This U.S.-Czechoslovakia research project between Dr. Andrew Rukhin of the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County and Dr. Igor Wajda of the Institute of
Information Theory &amp; Automation, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, will
focus on two problems relative to information theory and statistical decision
theory: (1) Change-point estimation problem; and (2) Adaptive classification
problems for stochastic process. The first problem deals with the classical
estimation problem of change-point between two different distributions. A notion
of asymptotic efficiency is introduced despite there being no consistent
estimator of the change-point. The researchers will investigate the new
optimality measure and study the existence of adaptive estimators which are
fully asymptotic efficient, when a nuisance parameter is present. A version of
this problem for stochastic processes in which consistent estimators exist will
also be addressed. In the second problem, Drs. Rukhin and Wajda will classify a
realization of a stochastic process into a family of given distributions (time
can be discrete or continuous). They have to derive a new inequality for the
error probability of any classification rule. This inequality leads to a notion
of asymptotic optimality more general than the classical one. They will obtain
conditions for the existence of adaptive classification procedures. This project
in statistics and probability fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and
Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence.