* 9214329
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research:  Size-Specific Growthand Condition in Larval Fish
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1995
* James Power, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1995
* USD 12,890.00

This award supports Professor James H. Power of Louisiana State University to
collaborate in marine biology research with Professor Henk W. van der Veer of
the Netherlands Institute for Sea Research (NIOZ). The objective of their
research is to obtain an innovative and comprehensive set of key measurements on
individual fish larvae that will fully characterize the animal's size-specific
growth as well as the response of these measures to different food levels. They
will obtain the typical values of these measurements in cultured populations of
plaice larvae, and evaluate their observed distributions, variability and the
strengths of their relationships to one another. NIOZ staff has experience and
special facilities for culturing plaice larvae for use in their own ongoing
research. Dr. Power brings special apparatus and techniques that he has
developed for determining larval mass, body volume, and morphometrics. Both
groups will be involved in the data analysis and interpretation. This research
addresses one of the very important objectives of marine biological research:
understanding how various biological and environmental factors affect the
abundance of a given marine population. The joint research will identify
baseline development patterns that are expected to be significant in field
studies of population recruitment. In addition, it may provide indicators for
identifying especially healthy or stressed individuals and for predicting
continued survival.