* 9214461
* LMER:  Plum Island Sound Comparative Ecosystems Study       (PISCES): Effects of Land Use and Organic Matter - Nutrient Interactions on Estuarine Trophic Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1992,09/30/1998
* Charles Hopkinson, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1998
* USD 1,780,000.00

Nutrient movement into estuaries and the resulting effects on primary
productivity, the depletion of oxygen, habitat structure, and trophic changes in
coastal waters have dominated estuarine research for decades. Another, and
neglected, linkage between land and coastal waters is the input of dissolved and
particulate organic carbon and organic nitrogen. Organic nitrogen inputs are
frequently greater than inorganic nitrogen inputs and in many cases the input of
organic carbon from land is greater than the in situ production of organic
carbon. Despite the quantitative importance of organic matter inputs from land,
there is little data on its actual use in coastal waters and even less data on
effects of organic matter loading on coastal ecosystem structure and function.
Recent developments in the chemical analysis of dissolved organic C and N and
stable isotope tracer technology now make it possible to refine the input-output
budgets and also address the fate and importance of organic matter entering
coastal waters from land. Two broad questions addressed in this project are: (1)
What is the importance to estuarine ecosystems of organic carbon and organic
nitrogen inputs from watersheds with various land covers and uses? and (2) Does
the interaction of inorganic nutrients with the quantity and quality of organic
carbon and organic nitrogen play an important role in determining the trophic
structure, production, and trophic efficiency in estuaries? This project will
attempt to answer these questions through measurements of the quantity of
dissolved and particulate organic carbon and organic nitrogen entering coastal
waters from land, through experiments to determine the effects of various
nutrient and organic matter inputs and interactions on the flow and recycling of
C and N through pelagic and benthic food webs including higher trophic levels,
and through modeling of food chain transformations and the effects of changes in
land use and land cover. The proposed research integrates estuarine
biogeochemistry with studies of food webs and population biology of higher
trophic levels. Site-specific research will be focused in the Plum Island Sound
System of the cold-water Acadian Biogeographic Province in northern New England.
This projects seeks conclusions and models that are applicable across a wide
range of coastal waters; hypothesis testing of specific questions across
ecosystems is the most effective way to achieve this goal. This project will
combine experimental studies in the Plum Island Sound Ecosystem with comparative
studies at different coastal sites (LMER/LTER) chosen to represent end-members
in an analysis of interactions between organic matter and inorganic nutrient
loading.