* 9214865
* SGER:  Optical Parametric Processes in Ferroelectric Liquid Crystal Filled Capillary Tube Waveguides
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1994
* Kenneth Arnett, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 25,000.00

A new class of second order nonlinear optical (NLO) materials has been
developed: X(2) ferro- electric liquid crystals (FLCs). Conventional FLCs
readily form low- light-loss polar films in a wide range of thicknesses, and
have been demonstrated as optical waveguides. The new X(2) FLCs combine the
processibility of conventional FLCs with thermodynamically stable NLO
susceptibility of useful magnitude. In addition, optical properties such as
birefringence, dielectric permittivity, and NLO properties are highly
customizable by chemical synthesis and mixing. In this Small Grant for
Exploratory Research, the attractive possibility of using centimeter long, um
inner diameter capillary tubes filled with X(2) FLCs for optical parametric
processes will be investigated. Key questions which will be answered in this
work include the following: 1) What is the intrinsic director structure in the
capillary tubes--is the polarization vector field polar, and how can it be
controlled? 2) What are possible phase matching schemes for FLC-cored optical
waveguides? FLC alignment in capillary tubes will be examined experimentally,
and the effect of FLC material parameters such as liquid crystal phase sequence,
helix pitch, tilt angle, and capillary tube preparation on alignment
characteristics will be determined. Using director alignment information, second
harmonic generation processes will be accurately modeled by solving the wave
equation with position dependent relative permittivity and nonlinear
polarizability. Finally, frequency doubling of near-infrared radiation using the
X(2) FLC mixture Displaytech MX-5679 in um inner diameter, centimeter long
capillary tubes will be investigated experimentally.