* 9214628
* Renovation of Science Research Laboratory for Undergraduate Women Science Majors
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Jeanmarie DeChant, Notre Dame College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1997
* USD 287,522.00

The proposed renovation of the science laboratory will provide a modern, safe
and attractive facility for research and research training for undergraduate
women science majors and science faculty. The renovated area (1660 sq. ft.) will
provide more laboratory tables and sinks, a greater number of hoods, ample space
for laboratory instruments, a safety center, updated chemical storage and waste
collection areas, and good overall ventilation - all of which are critical to an
undergraduate research laboratory. Further, renovation of the tissue culture and
microbial culture areas will greatly reduce contamination and stimulate
biochemical research. The renovated laboratory meets the research needs of the
five full-time and three part-time science faculty in Biology and Chemistry.
Projects include inorganic synthesis, electrochemistry, catalysis, enzyme
structure and function, data acquisition protocol and microcomputer applications
for chemical analysis, molecular biology of senescence, control of carotenoid
synthesis in citrus fruit, microencapsulation of chemicals for controlled
release systems, nutritional studies of microbes, and development of pesticide
resistant plants. This project will create an exciting and stimulating
environment where young women, especially minority young women, can develop
their confidence and potential as scientists and encourage them to consider
science and engineering careers.