* 9214863
* Purchase of an LC-Electrospray Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1993
* William Miller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas C. Farrar
* 12/31/1993
* USD 166,600.00

This award will assist the College of Chemistry at the University of California
Berkeley in the purchase of a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer equipped with
electro- spray ionization capabilities and interfaced liquid chromatograph. The
instrument is needed by members of the Department of Chemistry and will also
provide mass spectroscopic services for the Department of Molecular Biology.
Research areas supported by the acquisition of this instrument are: 1) Structure
determination of protein-bound pigments. 2) Analysis of charged high molecular
weight fullerene derivatives. 3) Design and synthesis of new classes of
synthetic biopolymers. 4) Linkage position determination of metal-coordinated
oligosaccharides. 5) Site specific incorporation of unnatural amino acids in
proteins. 6) Analysis of densely charged poly-onium compounds. 7) Preparation of
peptides with defined secondary structure. 8) Structure determination of
transcription factors. 9) Structure determination of RNA molecules. %%% A mass
spectrometer is an instrument used to measure the precise molecular weight of a
molecule. The electrospray device is a way to volatilize the sample so that it
may be introduced into the mass spectrometer. This information is needed so that
the chemical composition and, sometimes, the molecular structure of newly
synthesized compounds may be determined. An instrument of this description is
required in the Berkeley facility because the current user needs cannot be meet
with the existing equipment.