* 9214449
* Acquisition of a 200keV Analytical Field Emission           Transmission Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1994
* Garth Freeman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 704,655.00

High resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is a technique critical
to the characterization of nearly all solid state materials. The 200 kev Hitachi
HF-2000 field emission, analytical transmission electron microcope to be
installed at the Microelectronics Research Center at Georgia Institute of
Technology is a cutting edge instrument that combines state-of-the-art high-
resolution capabilities with excellent analytical capabilities.
Multidisciplinary materials research has emerged as a high-priority area of
emphasis of both research and education at Georgia Institute of Technology over
the past decade. Lack of such an instrument however has been a major limiting
factor in the breadth and depth of the current and planned materials research
program. Provision of this modern, research-grade TEM will facilitate the
conduct of major research studies on a broad range of materials systems and
structures. It will be made available throughout the Institute and utilized at
four different levels: (a) by long-term professional microscopists responsible
for operation, training, and collaborative research with faculty PI's; (b) by
long-term student microscopists requiring TEM as a central part of their
research; (c) by short-term student users for educational as well as data
acquisition purposes; and (d) as a service to provide essential research data to
PI's and students.