* 9214441
* Renovation of Facilities for Undergraduate Research -       Research Training in Biology, Chemistry, and Geoscience
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1993,11/30/1995
* Sheila Bennett, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 11/30/1995
* USD 290,761.00

9214441 Bennett This award will provide funding for the renovation of areas in
existing facilities for undergraduate research and research training in biology,
chemistry and geoscience at Hobart and William Smith Colleges. The existing
structures, Lansing and Eaton Halls, were built in 1952 and 1961 as conventional
facilities for undergraduate science instruction and are currently inadequate
for the mission of the institution that all students pursuing scientific
disciplines be involved in research training, independently and in collaboration
with research faculty. Laboratories are deficient in size, configuration,
technical specifications, safety provisions and are not accessible to handicap
students and faculty. Due to overcrowded conditions in the laboratories, the
number of students that can be accommodated is limited. Research space competes
with instrumentation and equipment storage, further eroding the functionality of
the existing space. In addition to refurbishing laboratory space, renovations
will include installing new fume hoods, upgrading the electrical and plumbing
systems and removing all hazardous materials that make for an unsafe
environment. The modernization and enhancement of the Colleges' facilities for
research and research training in the sciences will therefore contribute
directly to the pipeline of college graduates entering the nation's base of
scientific personnel, expanding access in the process to women and individuals
of diverse ethnic background. ***