* 9214172
* Replacement of Multidisciplinary Science and Engineering    Laboratories with a Center for Interdisciplinary Research
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Sekazi Mtingwa, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1997
* USD 2,000,000.00

Mtingwa North Carolina A&amp;T State University has a long and distinguished
record in graduating talented minority students in science and engineering, both
at the baccalaureate and masters levels. In its quest to achieve academic
excellence in science and engineering, the institution recently established a
doctoral program in the fields of electrical and mechanical engineering. This
program will significantly enhance the university's progress in its relation to
scientific research excellence and the productivity of scholars trained in
science and engineering. To help support the doctoral programs and expand its
research programs, the university will create the Interdisciplinary Research
Center (IRC), a single facility that will allow for the merger of several
multidisciplinary laboratories in six major thrust areas: Materials,
Manufacturing, Systems Engineering, Computing Systems, Agriculture Sciences and
Social Sciences. The Center will support interdisciplinary research activities
by faculty and students from the Schools of Engineering and Technology and the
College of Arts and Science. This award will provide funding for the renovation
of research and research training space for the IRC. Space will be reconfigured
to house well-defined interdisciplinary research that is currently ongoing in
cramped conditions. Supporting utilities will be routed vertically through
common chases and distributed horizontally to the various laboratories, and new
fixed equipment will be installed. The improved facility will expand the
capabilities of researchers and students engaged in research activities,
stimulating technological innovations and training in nationally strategic
academic disciplines for the 21st century. Since North Carolina A&amp;T State
University is an Historically Black College and University, the renovated
facility will have a substantial impact on increasing the number of
underrepresented minorities and women entering the pipeline leading to advanced
degrees in engineering and science.