* 9214353
* Renovation of Research Space for the Department of          Microbiology and Immunology
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/1992,05/31/1995
* Neal Rote, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 05/31/1995
* USD 309,500.00

The proposal requests funds for renovation of research space for the Department
of Microbiology and Immunology (M&I). The proposed renovation will solve
numerous problems. Floors, lighting and finishes will be replaced and numerous
code violations eliminated. Aisle space will be redesigned to facilitate
multiple users and interactions or access by the handicapped. Facilities for
tissue culture and monoclonal antibody production will be improved for training
graduate students. The renovated facility will enhance the recruitment of
additional faculty and graduate students, and the present externally funded
research projects of M&I. It will also enhance M&I's appropriate participation
in NSF funded outreach programs at the university, including programs to
motivate women and minority students toward a career in science and to provide
hands-on training for elementary school teachers in the biological sciences. The
renovation stresses open laboratories that maximize encounters between groups of
researchers. This will facilitate mentorism between established, funded faculty
and incoming new investigators, to increase interactions among a small number of
faculty to increase scientific cooperation and the development of new and
exciting areas of research, and to accommodate the use of communal laboratory
equipment.