* 9215110
* Combined Experimental/Theoretical Study of Mold/Casting     Interface Behavior During Directional Solidification
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1997
* M. Ozisik, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 02/28/1997
* USD 150,023.00

The project will investigate experimentally and theoretically the effects of
mold surface morphology, physical and thermal properties of casting and mold,
wettability of molten aluminum over the mold surface, and temperature and
pressure at the mold casting interface on the heat transfer rate, interface
conductance, and physical and chemical structure of the casting surface. The
surface quality of castings is closely related to the cooling rate during
solidification, but no quantitative results are readily available on how surface
structure of the casting is affected by mold surface morphology and heat
transfer rate across the metal- mold interface. Thus, this interdisciplinary
project encompasses the areas of heat transfer, tribology, metallurgy, and
stress analysis and combines the theoretical predictions with experimental
verifications. Semi-empirical relations will be developed for the effects of the
various factors stated above on interface conductance and heat transfer rate
across the casting mold interface. Since the ultimate goal of this research with
heat transfer/mechanics and mold surface design, is to positively influence the
surface quality of the casting ingot, the investigators will evaluate the
metallurgical structure of the cast ingots and attempt to correlate it to the
heat transfer model as well as to mold surface properties. The success of the
project may allow the production of higher quality, lower cost casting.