* 9215246
* Deformation Processing:  Crystallographic Texture Evolution and Shear Band Formation
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Lallit Anand, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 06/30/1997
* USD 300,000.00

Workability is often defined as the degree of deformation that can be achieved
in a particular deformation processing operation without failure. Failure may be
the basic material related phenomena of cracking or fracture, but it could also
be any other undesirable condition, for example lack of die fill or poor surface
finish. The major factors which influence the workability of a material are: (1)
the external process variables of stress, temperature, strain, strain rate,
frictional and heat transfer boundary conditions, and their evolution; and (2)
the internal microstructural variables, for example porosity, crystallographic
texture, deformation localization and their evolution culminating in ductile
failure. While considerable attention has been paid to developing a capability
for predicting defects associated with the growth of porosity in deformation
processing operations, much remains to be done with regard to incorporating the
evolution of other important microstructural features in macroscopic
mathematical models. Specifically there is need for incorporating the effects
due to crystallographic texture and deformation localization and failure. This
project is to develop accurate anisotropic thermo- elastic-viscoplastic
constitutive equations and computational procedures for modeling and simulation
of inelastic deformations due to both crystallographic slip and twinning in
face-centered cubic and hexagonal-closed packed alloys. The computational
capability will be useful in simulating the development of anisotropy due to the
evolution of crystallographic texture, and the development of material
processing defects associated with localized shear bands at large deformations
at both low and high homologous temperatures. The mathematical models should be
useful in the design and analysis of a variety of cold and hot deformation
processing operations. Such models will allow the faster and more accurate
design of tools and procedures for forming metal parts.