* 9215075
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of the Representation   Theory of Quantum Affine Lie Algebras to Solvable Lattice   Models
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1994
* Kailash Misra, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 06/30/1994
* USD 23,005.00

During the last two decades representation theory of affine Lie algebras has
led to many interesting and important applications in many areas of mathematics
and physics. One such connection has been established with certain two
dimensional solvable lattice models in statistical mechanics. The interaction
between quantum affine Lie algebras and solvable lattice models has recently led
to many new discoveries both in representation theory of affine and quantum
affine Lie algebras as well as solvable lattice models and integrable systems.
Professor Miwa is a pioneer in this field and possesses a unique overview. He
can give a well organized presentation of the major ideas and recent research
results, and prescribe future directions for research in this field, during the
course of the ten lectures. This project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional
Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Application of the
Representation Theory of Quantum Affine Lie Algebras to Solvable Lattice Models,
to be held June 1 - 5, 1993, on the main campus of North Carolina State
University in Raleigh. Professor Tetsuji Miwa will be the principal lecturer/ To
stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research, the National Science
Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conferences
in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference features a distinguished
lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic on important current research in
one sharply focused area of the mathematical sciences. The lecturer subsequently
prepares an expository monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally
published by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical Association and the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics. Certain features differentiate these
conferences from typical research conferences. These are: (1) Focus on a single
important and timely area of research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued
effect and local stimulation through regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for
quality, breadth, and timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider
audience.