* 9215114
* U.S.-Sweden Seminar:  Network Infrastructure and Regional   Regional Development Planning, Stockholm, Sweden,           July 1-3, 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Tschangho Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1995
* USD 20,650.00

This award supports U.S. participants' travel to a U.S.-Sweden seminar on urban
and regional infrastructure and development planning to take place in Stockholm,
Sweden, July 1-3, 1993. The principal objective is to bring together twenty-four
prominent experts from the USA and Sweden who are currently conducting leading-
edge research into the role of infrastructure networks (transportation and
communication) in urban and regional development. The participants will develop
a research agenda and exchange information on research methods, results and
policy conclusions on how infrastructure networks grow and change and how
interacting networks influence urban and regional development patterns in the
long-term. The coordinators are Tschangho J. Kim at the University of Illinois
and D. F. Batten and Lars Lundqvist of the Royal Institute of Technology in
Stockholm. This is a very timely seminar. The problem of infrastructure and its
relation to economic and social planning is a high priority for industrialized
countries as cities continue to age and deteriorate. The Swedes have long been
known as innovative thinkers on transportation and communication networks in the
urban and regional context. The U.S. participants bring to the collaboration
their expertise on transportation modeling, network analysis, economic in-put,
out-put analysis and urban economics.