* 9215223
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Studies in            Non-Perturbative QCD and Hadron Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Peter Tandy, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 07/31/1995
* USD 24,084.00

The principal U.S. participants in this project are Prof. Peter Tandy of Kent
State University and Dr. Craig Roberts of Argonne National Laboratory. Also
associated with the project are Dr. Michael Frank from Hampton University and
Dr. David Kahana, an NSF-supported post-doctoral associate at Kent State
University. The primary Australian participants are Prof. Bruce McKellar of the
University of Melbourne and Dr. Reginald Cahill of the Flinders University of
South Australia. This award will provide travel support over a two year period
for the American participants to visit the laboratories of the Australian
colleagues. The cooperative research to be undertaken is in the area of non-
perturbative studies in Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) and QCD modelling. The
experimental work will probe issues in nuclear dynamics that have no clear
separation between baryon- meson degrees of freedom and quark-gluon degrees of
freedom. Important tools for addressing such issues are effective QCD models of
hadron dynamics. The topics to be investigated include the determination of the
structure of the quark propagator through study of the QCD Schwinger-Dyson
equations, the construction of covariant, confining models of QCD based on these
studies, the quark structure and interactions of baryons and mesons in such
models and the electroweak couplings and form factors of these quark and quark-
antiquark composites. The exchange visits by Drs. McKellar and Cahill are being
supported through the Australian Department of Industry, Technology and Commerce
(DITAC).