* 9215258
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research: Testing and Estimation ofModels with Structural Change
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Donald Andrews, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 10/31/1996
* USD 11,230.00

This award supports Professor Donald Andrews of Yale University to collaborate
in economics research with Professor Werner Ploberger of the Institute of
Econometrics and Operations Research of the Technical University of Vienna,
Austria. These investigators began joint studies in the econometrics of
structural change during a 1991 visit to Yale University by Dr. Ploberger. They
produced two papers establishing new optimal tests for situations with an
unknown changepoint and for testing problems when a nuisance parameter appears
only under the alternative. Now that Dr. Ploberger has returned to Vienna, they
propose to continue their collaborative research focusing on several related
topics. These include: 1) further analysis of the properties of the optimal
tests; 2) treatment of tests of multiple structural changes; 3) estimation of
breakpoints; and 4) inadmissibility of likelihood ratio tests in this context.
This joint effort links one of the leading young econometricians of the U.S.
with a highly regarded European colleague to pursue state of the art research in
theoretical and applied economics. This collaborative research is likely to
advance both econometric theory and practice. Among the methods which will be
developed are some especially useful for applied economics research when the
basic relationships being analyzed change dramatically. One such area is the
important research being done on the economic implications of global climate
change.