* 9215111
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems for Two Classes of          Evolutionary Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Hans Engler, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 32,458.00

This project seeks to derive properties of solutions of two classes of partial
differential equations that arise in models for the time-dependent behavior of
viscoelastic model materials. The first part deals with linear
integrodifferential equations that describe materials with long-term memory and
their solutions. A goal is to give a detailed description of the smoothness of
solutions depending on the data. The methods to be employed involve various
transformation and transfer techniques that allow use of known properties of
simpler, related problems. As a result, a better understanding of theoretical
models and improved insight into the behavior of computational methods will is
expected. Work will also be done investigating a class of nonlinear partial
differential equations describing model materials with internal friction. The
goal is to construct generalized solutions that obey the basic physical
principle that matter cannot penetrate itself and to analyze their structure.
Techniques that have been successful for other classes of nonlinear partial
differential equations, such as a priori estimates, are to be employed. As a
result, improved understanding of certain classes of models in continuum
mechanics and more generally of solutions of partial differential equations that
are to describe one-to-one mappings should result.