* 9215993
* U.S.-Singapore Cooperative Research on Automatic Fixturing
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Lucy King, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 02/28/1997
* USD 19,980.00

9215993 King This award provides funds to permit Dr. Lucy Siu-Bik King,
Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, GMI Engineering
and Management Institute, and Dr. Kingman E. Yee, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Lawrence Technological University, to pursue with Dr. Beng Siong
Lim, GINTIC Institute of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, Nanyang
Technological Institute, Singapore, for a period of 24 months, a program of
research on automatic fixturing. Their research will be directed toward two
major goals, namely, (1) the theoretical formulation of an optimization model
for finding the positions of fixturing elements for a given workpart geometry
and (2) comparing the fixturing element with fixture components using the MOFDEX
expert support system, the Block Jig System, and Modular Fixturing System. In
the PI's previous research, an optimization model has been developed to generate
a fixturing configuration design for prismatic objects. This research will be
extended to non- prismatic workparts such as the sphere, cylinder, tetrahedron
and parallelpiped taking into account assembly operations and fixturing element
types. Dr. Lim has developed expert systems for the practical portion of the
second goal. Manual methods of fixturing, still prevalent in the manufacturing
environment, may result in delays of three to six weeks in an automotive plant.
Concurrent engineering and flexible manufacturing requires faster turn around
time for fixturing design. Automatic fixturing configuration offers a partial
solution to such a demand. The expert support system generated from this
collaboration will be especially useful for computer- aided fixturing in
industries that use CAD (Computer Assisted Design) systems. The collaborators
have complementary expertise which will be mutually beneficial in this research.
This project is relevant to the objectives of the Division of International
Programs which seeks to increase the level of coopera tion between U.S.
scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through
the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and
through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. This project adds an
international cooperative dimension to the Dr. King's research under NSF Grants
No. DDM-9196231 and DDM-9215362. ***