* 9215167
* Workshop on Imaging the Cell during Development and         Reproduction: Coquimbo, Chile; January 11-30, 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1993
* Joseph Sanger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 12/31/1993
* USD 20,225.00

This Americas Program award will support a laboratory-workshop course to
familiarize young scientists with modern approaches for exploring structural
events at the cell and molecular level. Using advanced imaging technologies on
marine and mammalian gametes and embryos, dynamic events in the cell cycle and
during development will be observed. The application of imaging equipment in the
broad field of cell and developmental biology and the biological insights
derived from such technology will continue to lead to important discoveries.
This workshop, organized by Dr. Gerald Schatten of the University of Wisconsin,
Madison and Dr. Claudio Barros, of the Catholic University, Chile, will take
place in the Marine Laboratory of the Catholic University of the North,
Coquimbo, Chile. The participants, young scientists on a postdoctoral level,
will come from countries in South and Central America and from other countries.
The program should result in a very successful exchange of
scientific/technological information which could lead to long term interactions
between the participants. The areas of development and reproduction are of
general concern to scientists around the globe and sharing knowledge and
technique in this area is essential. The global scientific community will most
certainly benefit from this interaction.