* 9215832
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Study on the Control  of Linear and Non-Linear Chemical Process
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Ahmet Palazoglu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 01/31/1996
* USD 17,490.00

This project is a collaborative effort between research groups headed by
Professor Ahmet N. Palazolgu at the University of California, Davis and
Professor Jose A. Romagnoli at the University of Sydney. This award will provide
support for the U.S. investigator to travel to Australia once each year for the
next two years to spend a month working in the facilities at the University of
Sydney which includes a unique pilot-plant distillation column with computer
interface. The collaborative research is focused on the control of linear and
nonlinear chemical processes with equal emphasis on both theoretical
developments and experimental verification results. Development of control
strategies for such processes ultimately benefits processing industries in both
countries by assisting them to operate process units with greater confidence
under controlled situations. Robust control and nonlinear control research are
recognized as being among priority research in both countries. This study will
utilize the complementary skills of the investigators in theoretical analysis
and experimental design and the collaborative effort has the potential to
provide new insights and solutions. The exchange visits by Dr. Romagnoli are
supported through the Australian Department of Industry, Technology and Commerce
(DITAC).