* 9215199
* Algorithms for Graphs, Matroids and Crossing Set Families
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Harold Gabow, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Dana May Latch
* 03/31/1995
* USD 154,336.00

This project is on the design of efficient algorithms for combinatorial
problems on graphs. A major focus is on crossing families. Such families are
exemplified by the minimum cuts of a graph; problems involving minimum cuts
include issues of edge connectivity, graph augmentation and orientation,
feedback sets on planar graphs and others. The first part of the project is to
develop a compact representation for crossing families. Many problems on
crossing families can be solved using the framework of submodular network flow.
Currently algorithms for submodular flow run in high-degree polynomial time. An
important goal of the project is to make such algorithms more efficient. One of
the main tools to achieve the goal will be the new representation - it allows
the efficient computation of information commonly needed for submodular-flow
type algorithms. Crossing families also arise in the study of graph rigidity and
scene analysis. The project will develop efficient algorithms for applications
in these areas and others. Related issues in the study of graph connectivity;
and optimization on matroids will also be investigated. The goals of this
project help increase knowledge about succinct representation of information and
efficient computation on discrete structures.