* 9215654
* Development of Computer Vision Research, Visit by a U.S.    Scientist to Pakistani Universities and Research Centers
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1994
* USD 7,650.00

Description: This project supports a visit by Dr. M. Shah of the University of
Central Florida (UCF) to Pakistan to organize a seminar and initiate cooperative
research in Computer Vision (CV). His program will include a seminar and
experimentation at the Mehran University of Engineering and Technology (MUET) in
Jamshoro, and visits to two other major engineering colleges in Karachi. The
scope of the seminar covers imaging geometry, segmentation, two dimensional
shape representation, dynamic scene analysis, shape from X, matching, and
texture. The seminar will include programing work by the participating students.
The visit is intended to stimulate research in this relatively new area in
Pakistan and to identify areas of mutual scientific interest. Scope: Computer
Vision is a dynamic and growing branch of Computer Science. It has many
applications such as in industrial automation and robotics, traffic control,
object tracking, measurement of cloud and wind motion, and in the biomedical
field. The UCF has a major department of computer science which is designated by
the state of Florida as a Center of Excellence. Dr. Shah is the leader of the CV
group in that department. His collaborator in Pakistan is Dr. A.Q.K. Rajput,
chairman of the Department of Electronic Engineering and Computer Systems at
MUET. The interaction with faculty and students at the seminar and the other
visits are likely to open a vista for increasing research in this area in
Pakistan, to the benefit of both countries.