* 9215470
* STRATMAN:  Development of a Science Base for Drills and     Drill Grinding Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1997
* Jun Ni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jay Lee
* 08/31/1997
* USD 599,296.00

This research effort is to establish a scientific understanding and basis for
the drilling operation. While most metal removal operations have enjoyed
substantial increases in speed and efficiency over the last few decades,
drilling has been and exception. Yet, it continues to be a major operation in
most manufacturing enterprises and as result constitutes a major impediment to
increases in manufacturing productivity. An attempt improving efficiency, could
result in the much needed breakthrough. In this effort a Computer Integrated
Design, Manufacturing and Evaluation (CIDME) platform will be developed, which
will consist of four modules. These will be: (1) a drill point modelling module,
(2) a drill grinding module, (3) a drill performance evaluation module, and (4)
a computer integration module. This will enable this effort to synthesize all
available techniques, bridge the missing links between the different modules and
to develop a scientific framework for drill point design, grinding and
performance evaluation. This significance of this research effort is clearly
illustrated by the degree of industrial financial support already committed to
this program. It could have a major impact on improving the efficiency of the
metal working industries in the United States.