* 9215508
* Structure and Momentum Fluxes of Warm Pool Oceanic MesoscaleConvective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1997
* Gary Barnes, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar-Rao Mopidevi
* 01/31/1997
* USD 212,529.00

This research focuses on the analysis and interpretation of airborne Doppler
radar and in-situ (i.e., flight level) data from warm pool mesoscale convective
systems (MCS) and on the documentation of the three-dimensional airflow within
these systems. Past observational field programs (e.g. GATE, PRE-STORM) have
clearly shown that MCSs are a fundamental phenomenon in the atmosphere.
Particular emphasis will be given to the diagnosis of vertical motions:
convective-scale in the active cumulus regions of the MCS and mesoscale in the
stratiform rain regions. The accurate quantification of vertical motions is
important for the computation of fluxes of momentum and vertical profiles of
heating. The results from analysis of both Dopple and in-situ data will be
tested, supplemented and extended by using a series of numerical simulations
from several numerical models including both the Clark and the Klemp-Wilhelmson.
Initialization for these models will be provided by a combination of data from
aircraft and sounding observations. This approach, combining data analysis and
numerical modeling, should lead to a better understanding of MCS structure,
airflow, fluxes, and life-cycle and of the interactions between the MCS and the
environment. This proposal is also concerned with proper planning and execution
of the aircraft flights, as well as data validation and data management
activities following the completion of the field phase of TOGA/COARE. Experience
in other field projects (e.g., PRE-STORM hurricanes, TAMEX, and EMEX) has shown
the value of real- time decision making in the selection of proper flight tracks
to fully utilize the capabilites of the airborne Doppler radar. Therefore, the
scientists performing this research will also participate in the field program
as airborne Chief Scientists and Doppler radar operators. All aircraft
scientists are working together to meet their individual research objectives
through a coordinated research flight plan. This research is important because
it serves as one of the principal TOGA/COARE studies of the processes
responsible for convection in the western Pacific warm pool and its interaction
on larger scales is an especially climate sensitive region of the world, the
western Pacific Ocean, the field site of TOGA/COARE.