* 9215532
* Travel to attend the U.S.-Italy Workshop on "Systems, Modelsand Feedback:  With Applications to Underwater Robots"
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1993
* Tzyh-Jong Tarn, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Norman Caplan
* 05/31/1993
* USD 4,300.00

The proposed workshop will focus directly on research topics of systems, models
and feedback with applications to underwater robots. Special emphasis will be
placed on the use of recent advances in nonlinear and intelligent control theory
in analysis, synthesis, operation and control of underwater robots. The use of
nonlinear and intelligent control theory in flight control, satellite control,
and robot control in both the United States and Italy was very successful in the
last decade; this workshop will certainly generate important results in the
modeling, control and operation of underwater robots. Because underwater robots
and its control in both the United States and Italy is continuing to grow in
importance. This workshop will focus on the most timely and current subject of
research. The participants from both countries consist of leading researchers
and they have already developed fruitful interactions through previous contacts.
Further collaboration would lead to deeper understanding of the important
problems in the area. So this workshop should benefit both countries and lead to
building valuable international connections and achieving international cross-
fertilization of ideas. It certainly will lead to the advancement of modeling,
control, and operation of underwater robots. In fact, we have received requests
for participation in the workshop by well-known researchers from Europe and
Japan.