* 9215350
* Time Series Sediment Trapping in the Sargasso Sea and A     Search for an Efficient Assessment of the Biological Pump
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Werner Deuser, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 05/31/1995
* USD 414,885.00

This project represents the balance of support required for studies related to
time-series sediment trapping in the Sargasso Sea and for assuring continuation
of the work beyond the present P.I.'s full-time involvement. The proposed work
has two primary objectives: (1) A major portion of the effort will be spent on
identifying relationships between surface-ocean variables and deep- ocean carbon
flux. The marine biota is thought by many investigators to play an important
part in the removal of carbon from the atmosphere and upper ocean to the deep
ocean through the production of organic and carbonate particles which sink out
of the mixed layer. There is, however, a considerable range in estimates of the
effectiveness of this mechanism, the "biological pump", relative to the amounts
of carbon dioxide injected into the atmosphere by human activities. An
assessment of the magnitude, variability and secular trend of the pump is thus
desirable. Direct measurement of deep-ocean carbon flux is far too expensive and
labor-intensive to be done on a large scale over extended periods. However,
there is a distinct possibility that much more easily monitored surface-ocean
properties may serve as proxies for deep carbon flux. To test this hypothesis,
this study will investigate whether or not carbon flux varies in a consistent
relationship to variations in one or a combination of several of those surface
properties. Identification of suitable proxies may permit long-term monitoring
of the deep carbon flux on large scales. Comparative studies of existing time
series of remote- sensing, meteorologic, and hydrographic data on one hand and
of deep carbon-flux data on the other are a promising approach. The emphasis in
such studies will be on other-than-annual periods because the annual cycle,
common to all likely proxy candidates, is of little value in revealing causative
connections. Comparisons will be made between continuous deep carbon-flux
measurements in the Sargasso Sea and a superior variety of hydrographic and
meteorologic data sets, as well as satellite data, for the area. While the
Sargasso Sea is representative of only one of several major oceanographic
domains which are likely to have different characteristic proxies and proxy-
carbon flux relationships, the ability to assess carbon flux by means of proxies
even in part of the ocean can free resources for more intensive in-situ studies
in other areas. (2) Present modeling efforts at determining means and time
variances of the source areas and paths of particles collected by sediment traps
at different depths, i.e. using real and model current vectors in the sampling
area to delineate the shapes of the statistical funnels connecting the traps to
the sea surface, will be completed.