* 9215486
* Spin-Orbit and Magnetic Scattering and Non-Equilibrium      Properties by Weak Localization
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Gerd Bergmann, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 12/31/1995
* USD 400,000.00

Weak localization of electrons in thin metal films is used to observe electron
scattering from impurity atoms arising from spin- orbit and magnetic electron-
impurity atom interactions. Transport data measured as a function of an applied
magnetic field can be interpreted to yield information about the electronic
structure of the impurity atoms. Earlier research on s and p impurities is being
expended and extended to include d impurities. An additional subproject will
investigate thin films under the influence of a high current density. This
corresponds to a steady non-equilibrium state with the electron temperature
considerably above the phonon temperature. Such measurements yield information
about the electron-phonon system, the electron-phonon interaction and the
Kapitza resistance between film and the substrate. %%% Because of quantum
effects, electrons in metals display both particle and wave properties. At low
temperatures, the electron waves are coherent over extended distances and
influence the properties of the metal. In particular, the transport properties
such as the resistance are modified because the electron waves can interfere
with each other. An external magnetic field alters the phase of the electron
waves and modifies the interference. As a consequence the resistance depends on
the magnetic field. (For historical reasons, this phenomena is called weak
localization). A careful analysis of the magneto-resistance reveals detailed
information about the fate of the electrons as a function of time. For example,
we can determine the rotation of the electron spin as a function of time on the
very short time scale of pico-seconds (one millionth of a millionth of a
second). Such a rotation occurs when the electron encounters impurities and is
called spin-orbit scattering. This scattering is being studied for various
impurity atoms (copper, zinc, gold, tin, etc.) in host magnesium metal. The
research provides important information about the magnetic and electronic
properties of metals and alloys and will aid in the development of new materials
with useful properties, particularly at low temperatures.