* 9215031
* Reaction, Transport, and Structure Evolution Phenomena in   the Densification of Fibrous Substrates
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1992,10/31/1996
* Stratis Sotirchos, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/1996
* USD 308,996.00

Low-density materials exhibiting high strength and an ability to hold up under
highly strenuous conditions of stress, temperature, pressure, etc. are needed in
many high- temperature aerospace and energy applications. Fiber- reinforced
ceramic matrix composites are materials that satisfy the requirements of low
density and acceptable toughness because fiber reinforcement usually leads to
strengthening of the homogeneous isotropic material that forms the matrix of the
composite. Chemical vapor infiltration (CVI) is a method that can be used to
fabricate ceramic matrix composites without damaging the preform of fibers or
whiskers used for reinforcement. During this process the gaseous reactants, or
the products of their decomposition in the gas phase that surrounds the fibrous
preform, are transported through the pores and form a ceramic matrix throughout
the preform by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). CVI leads to products of very
good mechanical properties, can produce objects of complex shape and large size,
and can be used for many ceramic-ceramic composites including oxides and
nonoxides. In addition to composite fabrications, CVI can be used to partially
densify membranes made from ceramic or other materials and in this way produce
selectively permeable membranes for special applications (such as separations).
Theoretical and experimental work is planned to study the fundamentals of the
interaction of transport processes (heat and mass), reaction, and structure
evolution during densification of porous preforms by CVI. The deposition of
silicon carbide from methyltrichlorosilane will be used as the model system in
these studies. The experimental work will include deposition experiments using
porous and nonporous substrates, film and pore structure characterization, and
mass transport coefficient measurements. The deposition experiments will be
carried out in a hot-wall reactor, operating in a gravimetric arrangement, while
structure characterization will be carried out using microscopy, Raman, XRD,
electron microprobe, gas adsorption and mercury porosimetry. Theoretical work
will involve the development of models that summarize the relative importance of
the various factors that occur during CVI. In addition to contributing to the
elucidation of the fundamentals of CVI, this project will also generate
information for any application involving transport in media consisting of
fibrous structures.***//