* 9215070
* Materials Development and Processing for Fabrication of a   Microdynamical Optical Switch (REU SUPPLEMENT)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Denice Denton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 01/31/1996
* USD 305,610.00

The objective of this work is to develop the materials and processing
capabilities required to fabricate an optical micro-switch for fiber optic
networks. The switch consists of a polymer channel waveguide fabricated on a
cantilevered micromechanical beam. This beam can be coupled to one of the two
stationary polymer guides using an electrostatic comb drive. All three polymer
guides are coupled to fiber pigtails via V-groove alignment. The use of polymer
waveguides instead of fibers drastically reduces the reduces the required motion
for alignment (and therefore the required switching power). Micromechanics, in
addition to producing the switching action, makes fiber alignment and packaging
relatively straightforward. Fabrication of such a device will require the
marriage of high aspect ratio x-ray lithography fabrication and polymer
processing. The micromechanical switch is fabricated in metal because of its
superior mechanical properities. The optical waveguides are fabricated using
polymers whose optical properties can be tailored for a variety of applications.
The materials challenges to be addressed include the tailoring of the mechanical
properties of electroplated metal films, the control of the optical properties
of polymers, and the understanding of the long term reliability of the materials
used. This device represents a synthesis of polymer, x-ray lithographic, and
micromechanical processing. The materials and processes developed for this work
will be useful for a wide array of applications in solid state circuits, sensors
and actuators, and photonics.