* 9215329
* A Multidisciplinary Synthesis of the Chukchi Sea            Ecosystem:  Biological Processes
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1995
* John Walsh, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Myers
* 12/31/1995
* USD 159,896.00

This collaborative effort will make use of an extensive and unique data set
collected over several years from the Chukchi Sea. Investigators from three
institutions will study the interactions of physical, chemical, and biological
processes of the Chukchi Sea ecosystem to define its present and perhaps future
trophic status in a series of data and simulation analyses. The biological
processes associated with chemical and physical processes in the Chukchi Sea
will be assessed using data from a series of 13 current meter moorings in
1990-1991 and seven bilateral U.S.-U.S.S.R. cruises during 1988-1991. The source
water concentrations of nutrients flowing through Bering Strait into the Arctic
will be determined on an annual basis for the years 1988-1991 and will be
combined with buoyancy flux estimates to calculate nutrient flux estimates. Work
will be undertaken to analyze various scenarios of ice cover, primary
production, DOC releases, and CO2 exchange with the atmosphere, using a
biochemical model of high vertical reso- lution (1 m) coupled to a barotropic
circulation model of coarse horizontal resolution (10km). In addition, dominant
phytoplankton groups will be identified and related to their respective nutrient
habitats. The work supports the goals and research priorities of the Arctic
System Science (ARCSS) program of the Global Geosciences Initiative.