* 9215142
* Structure and Dynamics of Ferredoxins by NMR and X-ray
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1996
* John Markley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

Two-iron ((2Fe-2S)) ferredoxins comprise an important class of biological
molecules whose function is incompletely understood at the molecular level. The
investigators propose to study three classes of (2Fe-2S) ferredoxins: those
found in mitochondria of steroid metabolizing tissue in vertebrates, those
involved in photosynthesis, and those involved in nitrogen fixation. Examples of
wild-type ferrodoxins from each of the three categories have been cloned and
currently are overproduced in the PI's laboratory. The investigators previously
determined x-ray structures from examples of two of the ferredoxin classes and
an NMR structure from one. NMR and x-ray studies of members of the other classes
of (2Fe-2S) ferredoxin are underway. The experiments are designed (1) to develop
an understanding of factors that determine the reduction potential and electron
delocalization in (2Fe-2S) ferredoxins, (2) to elucidate mechanisms of electron
transfer to and from these ferredoxins, and (3) to investigate the requirements
and energetics of (2Fe-2S) cluster formation. Roles of individual residues will
be investigated by site-directed mutagenesis. Stable isotope labels inserted at
specific locations will be used to monitor the electronic properties of atoms in
the active site. X-ray structures will be determined for interesting mutant
proteins that can by crystallized and analyzed either by multiple isomorphous
replacement or by molecular replacement methods. %%% One of the basic motifs
found in proteins that function as electron carriers is an iron atom coordinated
by four sulfur atoms (an iron- sulfur cluster). Iron-sulfur clusters are found
in all forms of life from bacteria to man. Iron-sulfur clusters can contain one,
two, three, four, or more iron atoms, and their affinity for electrons varies
over several orders of magnitude. They are involved in photosynthesis,
respiration, nitrogen fixation, and many other important metabolic processes.
This research project is designed to answer the following fundamental questions
about proteins that contain iron-sulfur clusters: (1) How does the sequence of
the protein specify the structure of the iron-sulfur cluster, the number of iron
atoms and the geometry? (2) How does the sequence of the protein determine the
affinity of the cluster for electrons and thus tune its reactivity for a
particular process? (3) What residues in the protein are responsible for the
specificity of electron transfer, and how do they guide that transfer? This
knowledge will enable one to design electron transfer proteins with desired
properties.