* 9215295
* Collaborative Research on High Angular Momentum Phenomena   in Nuclei, Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Umesh Garg, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1997
* USD 23,720.00

Description: This proposal is for the support of travel and living expenses
associated with a collaborative research project between the University of Notre
Dame (ND) and the Panjab University, Chandigarh, India (PU). The major thrust of
the work is to study high-angular momentum phenomena in nuclear physics, in
particular studies of exotic shapes and lifetime measurements using the recoil
distance technique. Experiments will be carried out at the Nuclear Science
Center (NSC), New Delhi, at the University of Notre Dame Nuclear Structure
Laboratory, and at the Argonne National laboratory ATLAS facility. For
experiments in which the PU group takes the lead, most of the data analysis will
be performed there, the measurements will be made there to determine feasibility
and optimal conditions. The final experiment would then be performed using the
full power of the Argonne-Notre Dame facility if warranted by experimental data
from NSC. This investigation offers an excellent opportunity to make optimum use
of facilities available both in India and in the U.S. since much of the work
could be done at the NSC in India. Scope: The proposed research involving the
study of exotic shapes of nuclei represents one of the most active fields in
structure physics at the present time. The division of experiments between the
two facilities is very useful considering that the Argonne-Notre Dame Facility
is in high demand and the accelerator over-subscribed. Postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students at both institutions will be included in this research. ***