* 9215099
* U.S.- Austria Cooperative Research on Asymptotic Bayesian   Analysis and Order Selection
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Peter Phillips, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 11/30/1996
* USD 13,330.00

This award supports Professor Peter Phillips of the Cowles Foundation for
Research in Economics, Yale University, to collaborate with Professor Werner
Ploberger of the Institute of Econometrics and Operations Research of the
Technical University of Vienna in Austria. They plan to work jointly on several
lines of research in econometrics. First, they will carry out asymptotic
analysis of Bayesian methods for possibly non-stationary time series. Also, they
will develop generalized Bayes model selection criteria with specific reference
to problems of order selection in parametric methods. In addition, they intend
to write computer software to implement the methods they develop and to apply
them to macroeconomic data sets for the USA, Austria, and several other
countries. Scientific interest in Bayesian methods has grown sharply over recent
years and has affected many different fields of statistics and econometrics.
Many econometricians find the Bayesian approach particularly well-suited to
problems of time series analysis and inference in econometrics, two areas being
explored in the collaboration of Drs. Phillips and Ploberger. Some of their
research will contribute to improved modelling of economic time series. The
other project they are engaged has an important application in the development
of hypothesis tests under data-based model selection principles. Some hypotheses
of considerable interest in economics, like that of the presence of an
autoregressive unit root, remain invariant across different models. These
investigators plan to exploit this invariance so that their "Bayes model"
criteria can be used to select a system to conduct an explicit test of the unit
root hypothesis.