* 9215230
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on Functional Role of   CNS Microvasculature in Lower Vertebrates
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Gregory Snyder, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 06/30/1995
* USD 24,950.00

This award provides funding to Gregory Snyder of the University of Colorado to
assist his work in collaboration with Professor R.V. Baudinette of the School of
Biological Sciences at the Flinders University of South Australia. Dr. Snyder is
currently supported by the National Science Foundation's Division of Integrative
Biology and Neurosciences to examine the morphometric characteristics of the
development of microvascular loops and whether the countercurrent loops are
specific to certain brain areas in marsupials. In vertebrates, capillary
endothelia or glia regulate the exchange between blood and the central nervous
system (CNS), forming the blood brain barrier. CNS capillaries in marsupials
consist of hairpin loops which appear to add another dimension to the blood
brain barrier. This project will support the travel of Dr. Snyder to Flinders
University where he will continue his investigations on the development of the
unique microvascular geometry in marsupials using tammar wallabies. A breeding
colony of tammar wallabies is maintained at the School of Biological Sciences.
Taking advantage of this colony, the development of microvascular loops in young
Joey's during pouch development will be examined. The host scientist, Dr.
Russell Baudinette, is a recognized authority on the physiology of marsupials.
The collaborative work will advance not only the understanding of the
relationships between vascular geometry and exchange, but also the adaptations
that attend the transition from an aquatic to a terrestrial existence, and
further the understanding of phylogenetic relationships within vertebrates.