* 9215384
* Preparation of Ultrafine Magnetic Particles Using           Microemulsions and Vesicles
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1992,10/31/1995
* Dinesh Shah, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1995
* USD 265,000.00

In recent years there has an increasing demand for the preparation of ultrafine
magnetic oxides of uniform size which are mainly used in computer data storage,
audio and video recording, magnetic fluids and fabrication of certain microwave
devices. The primary objective of the proposed research program is to synthesize
nanoparticles of magnetic oxides using microemulsion processing and
intravesicular precipitation. These are unique methods which can be used to
produce ultrafine, microhomogeneous particles with a narrow size distribution,
which cannot be achieved by conventional methods such as solid-state reaction,
bulk precipitation, sol- gel processing and spray drying. Microemulsion
processing consists of the precipitation of precursor hydroxides or carbonates
of magnetic oxides within the aqueous cores (typically 10 - 50 nm in size) of
water-in- oil microemulsions. These nanosize precursors would then be further
processed and calcined to produce the magnetic oxides. Intravesicular
precipitation consists of aqueous phase precipitation or reduction inside
organically constrained microdomains defined by vesicles. Each vesicle becomes a
submicroreactor of dimensions of the order of a few hundreds of angstroms.
Cations trapped in the intravesicular spaces will react with anions permeating
through the vesicle wall from the extravesicular region or be
photolytically/chemically reduced to form the product. Intravesicular
coprecipitation as well as precipitation upon encapsulated seed particles will
be used to create nanocomposites, opening up the possibility of tailoring the
functionality of products by manipulating both their morphology and composition
at a near molecular scale. The results of the research would delineate the
similarities as well as differences between the two processes (microemulsion
processing and intravesicular precipitation) in relation to the mechanisms
involved and the products formed in them.