* 9215287
* An Investigation of the Thermomechanical Behavior of Fiber  Reinforced Thermoset Composite Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Tim Osswald, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jay Lee
* 02/29/1996
* USD 200,000.00

An investigation of the thermomechanical behavior of fiber reinforced composite
parts will be conducted. The objective of the project is to continue research in
modeling, analysis and process simulation of the thermomechanical behavior of
fiber reinforced thermoset parts. Such a study will increase the understanding
of the phenomena and the physics behind shrinkage, warpage and surface waviness
of reinforced plastic parts. The project will be divided into two portions: and
experimental and a computer modeling portion. The experimental aspect of the
research deals with thermomechanical material properties characterization. Here,
the effect that degree of cure has on the elastic constants and on shrinkage
during solidification will be studied. In the second portion of the project the
shrinkage due to cure will be introduced and a constitutive model for the
material tensor will be developed and implemented into existing finite element
computer simulations of the thermomechanical processes that take place during
molding of thin and thick fiber reinforced thermoset parts. The simulation
considers parts of complex geometry molded under realistic industrial processing
conditions. Understanding the thermomechanical behavior of plastics and being
able to predict filling patterns, fiber orientation, temperature fields during
cure, residual stresses, voids and cracks, shrinkage, warpage and surface
waviness before a part is actually manufactured leads to higher part quality and
eliminates some of the expensive and time consuming tasks done in the early
stages of part and mold design.