* 9215869
* Mathematical Sciences: CBMS Reg Conf -Semiparametic MixturesModels:  Theory and Methods with Applications in Empirical  Bayes, Measurements Error and Random Effects Models - May 93
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1994
* John Grego, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 08/31/1994
* USD 23,906.00

Recently there has been substantial research on mixture models based on a
nonparametric mixing distribution, also called semiparametric mixture models.
Applications have ranged from clinical trials, astronomy and marine biology.
Within statistics, research from semiparametric mixture models extends to
empirical Bayes' estimation, measurement error models and random effects models,
as well as other fields. Insights into these questions and others have been
greatly aided by work done by the principal speaker, Bruce Lindsay. Professor
Lindsay 's research on the geometry of mixture likelihoods has provided a
unified approach for interpreting, solving and formulating models of mixed
distributions. His intuitive approach and geometric insights make him an ideal
lecturer for an NSF/CBMS conference on the subject. This project will support an
NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on
Semiparametric Mixture Methods: Theory and Methods - With Applications in Bayes,
Measurment Error, and Random Effects Models to be held May 24 - 28, 1993, on the
campus of the University of South Carolina. Professor Bruce Lindsay of the
Pennsylvania State University will be the principal lecturer. To stimulate
interest and activity in mathematical research, the National Science Foundation
each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the
Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference features a distinguished
lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic on important current research in
one sharply focused area of the mathematical sciences. The lecturer subsequently
prepares an expository monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally
published by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical Association and the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics. Certain features differentiate these
conferences from typical research conferences. These are: (1) Focus on a single
important and timely area of research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued
effect and local stimulation through regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for
quality, breadth, and timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider
audience.