* 9215090
* Tropical Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* J. David Neelin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/1995
* USD 287,000.00

This research is aimed at understanding the mechanisms of ocean-atmosphere
interaction in the tropics and the phenomena that these produce. The methods and
models already developed will be applied to three main areas: 1) Contined work
on interannual variability, emphasizing analytical as well as numerical
approaches. 2) Initiation of work on the effects of coupled feedbacks in the
climatology. Tropical climate features in coupled general circulation models
(GCMs) appear to be quite sensitive to coupled feedbacks involving three-
dimensional dynamical interactions. Much of the current discussion of ocean-
atmosphere interaction in tropical climate centers on a one- dimensional,
vertical column point of view. A complementary approach is proposed, aimed at
developing understanding of the interactions which are nonlocal in the
horizontal. 3) Tropcial atmosphere modeling. Current simple atmospheric models
used in coupling have a number of deficiencies for this type of study. Further
development of a model of complexity intermediate between these and atmospheric
GCMs is proposed; in particular one for which near-analytic versions can be
obtained in simplifying cases, thanks to the properties of the Betts (1986)
convection scheme. The mechanisms driving both the tropical atmospheric response
to surface boundary conditions and intraseasonal variability, such as the
Madden- Julian oscillation, will be examined. This research is important because
it is one of the studies which will help determine the feasibility of modeling
the coupled ocean-atmosphere system for the purpose of predicting its variations
on time scales of months to years, an issue of concern in climate variability.