* 9215577
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Molecular Engineering at Ultrathin Organic Films for Membrane Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* T. Kyle Vanderlick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 12/31/1993
* USD 49,499.00

The effectiveness of a membrane in a separation process is based on the degree
of its selectivity and its permeability or throughput. Unfortunately,
selectivity and permeability are generally traded off - the same mechanisms
which control selectivity, such as pore size, regulate the flux of material
through the membrane. This SGER proposal suggests fabricating composite
membranes in order to maximize both selectivity and permeability. A porous
substrate is used as the backing material thus providing mechanical strength and
insuring high permeability. Selectivity is then controlled by mounting a
nonporous ultrathin microstructured film over the backing sheet. The PI suggests
making these microstructured films out of cohesive, molecularly ordered, organic
mono- or multi-layered films formed either by the Langmuir Blodgett technique or
self assembly via adsorption from solution. The permeability of these films to
gases of interest will be measured by using either a quartz crystal microbalance
or a surface acoustic wave device. In this type of measurement this film is
attached to a (typically) quartz piezoelectric crystal, and an oscillating
electric field is applied to the crystal. This application causes an acoustic
wave to propagate with a particular resonant frequency. Minute changes in mass
of the film can be detected by shifts in the resonant frequency of the crystal.
The film will be exposed to a gaseous environment, and frequency shifts will be
measured in time in order to measure the permeability. The study will focus on
how the microstructure architecture and physicochemical properties of the films
relate to the permeability. Specifically films of different fluidity, surface
characteristic, chemistries and defect structure will be examines.