* 9215476
* Dissertation Research: The Northeast Mesoamerican Frontier
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1994
* NONE NONE, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1994
* USD 11,970.00

Under the direction of Dr. Dan Healan, MS Elizabeth Mozzillo will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze a range of archaeological
materials which she has collected from the prehistoric site of Cerro de las
Ventantas (CV) which is located in northern Mexico. The entire mesa top of CV is
covered by what probably were civic-ceremonial buildings including impressive
platform constructions, a number of plazas, two small pyramids and a circular
structure. The sole prehistoric access trail to the mesatop is lined with the
remains of a stone stairway which passes near a rockshelter filled with the
cliff dwellings from which the promontory and archaeological zone take their
names. To date MS Mozzillo and her colleagues have surveyed and mapped the
region. They have collected surface materials and conducted controlled
stratigraphic excavations. The goal of the current project is to analyze the
materials collected. Together with assistants MS Mozzillo will construct a
ceramic tyopology which will allow sites to be placed relative to each other in
time. Radiocarbon determinations will be used to anchor the sequence with
absolute dates. Other classes of materials recovered - these include lithic
faunal and human skeletal remains - will also be examined. While this region of
northern Mexico contains many archaeological sites, it has received little
archaeological scrutiny. The reason for this is its intermediate position
between the "great" sites and cultures of the Valley of Mexico to the South and
the impressive remains located in the U.S. Southwest to the North. The region
appears to have served as a "frontier zone." Archaeologists have speculated for
many years about the rise of complex prehistoric societies in the U.S.
Southwest. Some believe that this process took place essentially independently
of developments in central Mexico while others see strong linkages. To solve
this question it is necessary to study sites which lie between these two areas
and MS. Mozzillo's work will contribute to this goal. This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will increase our understanding of U.S. prehistory and shed light on the rise of
complex societies. It will also assist in the training of an extremely promising
scientist.