* 9215831
* Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Graduate Programs in   the Applied Mathematical Sciences II
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/1993,09/30/1994
* K. Wallenius, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/1994
* USD 30,000.00

This project will support a Conference on Graduate Programs in the Applied
Mathematical Sciences to be held April 16-17, 1993 at Clemson University. Major
objectives of the conference are to project characteristics of successful
graduate programs for the 1990's and beyond, to identify those characteristics
of current programs that are essential for success, and to clarify nonacademic
employment opportunities. Both masters and doctoral programs will be addressed.
Specific conference objectives are: (1) to review the current state of graduate
education in the applied mathematical sciences; (2) to obtain perspectives on
current industrial/government employment opportunities and placement; (3) to
clarify methods to attract undergraduates to graduate study in the mathematical
sciences; and (4) to publicize graduate applied mathematical science programs to
the university community and potential students. Major themes of the conference
will be recent developments within the mathematical sciences, their utility as
essential ingredients for the solution of modern technological problems, and the
challenges and opportunities these developments present to graduate education in
the future. Individuals from universities, industry, and government
laboratories, who possess a broad perspective, will be invited participants.
Representatives from the professional societies, including the American
Mathematical Society, the American Statistical Association, the Operations
Research Society of America, and the Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics will also be invited. A forum will be provided within which leaders
in the field can assess and make recommendations for future graduate programs. A
conference proceedings will be published.