* 9215145
* Integrated Analysis and Display of Multivariate and Time-   Dependent Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Lambertus Hesselink, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* George K. Lea
* 08/31/1997
* USD 550,000.00

9215145 Hesselink Both experimental and numerical techniques are becoming more
sophisticated leading towards very large multivariate, time-dependent datasets
describing complex physical phenomena. Visualization approaches for analysis and
display of these datasets are currently inadequate, in particular when dealing
with tensor data. The project addresses the need for better understanding of
these datasets by investigating an integrated approach based on the triad of
enabling technologies of feature extraction, data compression, and immersive
environments. Three-dimensional datasets of increased complexity: tensor data
and time-dependent fields will be displayed and analyzed. Most of the research
effort is aimed at understanding the dynamical properties of physical systems
that give rise to these large multivariate datasets. Therefore, techniques used
for visualizing steady fields must be extended in order to visualize time-
dependent data. Time-dependent data may be handled by animation of the
individual time steps. Processing time for animations, however, are notoriously
long. Therefore, data compression is being investigated at several stages of the
integrated visualization process. In the analysis component, data compression of
tensor fields is based on extracting and displaying hyperparticle paths using
tensor field topology. In the display component, time-dependent fields may be
analyzed and displayed using advanced data compression techniques such as vector
clustering and 4-D transforms. Finally, the results of these analysis are
displayed with tools from immersive environments, data compression techniques
applied to rendering approaches, and other new technologies. *** v s t @ j &lt;
l WINMINE HLP @ j J 1 WINTUTORDAT @ j j WRITE HLP @ j k CALC EXE @ j @ CALC HLP
@ j F CALENDARHLP @ j P CANYON MID @ j CHITZ BMP @ j Ä± M DING WAV @ j N- 9215145
Hesselink Both experimental and numerical techniques are becoming more
sophisticated leading towards very large multiv &lt; K 7 &lt; $ $ $ ( F / &lt; K
&lt; / 1 Courier Symbol &amp; Arial 5 Courier New Z " h lc lc r ( S
R:\WW20USER\ABSTRACT.DOT abstract Alicia E. Harris Alicia E. Harris