* 9215076
* Robust Frequency Domain Design of Flexible AC Transmission  System Devices for Power System Damping Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Joe Chow, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Vijay Vittal
* 08/31/1996
* USD 165,947.00

The objective of this research is to investigate new techniques for the control
design of flexible AC transmission system (FACTS) devices for the mitigation of
multiple interarea modes of oscillations. The focal point of the investigation
is the design of damping controllers which are robust with respect to variations
in loading conditions and system configurations. By modeling the changes in
operating conditions as uncertainties, the robust damping controller design will
be formulated as and H00 robust stability problem. A multi-modal decomposition
based on synchronizing and damping torques will be used to provide an
appropriate design structure to establish non-conservative uncertainty models.
The proposal consists of the following research areas: (l) development of the
multi-modal decomposition, (2) FACTS device siting and feedback signal
selection, (3) development of uncertainty models, (4) computation of multi-modal
decomposition in large power systems, (5) robust control design of a single
FACTS device, and (6) robust decentralized control coordination of multiple
FACTS devices. It is anticipated that a rigorous robust control design
methodology based on synchronizing and damping torques for multiple swing modes
will developed. The technique will appeal directly to power system control
design engineers. The power system models will set up using the Power System
Toolbox developed by the proposer. The control design process will be
investigated using Matlab. Design examples will be solicited from utilities and
equipment manufacturers.