* 9215678
* U.S.-Australia Workshop on Plant Gene Technology: Plants forthe Future; Cairns, Australia; September 1993.
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Sheila McCormick, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 01/31/1995
* USD 24,500.00

This award will partially support the participation of twelve U.S. scientists to
participate in a seminar/workshop on plant biotechnology and the engineering of
plants for the future to be held at Cairns, Australia in September 1993. The
American coordinators are Dr. Sheila McCormick from the University of California
Plant Gene Expression Center at Berkeley and Dr. Niels Nielson from the
Department of Agronomy at Purdue University. The Australian coordinators are Dr.
T. J. Higgins and Dr. Elizabeth Dennis from the Institute for Plant Production
and Processing of the CSIRO Division of Plant Industry in Canberra, and Dr.
Adrienne Clarke from the School of Botany at the University of Melbourne. This
project is being conducted under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program
and support in Australia is provided through the Department of Industry,
Technology and Commerce (DITAC). Emphasis in the program will be given to four
areas that are considered likely to generate significant advances in plant work.
These areas include new strategies for pest and disease resistance, manipulation
of reproductive biology, novel genes for agriculture and plant genome structure.
The seminar will provide a forum in which the strong and weak points of the
current research can be examined and new research directions and approaches will
be considered. By bringing together leaders in each of the four areas mentioned,
it is anticipated that there will be an exchange of ideas and techniques that
can be used in engineering plants for the future. This program should also
facilitate the establishment of new cooperative research efforts among the
participants.