* 9215234
*  Casting the Net:  Towards a Model for Collaboration         and Communication on the Electronic Network; A Symposium    to be held in Washington, DC.
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1992,01/31/1994
* Allen Renear, Electronic Peirce Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 01/31/1994
* USD 37,285.00

In the humanities and sciences alike, electronic networks are increasingly used
to access, disseminate, and work with research data and to communicate with
colleagues in connection with this research. The imminent development of the
National Research and Education Network (NREN) is greatly accelerating this
process, but also brings with it the need to develop structures of
communication, collaboration, and critical control which are largely
unprecedented. Basic questions about what is feasible and what is desirable need
to be addressed. We also have little shared understanding of how to handle the
problem of network management so as to insure the preservation of academic
autonomy. In view of this, twenty-five experts in network development, database
design, electronic information management, and network user research are being
convened to consider how to turn to maximum advantage the opportunities implicit
in the development of NREN as a medium for research and education. Rapid
experimental prototyping is needed, and at this symposium/workshop, a
substantive conception of an electronic research and learning environment will
be presented as a hypothesis to be critiqued systematically by the participants
in the interest of establishing a concrete understanding of what is required to
make such a prototype intellectually sound and technologically and fiscally
feasible. The results of this symposium will be reported to decision makers in
the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Science Foundation.