* 9215033
* Physiological Ecology of UV-Absorbing Compunds in           Antarctic Organisms
* O/D,OPP
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1994
* Deneb Karentz, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 04/30/1994
* USD 88,348.00

This study will contribute to our understanding of the full range of natural
"sunscreens" that marine organisms have to protect themselves against
ultraviolet (UV) radiation. With concerns about increased incident UV caused by
global ozone depletion, it is crucial to evaluate the ecological effects of this
atmospheric phenomenon on biological systems in Antarctica. Mycosporine-like
amino acids (MAAs) absorb radiation from the UV portion of the solar spectrum
and are commonly found in marine species. Scientific information obtained on
MAAs will further our understanding of how marine organisms deal with UV
exposure and continue to function within their ecosystems. Little is known about
the regulatory mechanism of MAAs production in phytoplankton or the mode by
which such compounds accumulate in animal tissue. Dr. Karentz proposes to
determine if changes in MAA concentration represents an adaptive response to UV
exposure and to examine the possible relationships between MAA content in
primary producers and their consumers. The research will be accomplished by
comparing MAA concentrations in selected algal and invertebrate species at
different times during the annual springtime gradients of increasing day length
and ozone depletion, during different life cycle stages, and under controlled
light and food conditions.