* 9215692
* U.S.-Australian Joint Seminar:  Gender, Science, and        Technology; Melbourne, Australia; June 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Joan Fujimura, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 07/31/1994
* USD 22,050.00

This award will support the travel of eight U.S. participants to a joint
U.S.-Australia seminar on gender, science and technology. The seminar co-
organizers are Dr. Joan H. Fujimura from the Department of Sociology at Harvard
University and Dr. Ann Dugdale from the University of Melbourne where she is a
Lecturer in the History and Philosophy of Science. The seminar will take place
in Melbourne between June 26 and July 1, 1993 under the auspices of the
U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program. The seminar will focus on the
historical and social analysis of interactions among gender, science and
technology. Considerable attention will be directed toward elucidating specific
case studies in which methodologies have been developed for analyzing the
influence of gender on scientific and technological knowledge and practice.
Through the study of science and technology in their social, cultural,
epistemological and historical contexts, highlighting the role of gender as one
variable shaping scientific and technical expertise, the participants should
contribute analyses that will stimulate policies directed at achieving access
and equity goals in scientific and technical fields. This seminar is being co-
funded by the Australian Department of Industry, Technology and Commerce
(DITAC).