* 9215926
* Equation-of-State Analysis of Miscible Blends of Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Donald Paul, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/1998
* USD 455,000.00

Miscible polymer blends are of interest as materials in their own right and for
implementing strategies for compatibilizing multiphase mixtures. This research
deals with the opportunities for designing miscible polymer pairs when one or
both components are copolymers. A modern equation-of-state approach is likely to
provide a rational theory that can make predictions from minimal information.
This research integrates polymer synthesis, characterization (molecular,
thermal, volumetric, etc), and careful phase-diagram determination into a scheme
that allows calculation of interaction energies (stripped of the complicating
effects of compressibility) for various pairs of monomer repeat units, even when
they energetically resist mixing. The focus is on a variety of polycarbonates,
copolymers formed from styrene, methyl methacrylate, acrylonitrile, and polymers
containing functionally reactive monomers. The goals are to perfect this scheme,
to produce a reliable matrix of binary interaction energies that will allow
accurate design of miscible blends from multicomponent polymers, and to identify
blend concepts that will be useful especially in the area of reactive
compatibilization. This research will help the growing field of polymer
mixtures, which are increasingly being used as engineering plastics and are also
commonly found in recycled plastics. A better understanding of the fundamentals
underlying these uses is essential to further progress.