* 9215231
* Structure and Physical Properties of Quasicrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Marko Jaric, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/1997
* USD 163,000.00

The main objectives of this condensed matter theory project are to: (1) develop
general computational methods and tools for determination and analysis of
quasicrystal structures using experimental diffraction data; (2) identify
kinetic and equilibrium factors responsible for quasicrystal formation and
stability; (3) characterize the nature of disorder in quasicrystals.
Determination of quasicrystal structure is a necessary first step leading to an
understanding and calculations of physical properties of quasicrystals, such as
their electronic and magnetic properties. A computer package for calculating the
average quasiperiodic structure of a quasicrystal from its diffraction data will
be developed using a method recently introduced by the principal investigator.
Studying the growth-induced disorder and phase fluctuations in quasicrstals will
significantly advance the understanding of the competition between crystal,
quasicrystal and glass formation in real materials. Quasicrystal stability and
thermal fluctuations will be investigated through Monte Carlo simulations of
tilings. Other more general disorder will be simulated using tiling growth
algorithms. Special emphasis will be placed on the competition between crystal
and quasicrystal structures. Quasicrystal formation will also be studied with
renormalization group calculations of the liquid-icosahedratic transitions. %%%
This theoretical and computational research will contribute to the understanding
of the properties of quasicrystals. Ten years after the discovery of this new
state of matter the basic conditions for the formation of this unique state of
matter versus that of the crystalline or glassy state are still undefined. These
basic conditions need to be determined before comprehensive models of specific
materials properties can be implemented. The proposed research will provide a
major impetus to resolution of these conditions.