* 9215844
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Abundances of Metal-  Rich K Giants
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Donald Terndrup, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 12/31/1995
* USD 18,150.00

This project brings together two groups of astronomers who are actively working
on the abundance patterns in the stellar populations of the Milky Way Galaxy and
the Magellanic Clouds. The U.S. team, headed by Donald Terndrup of The Ohio
State University in cooperation with Ruth Peterson of the Lick Observatory, will
collaborate with Michael Bessell of the Australian National Observatory and the
Mount Stromlo Observatory and Elaine Sadler of the Anglo-Australian Observatory
(AAO). This award provides funds for the U.S. investigators to attend observing
runs in Australia. Using other sources of support, Terndrup and Peterson will
conduct further observations of bulge K giants at the Cerro Tololo Observatory
in Chile while Bessell and Sadler will do the same for globular cluster stars
using Australian facilities. Specifically, the program will conduct observations
of bulge and cluster stars to determine the abundance of oxygen and other alpha-
capture elements. The relative abundances will generate information on the rate
and manner of chemical enrichment in the bulge of the Galaxy and in metal-rich
globular clusters. Increased understanding of the temperatures and compositions
of K giants will be used to generate diagnostic indicators of temperature,
metallicity and gravity for lower-resolution optical and infrared studies of
metal-rich stars. The project, supported jointly by NSF and the Australian
Department of Industry, Technology, and Commerce (DITAC) provides access to
international expertise and unique observational facilities.