* 9215275
* U.S.-China Workshop on International Research Data          Management Training:  A Proof-of-Concept Prototype Workshop for CERN
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Robert Parmenter, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 06/30/1994
* USD 64,269.00

This proposal will provide for research data management (RDM) training to
Chinese Ecological Research Network (CERN) scientists responsible for design of
a system of RDM within CERN, and serve as a proof-of-concept prototype for
collaborations that could be achieved with similar international organizations,
particularly developing countries, beginning to address RDM needs of long-term
ecological research (LTER). IT will also serve to meet an immediate and
documented need within the Chinese ecological community. The 12-week training
will address basic concepts of managing LTER data across both the US-NSF LTER
and CERN networks and will include lectures, demonstrations, discussion and
hands-on computer experience. LTER RDM personnel will team-teach modules focused
on the needs of CERN. The training will cover a range of RDM issues from
principles of design and organization to implementation. Discussions will focus
on the needs for international collaboration and sharing of long-term data sets
and establishment of international data management objectives. This will
establish groundwork for protocols and standards to facilitate international
data exchange and set the stage for future CERN-LTER cooperative efforts. The
resulting curriculum will be used to develop other courses - tailoring each, as
this one will be to fit particular needs of emerging international LTER
programs.