* 9215267
* Industry University Cooperative Research Center for Health  Management
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1997
* Howard Zuckerman, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 12/31/1997
* USD 260,000.00

Health care management is one of the most important research topics in this
country. Planning activities at Arizona State University have developed a
consortium based research Center program in addressing the health care
management problems. The formation of this Center is based on the early work
supported by the Western Network for Education in Health Administration. The
proposed Center program is to develop an integration of industry, Arizona State
University, and the Western Network university consortium based on the NSF
I/UCRC model. The initial research agenda of Arizona State University's I/UCRC
for Health Care Management will address the following topics: 1) Develop new
ways to organize and manage patient care units; 2) Changing relationships
between physician and organization; 3) Implementing new approaches to managing
quality and clinical outcomes. The Principal Investigator/Center Director and
his colleagues with Arizona State University, Northwestern University,
University of Colorado, University of Washington, and U.C. Berkeley have the
knowledge and facilities to run this Center. This I/UCRC Program is being
coordinated with Dr. John Castellan, Program Director of Decision, Risk, and
Management Science Program at the National Science Foundation. The Program
Manager recommends Arizona State University be awarded $50,000 for the first
year of a five-year continuing award. Near the end of each 12-month period, the
Program Manager and/or the Division Director of the Engineering Education
Centers Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of renewal
criteria, including the following: 1) the extent to which the university-
industry interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the support base is
developing; 3) the extent to which a robust research program is developing. If
the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend support for the
next period of this continuing award.