* 9215600
* Characterization of Functional Requirements and Dimensional Tolerances for Design and Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Chia-Hsiang Menq, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/1995
* USD 120,000.00

The long-term goal of this project is to develop the functional framework that
supports concurrent engineering in design and manufacturing. The purpose is to
shorten the design cycle time, to increase productivity and, more importantly,
to come up with optimum or near-optimum design and production plans. In order to
accomplish this goal, two specific objectives are identified. The first one is
to characterize the various mechanical functions for creating the functional
structure of a product. The functional structure will facilitate the integration
of the functional requirements into various activities of the product cycle so
as to serve as the links among design, process planning, manufacturing,
assembly, and inspection. The second objective is to develop a functional
tolerancing framework based on the characteristics of the required functions.
Using the tolerancing scheme, the current practice of tolerance representation
can be extended and applied to the products that are sophisticated in function
and/or complicated in geometry. The research will result in a systematic
approach for the characterization and representation of the functional
requirements in mechanical design. It will provide a basis for integrating
design intent into the product cycle so that higher level of decision making and
complex reasoning for the determination of optimum product design and process
planning become possible.