* 9215963
* Electrocatalytic Detection of Biologically Significant      Compounds at Noble Metal Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Dennis Johnson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 12/31/1996
* USD 336,000.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of electroanalytical chemistry. During the tenure of this three-
year continuing grant, Professor Johnson and his students will apply pulsed
electrochemical techniques to the detection of polar and ionic aliphatic organic
compounds having biological significance. Of particular interest to these
studies are amino acids and peptides that contain thiol, disulfide, or thioether
moieties. Such compounds traditionally do not yield to conventional
electrochemical analysis at noble metal electrodes because of their
electrochemical irreversibility. However, these functional moieties produce
transient anodic signals at gold and platinum electrodes as a result of
electrocatalytic reactions that occur during the formation of surface oxides and
are thus detectable by pulsed techniques. This research builds upon
accomplishments of the Johnson group under NSF grant CHE-8914700. %%% Results
from this research project will expand fundamental knowledge of electrocatalytic
reaction mechanisms for anodic processes that result in water-derived oxygen
transfer. Additionally, this research should give rise to significant advances
in detection technology for liquid chromatography wherein conventional
photometric and fluorometric detection of the compounds of interest at levels
less than nanomolar requires a priori chemical derivitization.