* 9215957
* Fault Tolerance in Cell-Site Processing for Mobile          Cellular Communication Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1997
* G. Robert Redinbo, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 01/31/1997
* USD 161,449.00

Redinbo Mobile cellular communication systems, a rapidly growing communications
medium, rely upon significant digital processing elements, particularly in the
central cell sites where numerous users in a geographic area interface with the
full network. Reliability is a serious design requirement where processing
elements are shared among many users and failures can significantly degrade the
network performance for all users. This research is applying new evolving fault
tolerance design methodologies to modern system designs which employ
configurations of high-speed functional processing units, Application-Specific
Integrated Circuits (ASICs). In the new fault-tolerance design philosophy,
algorithm- based fault tolerance, data sample integrity is paramount, and
special number codes are being used to generate parity values in parallel with
the normal processing operations. Comparisons between these values and other
associated parity generation are very similar to functional elements employed in
the main processing operations, and therefore can be substituted for failed
functional elements when failures are detected. The important interrelationships
between detecting failed functional units and protecting the underlying control
units are being examined. Simple reliability calculations employing
straightforward failure rate models are being used to guide fault tolerance
levels and the system location for detection facilities.