* 9215909
* U.S.-Australia Seminar:  The Influence of Tropical Rivers onCoastal Oceanographic Processes; Townsville, Australia;     June 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1994
* Charles Nittrouer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 12/31/1994
* USD 23,850.00

This award will support the participation of seven U.S. scientists in a joint
seminar on the topic of the influence of tropical rivers on costal oceanographic
processes in the region of southern New Guinea and the Coral Sea. The seminar
will be held at the Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS) located near
Townsville, Queensland, Australia in June 1993. Coastal environments adjacent to
tropical rivers include many unique characteristics. Tropical and subtropical
rivers discharge nearly 3/4 of the runoff and sediment reaching the coastal
ocean. The geological record preserved by accumulating sediments provides
important information. Australian researchers are investigating a multi-
disciplinary range of processes along the southeastern coast of New Guinea and
in the Coral Sea near the mouth of the Fly River. U.S. scientists are
investigating similar processes on the continental margin near the mouth of the
Amazon River. This seminar will bring together Australian and U.S.
oceanographers to discuss their current research. The meeting is being co-
organized by Dr. Charles Nittrover of SUNY-Stonybrook and Dr. Gregg Brunskill of
AIMS. The formal sessions will be devoted to delineating the similarities and
differences between the two coastal systems. A further objective will be to
evaluate observations and conclusions with regard to their generality for
tropical settings. Placing these two river systems in perspective will provide
an understanding of other low latitude river systems. Participation of
researchers from Papua New Guinea is also expected.