* 9215170
* Modeling and Identification of Nonlinear Input/Output       Differential Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Allan Pearson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/1996
* USD 90,936.00

9215170 Pearson Techniques will be developed that facilitate the least squares
parameter identification for systems modeled by a class of nonlinear input-
output differential and functional differential equations. Examples for this
class will be found in diverse areas such as pharmacokinetics, robotics, lasers,
and viscoelastic materials, as well as modeling for control systems engineering.
Techniques will also be developed for the nonparametric multivariable linear
system (frequency transfer function matrix) identification problem, as well as
the parametric and (possibly) the nonparametric identification of time-varying
linear differential system models. Unique to these formulations will be a
discrete-frequency format brought about by the introduction of a set of complex-
valued Fourier based modulating functions for the classical Shinbrot method of
moment functional. A basic motivation for using Shinbrot's method is that it
circumvents dealing with unknown initial and boundary conditions for time-
limited input-output data, i.e., no state estimation is involved. In addition to
the discrete-frequency format, a basic motivation for developing the Fourier
modulating functions is that the underlying computations will use the DFT/FFT
algorithm, thus providing a "fast algorithm" for setting up the least squares
problem. Structure determination procedures may be developed for particular
classes of system, like those modeled by polynomial input-output differential
equations. ***