* 9215064
* Solution of Large Markov Models for Computer Performance    and Dependability Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Richard Muntz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 12/31/1995
* USD 119,699.00

The ability to evaluate options early in the design phase is essential for
today's complex computer-communication systems. Models are required to be able
to specify and analyze designs prior to expending large amounts of capital on
actual construction of the system. Performance and reliability are two of the
major criteria for system design evaluation, and the main approaches to
evaluation are simulation and stochastic modeling. The most widely used class of
stochastic models is Markov chains. Markov models have their limitations, but
where applicable they are generally less costly than simulation and also have a
theoretical foundation that permits one to consider formal error bounds,
sensitivity analysis, etc. The main limitation of Markov models is the amount of
computer memory and processor time required for representing and solving the
models. The amount of required resources grows very rapidly with the complexity
of the model and unfortunately, models of real systems are often quite complex.
The thrust of this research is to develop analysis techniques which greatly
extend the range of models that can be analyzed with Markov chain numerical
methods. The only way to deal with the state space explosion problem is to
exploit properties of the particular class of problems of interest. Although it
is often effective to identify and take advantage of special problem structures,
the success of this research will also be judged by the generality of the
results, i.e., the ability to handle as wide a class of problems as possible.
The approach taken here is to examine several classes of important problems in
computer system performance and reliability modeling and show that certain
properties of each of these problem classes suggest methods of analysis that
will permit computation of tight bounds on the solution of models that would be
impossible to solve via standard numerical solution methods. The results of this
research will provide both specific results on a set of applications
(dependability analysis, load balancing, parallel processing and protocol
analysis) that are of great interest by themselves but even more importantly
will contribute to the body of formal techniques that will provide the basis for
advanced design analysis tools.