* 9215726
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Transport Processes   in Micropores
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,10/31/1995
* Keith Gubbins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 10/31/1995
* USD 24,550.00

This award supports the travel to Australia by two U.S. investigators as part
of a cooperative research program between Cornell University and the Australian
National University to study the transport behavior of fluids in narrow pores,
using the methods of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics and molecular
simulation. The senior collaborators will be Professor K. E. Gubbins and Dr. L.
A. Pozhar from Cornell and Professor D. J. Evans at the Australian National
University. The objectives of the research, to be conducted over a two year
period, are to develop and test a kinetic theory of inhomogenius fluids, and to
apply it to the prediction of diffusion, viscous flow and heat transport in
model micropores. In addition, molecular dynamics simulations will be used to
test the kinetic theory and nonequilibrium simulations of transport processes in
micropores of simple geometries (slits and cylinders) will be made to obtain an
understanding of the effects of pore size and shape, type of pore wall, and
state conditions on transport processes in such confined fluids. Microporous
materials are widely used in industry to carry out chemical reactions and to
effect purification and separations. The proposed work is needed to design
better and more efficient processes for such industries. This project, supported
jointly by NSF and the Australian Department of Industry, Technology and
Commerce (DITAC), brings together the expertise of the researchers in
computational and theoretical statistical mechanics.