* 9215080
* Spatially Resolved Diagnostics Using Tunable Laser          Absorption Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Philip Varghese, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 08/31/1996
* USD 285,663.00

Accurate measurements of temperature and species concentrations are important
for characterization of high temperature gas flows, particularly in the area of
combustion. Optical measurements are desirable since they are nonintrusive,
nonperturbing, and the probe is not subject to a hostile environment. An
absorption measurement provides a simple quantitative definition of the
concentration of the absorbing specie along a line-of-sight; this is sometimes
adequate information, but more often spatially resolved measurements are needed.
In principle, two-dimensional temperature and concentration fields should be
recoverable from a limited number of line-of-sight measurements using
tomographic reconstruction, a method widely used in medical imaging. However,
accurate quantitative reconstructions of temperature and concentration fields
have been difficult to achieve because reconstruction algorithms are very
sensitive to errors in the input data. The principal objective of this program
is to measure temperature and concentration fields simultaneously using a
reconstruction technique that exploits the tuning capability of infrared diode
lasers to greatly reduce the sensitivity of the reconstruction methods to both
random and systematic errors in the input data. The study will begin with
reconstruction of radial temperature and concentration profiles (CO and CO2) in
an axisymmetric flow, with subsequent extension of the procedures to
reconstruction of two-dimensional sections of three-dimensional flows. The
application of quantitative laser diagnostics to industrial scenarios has been
hampered by the typical high cost of equipment involved and by the user
sophistication required for achievement of quantitative results. Success with
the these lower-cost, more user-friendly systems may well lead to wider usage in
industry; the software and hardware developed should enable implementation of
tomographic absorption diagnostic techniques in a wide variety of applications.
Potentially, further development of this technology, with use of inexpensive
laser diode sources, may allow instrumentation packages cheap and robust enough
for use in in-plant process control systems.