* 9215898
* U.S-FSU Cooperative Science:  Partial Funding of the        2nd USA-FSU (formerly USSR) Seminar on Ferroelectrics,      St. Petersburg, Russia, June 22-26, 1992
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1993
* Stewart Kurtz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 05/31/1993
* USD 5,000.00

The USA-CIS Seminars on Ferroelectrics have developed into an effective
scientific exchange between American and former Soviet theoretical and
experimental scientists studying ferroelectricity and related phenomena. There
are some 500 to 1,000 scientists in the former Soviet Union working in this
area. The Second Seminar, to be held June 22-26, 1992 in St. Petersburg, Russia,
will be devoted to the physics of ferroelectrics and related materials and will
focus on the optics and spectroscopy of ferroelectrics. Emphasis will also be
given to the structure and properties of new classes of ferroelectrics,
including connections with high temperature superconducting oxides. The U.S.
Committee of the Second Seminar will be chaired by Dr. George W. Taylor of
Princeton Resources (Princeton, N.J.) and Professor Stewart K. Kurtz of the
Pennsylvania State University; the CIS Committee is chaired by Nobel Laureate
A.M. Prokhorov of the Institute of General Physics of the Russian Academy of
Sciences (RAS) and Academician K.S. Aleksandrov of the RAS L.V. Kirenskiy
Institute in Krasnoyarsk. This project fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in the United
States and the U.S.S.R. to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence in the field of basic scientific
research on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.