* 9215327
* Ecology of Mid-Atlantic Ridge Hydrothermal Vents: Food Web  Analysis Using Multiple Molecular and Isotopic Techniques
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Cindy Van Dover, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1995
* USD 181,417.00

While non-photosynthetic sources of organic carbon have been implicated as the
primary energy source fueling invertebrate populations at deep-sea hydrothermal
vents, details of carbon transfer have not been elucidated for an entire
community. Multiple paths for transfer of carbon exist, and dominance by one or
another path varies dramatically at geographically disjunct sites. Mid-Atlantic
Ridge vent communities are striking in their apparent dependence on free-living
primary production associated with sulfide surfaces to support large and
metabolically active populations of shrimp. This research will use the TAG site
on the Mid- Atlantic Ridge for a case-study of carbon transfer within a vent
community. Dr. Van Dover and colleagues will identify the major trophic links,
with particular emphasis on 1) testing alternative hypotheses regarding the
source of food for shrimp and 2) determination of the spatial isotopic,
taxonomic and biomass heterogeneity of basal dietary pools, the degree of
specificity of consumers to these pools, and the strength of interactions
between consumers. To accomplish these tasks, they will employ molecular and
isotopic techniques to define distinctive basal dietary pools and to trace the
paths of these pools through the food web. The field program will be designed to
relate spatial heterogeneity to microhabitat characteristics as defined by
temperature, mineralogical assays and macrofaunal assays and distributions.