* 9215337
* Dynamic, Concave-cost, and Lattice Programming with         Application to Inventory Control and Scheduling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Arthur Veinott, Jr., Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 02/29/1996
* USD 195,000.00

This project will continue work on dynamic, lattice, d-Schur- convex-cost and
concave-cost programming with applications to inventory control, scheduling,
networks, and multiperson decisions. The theory of lattice programming and of
substitutes, complements and ripples in network flows will continue to be
developed to enable one to predict the direction of changes of optimal and
equilibrium decisions resulting from changes in parameters without computation.
This work will be continued and extended in a variety of significant directions
including stochastic network flows, Leontief substitution systems and the
development of efficient algorithms. Decision problems in which there are
economies-of- scale lead to minimum-concave-cost mathematical programs. These
problems will continue to be studied with the aim of identifying broad classes
of problems that can be solved in polynomial time. Important problems of
sequential decision making under uncertainty can be studied as Markov branching
decision process. A variety of problems will be studied in this area including
controlled populations, geometric population growth, complexity of computation
and generalized semi-Markov decision processes. Special attention will be
focused on developing approximation methods with guaranteed high-effectiveness
and fast running times for large-scale systems. This work will be applied to
yield management, single- and multi-product/echelon/facility inventory models
under uncertainty, and other areas.