* 9215105
* Noncompetitive Inhibition of Acetylcholine Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1996
* David Johnson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1996
* USD 236,472.00

Information moves from the brain to muscle through neurons. The transfer of
information between neuron and muscle involves the release of a chemical called
acetylcholine from the neuron and the diffusion of acetylcholine to the muscle.
Acetylcholine binds to proteins called acetylcholine receptors on the surface of
muscle cells, transiently opening small ion channels in the cell membrane. These
channel openings initiate muscle contraction. The electric organs in
invertebrates are extraordinarily rich in these acetylcholine receptors and,
consequently, are the model system used to study the molecular basis of action
of acetylcholine or any other agent that acts on acetylcholine receptors. Over
the last twelve years, using quantitative fluorescence spectroscopy, Dr. Johnson
has developed a unique approach for the study of structural features of intact
ligand receptors. He will continue to use this approach to delineate the sites
of binding of inhibitors of the acetylcholine receptor. Specifically, he will
localize the sites of binding of two noncompetitive inhibitors of the
acetylcholine with respect to the surface and side of the cell membrane, as well
as their orientation when bound to the receptor. This information will
significantly contribute to the development of a molecular understanding of the
actions of chemicals on this receptor. Moreover, concepts and experimental
approaches developed in the study of the acetylcholine receptor should easily be
exportable to the examination of other neurotransmitter and hormone receptors.