* 9215362
* STRATMAN:  Automatic Design and Assembly of Fixtures Using  Modular Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Aristides A. Requicha, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1996
* USD 617,012.00

Setup and fixturing are amongst the least automated of all the production
activities for mechanical components and assemblies, and yet they contribute
significantly to overall factors such as cost and lead time. This project seeks
to automate the entire fixturing process, from the design of fixtures to their
physical realization as assemblies of modular components. Theory and technology
from the fields of kinematics and dynamics, geometric modeling, robotics, and
artificial intelligence will be deployed through a joint effort involving four
principal investigators and their students in two institutions, plus an
industrial collaborator. Multiple tasks will be considered-for example, NC
(numerically controlled) machining, metal-deposition processes, assembly, and
inspection. Task descriptions, plus solid models of parts, assemblies and
modular fixturing components will be used to compute fixture configurations
appropriate for the tasks, and to generate plans for assembling the fixtures
automatically. In addition, issues of design for fixturability will be
addressed, and feedback will be provided to designers about the fixturing
consequences of their decisions. The main objectives of the project are to
advance the current understanding of representations and algorithms for
automating the various steps of the overall fixturing process (e.g., the
synthesis of fixture configurations), and to integrate subproblem solutions into
a prototype, experimental system that demonstrates the feasibility of the
approach. An industrial collaborator will provide a test bed for experimental
investigations, information on current industrial practices, and realistic tasks
and products.