* 9215207
* Dissertation Research: The Subsistence Behavior of Early    Homo Erectus: A Taphomic Perspective from Beed II,          Olduvai Gorge
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1992,04/30/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 04/30/1994
* USD 11,760.00

The primary objective of this doctoral dissertation improvement award is to
clarify the physical and cultural capabilities of an ancestor of humans, Homo
erectus. H. erectus is particularly important as it was this species which first
moved out of Africa and colonized much of the Old World, implying improvement in
the ability to deal with environmental challenges. This earlier hominid is
represented at Olduvai Gorge in East Africa, a site which contains rich faunal
assemblages from the appropriate period of about 1.7 to 1.2 million years ago.
The investigators will undertake a two fold approach to clarifying the abilities
of these hominids. First, the fauna from Bed II at Olduvai Gorge will be
analyzed in order to determine the processes which led to their deposition. The
types and frequencies of bones, their sizes, abrasion and modification can
assist in determining the subsistence behavior of H. erectus. Secondly a series
of ethnoarchaeological experiments will be carried out to clarify the behavioral
interpretation of hominid bone processing. Butchery marks on bone resulting from
observed practices among the Samburu of Kenya will be compared to the evidence
left by our ancestors in orde r to better understand the ways in which the
earlier forms processed their food.