* 9215599
* Optimal Design for Castings
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Jonathan Dantzig, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jay Lee
* 08/31/1996
* USD 270,864.00

Given a set of design and process parameters, today's design engineer is
currently able to assess the quality and cost of the final product through
numerical simulation. The parameters are used to create a finite element model
of the manufacturing process and the ensuing analysis is performed to evaluate
the process response. The engineer then studies the response to predict the
ultimate quality of the product. Through some other means, the engineer also
estimates the relative cost of the design versus other designs. At this point,
the engineer entertains the following questions: (1) If the current design is
not suitable, how do I improve it? (2) If the current design is suitable, how
might I improve it, or reduce its cost? Presently, these questions are resolved
by the engineer's experience and/or trial and error. Although a satisfactory
design will ultimately be determined, there is no guarantee the chosen design is
the most cost efficient, i.e. optimal. This research is to develop a systematic
means to obtain optimally designed manufactured products, concentrating on the
process of metal casting. The approach combines the finite element method,
numerical optimization, and recent advances in explicit sensitivity analysis to
investigate various means of quantifying the effects of varying casting
parameters to obtain on optimal casting. Such a rational design method should
allow the more efficient and accurate design of molds for casting, resulting in
lower casting cost and higher quality.