* 9215643
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Interactions between  the Two Polypeptides of the Paramyxovirus Fusion Protein
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Mark Peeples, RUSH UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 06/30/1996
* USD 10,950.00

This award supports one trip per year, over a two year period, to Australia by
Dr. Peeples of the Rush-Presbyterian - St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago to
conduct collaborative research with Dr. Jeffrey Gorman, Head for Protein
Chemistry at the Biomolecular Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria. Drs.
Peeples and Gorman share an interest in understanding the structure and function
of the paramyxovirus fusion protein. This glycoprotein, in its active, cleaved
form, enables the membrane in which it resides to fuse with an opposing
membrane. The structural elements of this protein required for its proper
folding, disulfide bond formation, oligomerization, transport and cleavage are
not known. Recent genetic, immunologic and peptide chemistry information
generated in the laboratories of these investigators has led to new insights.
The investigators will work in each other's laboratories for one month each year
over the duration of the award. In this way, they will be able to share their
diverse expertise, techniques and reagents. Both investigators are using the
Newcastle disease virus F protein as a model and each has developed unique
antibody probes which will facilitate their studies. Their first target will be
to identify the disulfide bond which links the F1 and F2 peptides generated by
cleavage in the trans Golgi and to determine its role in folding, transport and
cleavage.