* 9215811
* High Resolution Estimates on Wind Stress, Heat Fluxes, and  Related Quantites Over the Global Oceans
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1994
* Arlindo daSilva, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/1994
* USD 64,922.00

The objective of this project is to use individual ship reports from the COADS
Compressed Marine Reports 5 to produce a global, high resolution data base for
observational and modeling studies of the atmosphere-ocean system. In addition
to basic quantities such as wind, sea surface temperature and humidity, this
data set will include estimates of surface wind stress, latent and sensible heat
fluxes, and short and long wave radiation fluxes. Particular attention will be
paid to correct known biases associated with erroneous Beaufort scale and
adjustment of the anemometer height to a standard 10 m reference level. The data
sets will be produced in two different resolutions: 1) Global monthly mean
summaries with 10 longitude by 10 latitude resolution, anomalies and climatology
from 1945 to 1989; and 2) Global weekly mean summaries with 0.50 longitude by
0.50 latitude resolution, climatology form 1965 to 1989. These summaries will
then be globally analyzed by essentially the same objective analysis scheme used
in Levitus' Climatological Atlas of the World Oceans (1982). Raw monthly/weekly
statistics will be made available to those users desiring to perform their own
objective analysis. All products will be made widely available to the national
and international scientific and operational communities with no restrictions.
This project will provide better and more valuable data products for the use of
the scientific community for observational studies of atmosphere-ocean system as
well as forcing of the oceanic general circulation models, for air-sea
interaction studies from interannual to decadal time scales, both in the tropics
and/or extratropics and provide a more accurate surface marine climatology than
presently exists.