* 9215850
* US-Australia Cooperative Research: Antarctic Paleobiology   and Paleoenvironments during Pliocene Deglacial Warmth
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* David Harwood, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 11/30/1996
* USD 17,450.00

This award provides travel support to allow Dr. David Harwood, University of
Nebraska- Lincoln, to visit the Australian Antarctic Division and the
Universities of Tasmania and New England in Australia during July 1993 and 1994.
The research activity is focused on Antarctic climatic history and will involve
close interaction with a team of Australian investigators under the direction of
Dr. Patrick Quilty, the Assistant Director of Science of the Australian
Antarctic Division. The Australian team includes Dr. Robert Hill and Dr. Andrew
McMinn from the University of Tasmania and Dr. Barrie McKelvey from the
University of New England located in Armidale, New South Wales. New evidence
from studies of geological deposits on the Antarctic continent points to a major
collapse of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet during the middle Miocene and
significantly warmer marine and terrestrial temperatures during the early to
mid-Pliocene (~4.5 to 2.5 million years ago). The survival of terrestrial
vegetation in Antarctica during this period suggests that earlier glaciations
were not as cold as today. The research will continue the U.S.-Australia
cooperative study of these significant terrestrial and marine deposits and will
address various features of the environment and life in Antarctica during this
period of deglacial warmth. The research will contribute critical southern high-
latitude data to an international research effort toward a better understanding
and modeling of Earth under a warmer climate regime. Specifically the proposed
research will produce and apply paleobiological information to paleoclimatic
interpretations, will document the last survivors of Antarctic marine and
terrestrial biotas, and will continue to develop microfossils, particularly
marine diatoms, as tools for geologic age dating and paleoenvironmental
reconstructions in the Antarctic.