* 9215404
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Radiative Interaction with Atoms and Molecules
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1996
* Thomas McIlrath, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 04/30/1996
* USD 23,900.00

This award supports a number of trips to Australia over a two year period by a
team of American researchers under the direction of Dr. Thomas McIlrath of the
University of Maryland to conduct collaborative research with a similar team of
Australian investigators at the Laser Physics Center of the Australian National
University working with Dr. Kenneth Baldwin. The primary goal of this research
is in the application of high resolution molecular spectroscopy to short
wavelength photoabsorption by atomic and molecular systems of atmospheric,
astrophysical and theoretical importance. Extracting molecular parameters from
measured line shapes will provide information needed to model temperature
dependencies for atmospheric extinction measurements; temperature dependent
models are very sensitive to the molecular line shape. This project will combine
the expertise represented by the U.S. participants with similar expertise in
Australia in the development and application of the highest monochromaticity
short-wavelength research. The research has relevance both in its application to
absorption processes in the earth's atmosphere, and associated environmental
questions, and to fundamentals of our knowledge of line shapes and molecular
potentials. The reciprocal visits by the Australian team members to the U.S. is
supported through the Australian Department of Industry, Technology and Commerce
(DITAC).