* 9215539
* Workshop on Undergraduate Education in Cognitive Science;   November, 1992; Washington, DC
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1994
* Neil Stillings, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1994
* USD 27,458.00

A two-day planning workshop will be held in Washington, DC, to consider in
detail the current state of undergraduate cognitive science education and to
issue recommendations for future directions. The workshop was initially
suggested in the final report of the 1991 planning workshop for the cognitive
science initiative at the National Science Foundation. It will be attended by
approximately sixteen representatives of the cognitive science community, drawn
from colleges, universities, and industry, as well as by program personnel from
NSF and other government agencies. A survey of existing cognitive science
programs will be conducted prior to the workshop. The workshop will consider
ways to bring more intellectual coherence to the cognitive science major, the
role of introductory courses in student recruitment, the role of computational
resources in undergraduate programs, the implications of new developments in
cognitive science research for the undergraduate curriculum, and the role of
various kinds of faculty and student development programs in the improvement of
undergraduate cognitive science education. The final report will issue
recommendations for the future development of cognitive science education, and
working subgroups of participants will be formed to pursue some of the
recommendations.