* 9215213
* Studying Intermolecular Interactions and Bimolecular        Reactions Through van der Waals Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Hai-Lung Dai, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 07/31/1996
* USD 341,095.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, H.L. Dai of the University of Pennsylvania will investigate
intermolecular interactions such as electronic energy transfer and bimolecular
reactions through van der Waals complexes. The study consists of several
parts,namely investigation of collision induced electronic relaxation processes
in van der Waals complexes by means of laser induced fluorescence spectroscopy;
molecular orbital dependence in the electronic relaxation of molecules like
glyoxal and pyrimidene and the effect of different collision partners; and the
chemistry of electronically excited molecules, or molecules excited to selected
vibrational levels in a van der Waals complex. The structure and frequencies of
the van der Waals vibrational modes will be determined by means of fluorescence
excitation and stimulated emission spectroscopy. These results will be used to
test theoreticel models for calculating intermolecular potentials. %%% This
research deals with the problem of how energy flows within and among
vibrationally and electronically excited molecules. The molecules of study are
incorporated in molecular clusters which are held together by weak
intermolecular van der Waals forces. Vibrational or electronic excitation of the
component molecules will generally cause the complex to dissociate. This
dissociation process mimics the energy transfer that occurs between colliding
molecules. The experiments with molecules embedded in a van der Waals complex
provide a measure of control over the reaction process that is not available
with molecular gases in which the molecules have random orientation. The
experiments will provide information useful for the understanding of the
reactivity of different molecular orbitals, and for the determination of the
potential energy surface which characterizes the reaction. With this information
it will be possible to devise novel photochemical reaction pathways.