* 9216253
* A Study of Planetary Boundary Layer Processes with Special  Emphasis on Land Surface Energy Budget, Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1998
* Sethu Raman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/1998
* USD 98,300.00

Description: This project provides for the collaboration between Dr. Sethu
Raman, of the Department of Marine, Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at North
Carolina State University (NCSU), Raleigh, and Dr. A. Prabhu of the Centre for
Atmospheric Sciences at the Indian Institute of Science (ISc)in Bangalore. They
plan to study the atmospheric boundary layer and the land surface processes in
the tropics with special emphasis on applications to agriculture and air
pollution meteorological aspects and climate modeling. Specific objectives are:
study the mean and turbulent structure of convective boundary layer in the
tropics; study the mean and turbulent structure of the nocturnal boundary layer
in the tropics which is normally associated with stable conditions with very
limited diffusion and can lead to high ground concentrations of pollutants;
study the evapo-transpiration processes under different crop and planetary
boundary layer (PBL) conditions; study the effect of the changes in the coriolis
parameter on the PBL processes with particular emphasis on the nocturnal layer;
and determine methods of incorporating these processes in mesoscale numerical
methods. Scope: The two scientists have been interacting for about four years
including a sabbatical by Dr. Raman at the IISc. They both have extensive
qualifications in the research topics, and the two institutes have extensive
capabilities to support the research. Bangalore has recently been selected by
the Government of India for establishing a national center for boundary layer
studies with a 300 meter tower, which should aid this research. The area of
study is useful in predicting diffusion of pollutants under various conditions,
and should be of benefit to the U.S. and India.