* 9216121
* Quantum Transport and the Aharonov-Casher Effect in Two     Dimensional Electron Gases
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Robert Wheeler, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 02/28/1997
* USD 270,000.00

The objective of this research is to show experimentally that the phase of the
electron spin in a two dimensional electron gas can be manipulated to produce
quantum interference effects modulating the electrical conductivity; this effect
was predicted by Aharonov and Casher in 1984. With the atomic strength electric
fields present in zincblende semiconductors, the Aharonov-Casher interference
should be observable using the electron magnetic moment in a two dimensionally
confined electron gas. The induced phase shift is predicted to be 2-10 pi
radians for realizable mesoscopic geometries. Ring geometries and Young
interferometers will be defined on GsAs heterojunction field effect devices. The
phase will be varied through the dependence of the electron magnetic moment upon
electron surface density. In zero magnetic field the observation of oscillations
in the electron conductivity, periodic in surface electron density and of
magnitude 1/(25812) mhos, will demonstrate the validity of the Aharonov-Casher
approach to the understanding of the spin dependent properties of mesoscopic
systems. These experiments will be essential for predicting the role that
electron spin plays in quantum dot and ballistic transport experiments
implemented in semiconductor heterojunctions. %%% The principles of electron
transport in semiconducting solids have been understood for a long time. In the
last decade, interference effects illustrative of the wavenature of the electron
have been observed when very small device structures are made. These sizes need
to be of the order of the electron wavelength, about one ten millionth of a
meter. The fabrication technology for these quantum devices originated in the
requirements for ever smaller devices in the computer chip industry. The
electron also carries a magnetic moment which can be represented as the physical
observable of a spin quantum number. The research proposed is to search for
methods to manipulate the spin phase of the electron waves such as to cause
interference. Spin phase can change as the magnetic moment moves through an
electric field. Here the internal electric fields existent in compound
semiconductors will be exploited. The results of this research will assist in
understanding the role of electron spin in quantum dot and ballistic transport
experiments implemented in heterojunctions and similar quantum device
structures.