* 9216164
* CVD Preparation of Hydrogen Semipermeable Metallic-Ceramic  Membrane Composites
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Jerry Y.S. Lin, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* VIJAY T JOHN
* 06/30/1996
* USD 105,200.00

This study attempts to develop a membrane for use in the high temperature
separation of hydrogen from a gaseous mixture. For high temperature
applications, inorganic membranes are necessary, and palladium and palladium
silver alloy metal membranes exhibit the highest selectivity for hydrogen. The
problems with these metallic membranes are that temperature or pressure cycles
can cause them to crack, and their surfaces can be poisoned by sulfur containing
molecules in the gaseous mixture. To avoid cracking, metallic membranes are
usually fabricated to large thicknesses which imparts a structural rigidity.
However large membrane thicknesses lower the flux to the point where the use of
thick membranes becomes economically unattractive. In order to develop a
membrane with high flux and selectivity, the study suggests forming membranes in
which metallic Pd and Pd/Ag films have been placed inside the pores of a
macroporous ceramic substrate. Two types of porous ceramic membranes will be
used. The first is a one layer . alumina disk with a pore diameter in the range
of .2 - .7 >m. The second is a two layer disk consisting of a thin (5>m), small
pore (5 nm) layer lanthana modified y Al2O3 layer atop a thick (1-2 mm), large
pore (.2 - .7 >m) . alumina support. The metal will be placed in the ceramic
support by using a CVD counterdiffusion process in which PdCl2 or a mixture of
PdCl2 and AgBr will diffuse through the pores from one face of the ceramic
support and H2 will diffuse from the opposite face. When the gases meet
somewhere inside the membrane, the reduction reactions: PdCl2(g) + H2(g) ---
Pd(s) + 2HCl(g) AgBr(g) + 1/2 H2(g) --- Ag(s) + HBr(g) will produce the metal
(or metal alloy) which will span the interstitial space of the pore and form a
gas tight layer. The layers, supported by the ceramic membrane, should be more
durable and less susceptible to chemical attack.