* 9216280
* Genetic Adaptation to High Temperature in a Marine Alga
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Valrie Gerard, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1996
* USD 295,390.00

Temperature is a primary determinant of the distribution of plants. Tolerance
limits of each species are genetically determined, and can be extended through
genetic adaptation. High-temperature adaptation in terrestrial angiosperms has
been shown to involve changes in physiological and biochemical traits, resulting
in greater thermal stability of photosynthesis and net carbon- fixation.
Mechanisms of adaptation will be examined in a marine alga by comparing traits
of a high-temperature tolerant ecotype of the kelp, Laminaria saccharina, from
Long Island Sound and a non adapted population from Maine. Adaptive changes in
photosynthesis vs. temperature responses of each ecotype will be examined in
detail, including time-dependence and reversibility of heat damage, and high-
temperature induced photo inhibition. Thermal responses of dark respiration and
photo respiration will also be compared for each plant. Thermal stability of
photosystem II, the most heat- sensitive component of photosynthesis, will be
examined using chlorophyll fluorescence techniques. Adaptive changes in key
photosynthetic and respiratory enzymes will be determined by comparing thermal
properties in vitro and by comparing activity in plants exposed to superoptimal
temperatures. The results will provide the most comprehensive information to
date about mechanisms by which a marine alga can extend its temperature
tolerance and, thereby, its geographic and environmental ranges.