* 9216905
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Preparation and          Characterization of Thin Films on Substrates
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* David Stevenson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 11/30/1995
* USD 13,580.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-France Cooperative research in electronic
materials. The project involves Robert Sinclair and David Stevenson of Stanford
University and Michel Jaouen, Jean Grilhe and others at the University of
Poitiers. The investigators propose to prepare diamond carbon and diamond-like
carbon films and magnetic layers and then characterize their mechanical
properties and microstructure. Using specialized ion- beam deposition techniques
developed by the Poitiers research group, they will make a new type of carbon
film. Testing of wear resistance and friction will be handled at Poitiers, and
the hardness of the films will be determined by a special indentation machine at
Stanford. Characterization of the materials will be carried out by high-
resolution electron microscopy at Stanford and complemented by electron energy
loss spectroscopy and synchrotron x-ray studies at Orsay. It has been shown that
hard carbon films, composed of a mixed diamond and graphite crystal structure,
used as coatings, could improve friction and wear. However, adhesion of the
coatings on substrates remains a problem for materials researchers. The ultimate
goal of this collaboration is to develop new, wear resistant films with good
tribological and adhesion properties. These new materials are important for
magnetic layers and disk memory applications and could lead to improved computer
and information technologies.