* 9216638
* SGER:  Isolation of a Photoferrotrophic Bacterium from Iron Enriched Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Beverly Pierson, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1994
* USD 25,000.00

A photoferrotrophic bacterium (one that does photosynthesis and uses ferrous
iron as a reductant) will be sought. This organism is a hypothetical phototroph
that is a missing link in the evolution of the oxygen-evolving photosystem II
reaction center in cyanobacteria and the distantly related quinone type reaction
centers of the purple bacteria and Chloroflexus. Large differences in the
sequences of the reaction center polypeptides and large gaps in the reduction
potentials and hence the nature of reductants used for photosynthesis in these
distantly related organisms suggest the probable existence of one or more
organisms that were evolutionary intermediates in photosynthesis. Such an
intermediate organism that photochemically oxidized iron would explain the
geochemical appearance of oxidized iron in the Archean eon before the advent of
oxygenic photosynthesis. Although intermediate organisms may have existed in the
evolutionary history of the reaction center, they may be extinct today.
Consequently this research is exploratory and high risk in nature. Suitable
environments have been identified and will be carefully analyzed for the
presence of microhabitats the could sustain photoferrrotrophy. These
environments include iron-rich acid mine drainage areas, iron springs, and the
sediments of shallow iron rich lakes. The microhabitats will be sought by using
microelectrodes to find anoxic microzones that are exposed to light and that are
high in ferrous iron, low in sulfide, and of neutral or acidic pH. Once suitable
microhabitats have been found, samples will be collected for microscopy, pigment
content, and culture to attempt to isolate a photoferrotroph.