* 9216895
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Segmentation and Fusion  of Visual Motion Information
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Margaret Shiffrar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1996
* USD 15,250.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in
neurosciences between Margaret M. Shiffrar, Rutgers University, and Jean
Lorenceau, Experimental Psychology Laboratory, University of Paris. Through a
convergence of psychophysical, neurophysiological and computational studies, the
investigators propose to address the process of image interpretation in
computational and biological visual systems. Signal fusion and fission; that is,
how visual systems determine which signals should be grouped together, and how
human observers integrate visual motion signals across space and time, are
pivotal issues addressed by this research. Dr. Shiffrar and her colleagues bring
to this collaboration expertise in computational studies of biological systems
and the environment for large scale computational modelling and simulations. The
French group will conduct complementary neurophysiological studies on the visual
perception of motion coherence utilizing multi-electrode recording facilities.
Psychophysical studies designed to measure sensitivity to direction of object
motion will be performed jointly by both groups and serve as the unifying
framework for the neurophysiological and computational methodologies. This cross
disciplinary approach will further understanding of the human visual system and
applied aspects of vision research in video technology and robotics.