* 9216146
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Four-dimensional String  Theories and Low Energy Effective Lagrangians
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Tomasz Taylor, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1996
* USD 15,250.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in theoretical
physics between Tomasz Taylor of Northeastern University and Ignatios Antoniadis
of the Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, France. The investigators will study a theory
of particle physics based on four-dimensional superstrings. Their principal
objective is to determine the derivation of actions that describe the physics of
string excitations at low energies. They will achieve this by computing the
relevant string scattering amplitudes. The results will be applied to studies of
non- perturbative effects in superstring theory and to the problem of
supersymmetry breaking. Both investigators have been involved in research on
supergravity and superstring theory. Dr. Taylor brings to this collaboration his
background in the phenomenological aspects of superstring theory and expertise
on supersymmetry breaking and space-time symmetries. This is complemented by Dr.
Antoniadis expertise on superstring modes and theories and his involvement in
the first constructions of four-dimensional string theories and their
properties. Their combined effort will contribute to our understanding of
superstring theory and string/particle interface. Superstring theory is
important to the fields of particle physics, modern mathematics and condensed
matter physics. It provides a framework of unification for fundamental
interactions of nature and holds great promise as a theory of quantum
gravitation.