* 9216799
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Dissected Dynamics of    Musical Instruments
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Gabriel Weinreich, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1997
* USD 12,250.00

9216799 Weinreich This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative
research between Gabriel Weinreich, University of Michigan, and Xavier Boutillon
of the Musical Acoustics Laboratory, University of Paris VI, in computer studies
of the dynamics of musical instruments and the synthesis and reproduction of
sound. This project extends the previous work of the investigators on a digital
bow, a computer simulation, where a real physical string is bowed by an
electrodynamic force controlled by a ccomputer. The objective of the research is
to continue to utilize computer simulations in studying the dynamic processes by
which musical instruments are set and maintained in oscillation. The U.S.
investigator brings to this collaboration considerable expertise in basic
physics. This is complemented by the French investigator's work in acoustics and
musical instruments. The mechanical and physical processes of vibrating
instruments are not only of interest in the immediate area of musical acoustics,
but also have important implications for other fields, such as structural
vibration and mechanics. In addition, the project addresses problems of
replacing parts of a mechanical system with a computer programmed to operate in
real time. These efforts could have important consequences in the general area
of digital control systems. ***