* 9216037
* Designing at the Functional Level of Abstraction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1992,09/01/1992
* Farrokh Mistree, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 09/01/1992
* USD 0.00

In the early stages of a design project, it is especially important to be able
to represent, at a high level of abstraction, the functional requirements of the
system being designed. This makes it possible for the design team to arrange and
rearrange the essential functional components rapidly. This also offers a means
to explore the feasibility of different system configurations and to pose and
answer "what-if" questions before the design is frozen. Similarly, if one is
able to model processes associated with manufacture, then in a like manner, the
feasibility of different manufacturing systems can be explored. It is well known
that design for manufacture tools are implementable and useful once the design
of a component is known. But what if it is necessary to address the issue of
design for manufacture very early, for example, when only the function is known?
At present, this remains an open question. If the tools for modeling function
and manufacturing processes at the function level of abstraction are developed
then it should be possible to pose and answer "what-if" questions that occur at
the function-manufacture interface. The development of the means to include
manufacturing considerations in design when only the functional requirements are
known is the focus of this research.