* 9216943
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Modeling the Behavior of Non Ideal Mixtures in Porous Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1997
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1997
* USD 14,000.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in chemical
engineering between Peter A. Monson of the University of Massachusetts and
Martin L. Rosinberg of the Pierre and Marie Curie University in Paris. The
investigators propose theoretical molecular studies on the adsorption of fluids
in porous materials. They will examine mixtures where significant nonideal
behavior occurs in the bulk fluid state in order to understand how the behavior
of the fluids are modified by confinement in porous materials. Both the U.S. and
French research groups have longstanding research programs in the statistical
mechanics of adsorption. Dr. Monson and his research team bring to this
collaboration expertise in Monte Carlo simulations of adsorption. This is
complemented by Dr. Rosinberg's innovative theoretical approach based on density
functional theory. The work will be supplemented by integral equation theories
and analytic solutions of one dimensional models. Their combined efforts are
aimed at validating the potential of this theoretical approach through
comparisons with the results of Monte Carlo calculations. The topic is timely
and has important technological applications ranging from adsorption separations
to heterogeneous catalysis to modeling reservoir fluids in enhanced oil
recovery.