* 9216421
* Synchronization Mechanisms for High-Performance Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* James Anderson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 11/30/1996
* USD 181,677.00

The design, analysis, and implementation of highly concurrent synchronization
mechanisms shall be investigated. In the traditional approach to
synchronization, conflicting operations are implemented as mutually exclusive
"critical sections". This has the effect of serializing operations, much to the
detriment of performance. Such implementations also suffer from a lack of
resiliency, as they are not immune to halting failures. Highly concurrent
synchronization mechanisms minimize these shortcomings by either eliminating or
reducing the need for critical sections. The research is divided into three
principal components. The first component involves the development of highly
concurrent synchronization mechanism and the development of tools for
automatically incorporating such mechanisms in concurrent and distributed
programs. The second component is concerned with the analysis of synchronization
mechanisms by means of discrete-event simulation. The third and final component
is concerned with implementation, specifically the synchronization mechanisms on
a variety of real-world computing applications. The tools and algorithms
developed will be of use to system designers and application programmers alike,
providing a sound basis for the development of high-performance, fault-tolerant
distributed computing applications.