* 9216189
* Origin and Transport Properties of Coherent Structures      in the Planetary Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Richard Lindzen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 09/30/1995
* USD 165,500.00

The object of this research is the investigation of the origin and transport
properties of coherent structures in the planetary boundary layer (PBL) using
transient development theory. Previous theoretical work on this topic has been
limited to the investigation of the modal instabilities and these studies
confirm that coherent structures in the form of rolls, often revealed as cloud
streets, are produced most efficiently under convectively unstable conditions.
Recent work on transient non-modal development of unstratified laboratory flows
demonstrates that coherent structures develop robustly in flows possessing no
modal instabilities. In this project, transient development theory will be
applied for the first time to convectively stable and unstable viscous shear
flows. The initial disturbances that lead to the largest energy growth will be
determined through the employment of a variational method. The structure and
evolution of these disturbances will be studied, along with their dependence on
the Richardson, Reynolds, and Prandtl number. Transport properties associated
with the second order exchange process will also be studied. Because the
structures evolve in time, the second order correlations will be obtained as
mean quantities over the life cycle of the dominant perturbations from initial
growth to ultimate decay. This study addresses issues important to further
progress in understanding tracer transport, air-sea interaction, organization of
cloud streets, and parameterization of heat and momentum in NWP and climate
models.