* 9216699
* Zeolitic Solid Acid Catalysts for the Alkylation of         Isoparaffins with Olefins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,06/30/1996
* James Wei, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/1996
* USD 348,847.00

Through the process of alkylation, lighter isoparaffins can be combined with
small olefins to produce heavier, higher octane gasoline components. This
alkylation of light isoparaffins, typically isobutane, with olefins, typically
butenes or propylene, to produce high octane gasoline components, is an
important process in refinery operation. It is currently carried out with either
sulfuric acid or hydrogen fluoride as the catalyst, the choice depending on
specific conditions and requirement. Environmental and safety pressures are
forcing refiners to replace corrosive, toxic or hazardous materials with more
benign and environmentally acceptable materials. The sulfuric acid process
produces a hazardous sludge which needs to be disposed of. The explosion hazard
with resulting toxic vapor cloud makes the HF process undesirable. New catalytic
routes for alkylation utilizing solid acid catalysts are therefore being
developed. While various zeolites have been studied as potential catalysts for
the reaction of isobutane with butenes (or propylene), no viable commercial
process has yet emerged primarily because of the unacceptably rapid rate of
catalyst deactivation through coking. The PIs will synthesize and modify a
number of potentially viable zeolite catalysts with the properties of high
reactivities and low coking rates, and will carry out a study of the reaction
kinetics and coking characteristics. They will then select the most promising
catalyst, and perform a detailed reactor design analysis in order to identify
the most desirable process configuration.