* 9216979
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Synthesis of Polyacety-  lene Derivatives and Confinement Studies in Langmuir-       Blodgett Films
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1996
* Randolph Duran, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1996
* USD 15,250.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in materials
science between Randolph S. Duran of the University of Florida and J. Le Moigne
of the Institute of Physics and Chemistry of Materials in Strasbourg, France.
The objective of the research is to develop thin films of new, conjugated
polyenic polymers with enhanced non-linear optical (NLO) properties. While
materials with NLO properties have been known since the sixties and applied in
integrated optics and photonics, there is a need to study the structure-property
correlation of these materials in order to optimize their design. The French
group will synthesize a series of polymers having high planar content, thus
allowing for high NLO properties. Subsequently, the Florida group will prepare
thin films with controlled molecular conformation and ordering from the
synthesized polymers. The structure of the resulting thin films will be
characterized by both groups. The proposal takes advantage of the expertise of
an outstanding French polymer research group in synthesis and characterization
techniques. The collaboration will advance the basic understanding of the NLO
properties of polymers and their potential for optoelectric and photonic
applications.