* 9216646
* Heterogeneous Atmospheric Chemistry: Modeling Tropospheric  Processes and Effects
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Richard Turco, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/1997
* USD 495,000.00

92166646 Turco This research project will continue the establishment of a
comprehensive modeling capability for tropospheric heterogenous chemical
processes and effects. A hierarchy of models will be developed to study
systematically the chemical phenomena occurring on aerosol and cloud particles.
The models will treat the basic physical and chemical processes of gas-
particles. The models will treat the basic physical and chemical processes of
gas-particle interactions, which will be calibrated using laboratory and field
data. The heterogenous physics and chemistry models will be coupled to models
that simulate atmospheric dynamics (and radiative transfer), allowing
applications to problems including the evolution of sulfate aerosols in the
marine boundary layer, the chemistry that occurs on ice in cirrus clouds, and
the relationship of atmospheric chemistry that occurs on ice in cirrus clouds,
and the relationship of atmospheric chemistry to cloud radiative effects. These
models will be unique in several respects. They will be based on fundamental
processes -- for example, nucleation and surface adsorption -- to achieve more
realistic mechanistic treatments of heterogenous processes than are presently
used. The models will be more quantitative in defining coupled physical and
chemical processes, and will be designed for integration into comprehensive
tropospheric chemistry simulations. This research program emphasizes model
development and student training in atmospheric chemistry and climate.