* 9216357
* U.S.-Brazil Coooperative Science Program:  New Developments in Nonlinear Conservation Laws
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Bradley Plohr, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 06/30/1995
* USD 23,300.00

This US-Brazil Cooperative Science Program award will support research
collaboration by seven US mathematicians from various institutions, led by
Bradley Plohr of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, with a
Brazilian group led by Daniel Marchesin of the Pure and Applied Mathematics
Institute (IMPA) in Rio de Janeiro. The award will also support participation by
two US mathematicians in a July 1993 Workshop on Partial Differential Equations,
held at IMPA. The research project aims to analyze mixed-type systems of
conservation laws, which will also be a focus of the Workshop. These systems
occur in several scientific areas, including multiphase flow, elastoplasticity,
and magnetohydrodynamics. Funds will support travel to Brazil by four US
mathematicians and three US graduate students, as well as travel to the US by a
Brazilian graduate student. The researchers will build on their previous work on
the mathematical theory of fundamental solutions of nonlinear systems of
conservation laws, including stability and bifurcation. They will use this
theory to upgrade the general computer program for nonlinear waves, to allow use
in more complicated systems that arise in applications, such as enhanced oil
recovery and elastoplasticity. They will also focus on modelling issues
uncovered from knowledge of such solutions. The US side will benefit from
interaction with counterparts at IMPA, which is a center of excellence in
dynamical systems. The Brazilian side will strengthen their expertise in applied
mathematics.