* 9216450
* Stability and Control of Intelligent Vehicle/Highway Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Robert Stengel, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

This proposal addresses one of the most complex technological problems
confronting today's society: the minimization of congestion on our nation's
roads and high ways. It is unlikely that significant improvements can be made
without the application of the principles of Intelligent Control. Toward
achieving this goal, we propose to formulate system models, to analyze vehicle
and network modalities, and to design control, estimation, an d identification
algorithms for Intelligent Vehicle/Highway Systems (IVHS). We will develop a
theoretical basis for applying intelligent control to large-scale, complex
systems, using IVHS as a substantive example. Our approach is rooted in
optimization and control theory, as well as decisions analysis an artificial
intelligence. This is a multidisciplinary problem; hence, principal
investigators from Princeton's Departments of Civil Engineering and Operations
Research, Electrical Engineering, and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering will
work together to solve it. Furthermore, we will collaborate with the Vehicle
Systems Research Department of the General Motors Research Laboratories
(providing a link to the TravTek IVHS Program currently underway in Orlando,
Florida) and the TRANSCOM Interagency IVHS Program (Northern New Jersey and
Metropolitan New York area) to assure that this research is not only
scientifically meritorious but relevant to real needs. The proposed research
separates naturally into three tasks: 1) Modeling Intelligent Vehicles and
Schools of Intelligent Vehicles, 2) Intelligent Traffic Management and
Information Transfer for Minimizing Congestion, 3) Graphic Simulation of
Intelligent Vehicle/Highway Systems. These three tasks will be conducted
concurrently and jointly by the principal investigators and their students.
Anticipated outputs of the proposed research include a new discrete-event
formalism for analyzing systems of rule-based controllers and physical plants, a
hierarchical structure for intelligent management of large-scale systems, and a
flexible graphics tool for investigating mixed-variable dynamic systems, with
emphasis on IVHS scenarios.