* 9216720
* Dissertation Research:  Organization of Chalichihuites      Mining, Zacatecas, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1992,04/30/1994
* NONE NONE, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/1994
* USD 11,988.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ben Nelson, Mr. Vincent Schiavitti will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork in the
Chalchihuites area of northern Mexico and combine ceramic analysis with survey
of both archaeological sites and associated mine complexes. The goal of the work
is to define more clearly the chronological sequence for this important region
and to trace changes in settlement pattern and mining activity. On this basis
comparisons can then be made with developments in other parts of both Mexico and
the American Southwest and cultural interactions defined. The Chalchihuites area
is important because it contains over 750 mines, the earliest of which are
believed to date from ca. 300 A.D. The tradition probably endured for at least
400 years. Chalchihuites mining consisted of the extraction of semi-precious and
utiliaarian stones and minerals such as hematite, limonite, blue green stones,
cinnabar, weathered chert and ochres. Some of these were mined in quantities far
exceeding local needs and these activities left behind a wealth of
archaeological remains that can be used to explore organizational aspects of
this once thriving mining society. In prehistoric times Central and Northern
Mexico reached levels of complexity characterized by the integration of local
groups into larger regional networks. Archaeologists wish to understand just how
these larger units or primitive "states" functioned and the extent to which
developments - such as the development of the extensive Chalchihuites mining
complex - can be interpreted only in this broader context. During much of this
time period the Mesoamerican world was dominated by Teotihuacan in Central
Mexico and it is unclear how far to the North its power extended. Because the
mining complex is not well dated it is not possible to examine such issues. Mr.
Schiavitti's research will help to answer this question. This research is
important because it will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will increase our understanding of how states develop and will assist in the
training of a promising young scientist.