* 9216935
* Development and Application of a Continuous Flow Isotope-   Ratio Mass Spectrometer interfaced to an HPLC
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1999
* Fred Abramson, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 02/28/1999
* USD 762,827.00

9216935 Abramson This program will assemble for the first time an HPLC and a
continuous flow isotope ratio mass spectrometer. The component pieces are: 1. a
high performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC); 2. a Vestec Universal HPLC/MS
interface; 3. a chemical reaction interface (CRI); and 4. an isotope ratio mass
spectrometer system (IRMS). This proposal emerges from: the PI's development of
the CRI; an extensive range of CRI-MS applications using capillary gas
chromatography coupled to conventional mass spectrometers; and the recent
development of an interface to the CRI for HPLC that makes this approach
possible. The unique chemistry of the CRI should improve l5N determinations
compared with classical combustion methods. This type of instrument offers
researchers who use isotopes and IRMS an expanded range of target molecules
including intact biological polymers. Compared to HPLC/conventional MS
approaches, 13C and l5N will be selectively detected at greatly reduced isotopic
abundance. In addition, intact biological macromolecules can be analyzed
directly by the CRI-IRMS for isotopic quantitation. This will greatly improve
analyses in biological systems where either 14C would have been a tracer or
where the tedious sequence of hydrolysis followed by chromatographic separation
and MS analysis of selected monomers would be required.