* 9216178
* Interface Formation with Atoms, Ions, and Clusters
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1997
* John Weaver, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 09/30/1997
* USD 300,500.00

The goal of this research is to explore interfacial phenomena associated with
the deposition of atoms, ions, and clusters on semiconductor surfaces. This work
combines scanning tunneling microscopy with ab initio molecular dynamics
simulations to correlate interfacial structures and properties with the dynamics
of condensation ions and small clusters are deposited directly on the substrate
using laser-assisted supersonic expansion. The experimental studies are unique
because the energy, the trajectory, and the number of atoms in the cluster are
controlled and because scanning tunneling microscopy is used to image the
resultant surface and overlayer structure. The theoretical studies are unique
because new computational techniques are implemented for determining the
structure and interaction parameters of atoms and clusters on surfaces. These
studies should allow analysis of growth conditions with quantum interatomic
forces and testing of the predictions with surface analysis techniques. The
proposed studies are important because the focus on properties of complex non-
equilibrium systems where chemical and physical properties at the interface
change over microscopic scales. Interface formation during non-equilibrium
vacuum deposition is one of the challenging problems in the present day solid
state sciences. Because the goal of this research is to correlate interface
properties and interface structure, the successful realization of the proposed
work will have significant impacts on the nano-fabrication of new electronic
devices and the understanding of other surface related processes such as
catalysis.