* 9216978
* Dissertation Research:Exchange and Production in the U. S.  Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1992,03/31/1995
* Laurie Webster, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1995
* USD 10,280.00

Under the direction of Dr. Charles Adams, MS Laurie Webster will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation. She will utilize archaeological and ethnographic
materials as well as historical accounts to reconstruct the prehistoric and
early historic Pueblo Indian system of textile production and exchange. She will
visit a number of museums which house specimens and study the methods by which
they were manufactured. Because of the dry Southwestern U.S. environment many
textiles preserve well in archaeological contexts and therefore it is possible
to gain information on prehistoric textile use. Extensive ethnographic
collections also exist and therefore one can trace changes into historic times.
Textiles played a very important role in Pueblo society. In addition to their
utilitarian function they were widely used for religious and other symbolic
purposes. They played a major economic role and social role. When the Spanish
conquered the Pueblo peoples they reorganized textile production and in some
areas established an industry. Textile manufacture was also affected in more
indirect ways with the introduction of new materials, such as sheep wool, dyes
and weaving implements. Ms. Webster's goal is to trace changes from the pre-
Spanish through Spanish period. The ultimate purpose is not to understand
textiles as textiles, but rather to use them to gain insight into the Pueblo
economic and social systems and to learn how this indigenous group adapted to
culture change. This research is important for several reasons. It will increase
our understanding of the relationship between material culture and
social/economic organization. It will shed new light on the American past and
assist in the training of a promising young scientist.