* 9216629
* Zooplankton Photoresponses during Diel Vertical Migration:  Modificaiton by Chemical Cues from Predators
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Richard Forward, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1998
* USD 134,737.00

Most zooplankton undergo diel vertical migration (DVM) at some stage of
development. The common pattern involves an ascent near sunset and descent near
sunrise. The most pervasive functional explanations are that animals rise to
feed at night and descend to avoid visually-oriented predators during the day.
Recent studies indicate the presence and absence of planktivores can alter DVM
through rapid behavioral changes. Since light is the most important cue for DVM,
alterations in migration by cues from predators should involve changes in
photoresponses. Thus, photoresponses can be used as a behavioral assay to direct
characterization, purification and identification of the chemical cue(s) from
predators. The objectives of this project are: (1) to determine whether
photoresponses involved in DVM are altered by the presence or absence of
planktivores that do (fish) and do not (ctenophore and chaetognath) visually
sight their prey, (2) to determine whether chemical cues form predators induce
alterations in zooplankton photoresponses that are involved in DVM, and (3) to
characterize the chemical cues form the predators. Larvae of the crab
Rhithropanopeus harrisii and of brine shrimp (Artemia sp.) will be studied
because both undergo DVM and preliminary studies suggest their photoresponses
are altered by chemical cues from planktivores. Photoresponses will be monitored
with a video system and tested in an apparatus that mimics the natural
underwater angular light distribution. Preliminary studies indicate the active
chemicals from fish are less than 500 Daltons in molecular size and the
investigators predict that the biologically active molecules are odors generated
by hydrolysis of molecules found commonly on fish surfaces. Disaccharides
originating form fish mucus, and small peptides originating from epithelial
proteins are likely candidates.