* 9216235
* Human Performance in the Complex Workplace:  Implications   for Basic Research in Cognitive Science
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1993
* Valerie Shalin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 05/31/1993
* USD 36,076.00

The objective of this workshop is to assist in the development of an integrated
perspective on the scope, achievements, and promise of Cognitive Science. An
applications perspective on Cognitive Science furthers this goal in three
respects: First, the ability to address applications problems provides one
standard for recognizing progress and for identifying absent areas of scientific
understanding. Second, applications problems generally require the integration
of multiple scientific disciplines, but drive integration with a common goal and
context for interdisciplinary discussion. Third, complex applications problems
may assist in clarifying the boundaries of Cognitive Science, by introducing
research needs that are clearly outside the basic research agenda for the
community. This workshop will assemble twenty-four prominent researchers from
the basic Cognitive Science research community; they have been chosen for their
eagerness to generate the mapping between their basic research activities and
applications, while strengthening their own understanding of applied problems.
The workshop will be conducted over a two-day period and will center on the
theme of Human Performance in the Complex Workplace. It will include
representatives from the basic research community, NSF, the applied research
community, and application-domain specialists from government and industry. The
morning sessions will consist of brief presentations by domain specialists. The
afternoon sessions will consist of small working groups, each analyzing a
complex applications problem according to the lines of relevant Cognitive
Science research. The conclusions from each working group will be assembled and
preserved in the form of a publishable report. The expected outcomes include
increased awareness by both the scientifically- and practically-oriented
participants of the potential relevance of the Cognitive Sciences to
applications concerns. The workshop is also likely to promote interest in
uninvestigated aspects of Cognitive Science that serve as barriers both to
greater scientific understanding as well as to societally useful applications.