* 9216726
* Pollution Prevention Through Precision Process              Modelling, Design and Operation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* W. Harmon Ray, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/29/1996
* USD 300,000.00

To have a broad impact on pollution prevention at the source in the chemical
process industries (CPI), a multifaceted approach to the underlying fundamental
problems is needed. Developing totally new processes involves huge new capital
investments in order to affect a fraction of the pollutants produced by the CPI
today. With many trillions of dollars invested in existing chemical and oil
refining plants in the U.S., it will be many years before research directed at
totally new processes will have widespread impact on pollution reduction. In
order to have an important effect in reducing the production of pollutants in
the next 10-20 years, focusses process revamps which require modest capital
investments and maximize the impact of pollution reduction are desirable. These
approaches, while complementing important research on totally new processes, can
have greater impact in the next two decades because they require the least
investment and produce the greatest benefits. A requirement for success is
identifying good candidates for process modeling, design, and operation in order
to achieve the desired pollution reduction goals. This research is directed
towards developing new basic engineering tools for analyzing and designing
processes so as to make modifications for pollution prevention, and then
demonstrating the tools and the underlying principles on real problems form the
CPI. This research consists of fundamental studies of new basic engineering
tools for precision process technology directed towards improvements in process
design and process operation so as to eliminate pollution at its source. The
project will be broken into four components: (1) The application of detailed
process models and the emerging results in dynamic stability theory in order to
create parameter maps in process design and operation space which simultaneously
satisfy product specifications, production goals, and process dynamics which
avoid process runaway episodes or large scale venting for safety reasons. (2)
The development of fundamental control strategies for nonlinear processes
subject to runaway because of process sensitivity and limited controller power
(e.g. limited heat transfer capabilities). (3) The development of general
principles and strategies for product grade transitions for high volume
processes in which off-spec product must be disposed of as waste. (4) The
development of new polymerization processes which avoid the use of solvents in
production and ultimate application. The research will be carried out in
collaboration with some of the twelve industrial sponsors of the University of
Wisconsin Polymerization Reaction Engineering Laboratory (UWPREL).