* 9216386
* Intelligent Control of Mechanical Structures for Damage     Mitigation and Failure Prognosis
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Asok Ray, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

Interdisciplinary research in the fields of control systems, structural
dynamics, and materials science is proposed for damage mitigation and failure
prognosis of mechanical structures as an augmentation to intelligent control and
diagnostics in complex dynamic processes. The key ideas of the proposed research
are (i) a significant improvement in service life could be achieved by a small
reduction in the system dynamic performance; and (ii) impending failures of
critical plant components can be predicted in real time. Specifically, prognoses
of impending component failures are critical for enhancement of plant and
personnel safety, improvement of availability and operability, and reduction of
operational cost. As the science and technology of materials continue to evolve,
the design methodologies for damage- mitigating control and failure prognostics
must have the capability of easily incorporating an appropriate representation
of material properties. This requires augmentation of the current system-
theoretic and AI-based techniques for synthesis of decision and control laws
with governing equations and inequality constraints that would model the
properties of the materials for the purpose of damage representation and failure
prognosis. The major challenge in this research is to extract the information
from the material properties and then utilize this information in a mathematical
form for synthesizing intelligent control and diagnostic systems.