* 9216045
* Systems with Competing Periodicities
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1997
* Indubala Satija, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1997
* USD 163,000.00

A two-dimensional electron gas in a generic potential and a transverse magnetic
field exhibits very intriguing fractal spectra with various crossings and
avoided crossings in the band structure. These crossings are characterized by
integral topological invariants. These features are key towards understanding
some recent experiments in the organic conductors which exhibit cascades of
field-induced spin density waves and will have novel consequences in experiments
involving quantum dot arrays. In the incommensurate limit, a two-dimensional
electron gas exhibits a cascade of metal-insulator transitions which at zero
temperature has a "devil's fork" phase diagram. A large class of models will be
studied to demonstrate that this fractal phase diagram is universal. Some of the
quantum chaos models will be examined and their experimental consequences will
be explored. In addition, topological aspects of quantum chaos will be studied
in order to obtain a unified picture of a large class of systems with competing
periodicities. A general formalism to study the finite temperature properties of
systems with competing lengths will be developed. This method will be applied to
calculate thermodynamical properties of field-induced spin density waves systems
and the magnetic Fibonacci and other periodic superlattices. A novel aspect of
the Fibonacci lattices is the power law behavior with modulations in the
thermodynamic properties. %%% Theoretical research will be conducted on a
variety of physical and model systems which have competing periodicities. This
competition between various natural periods of the systems results in highly
nonlinear behavior. Special mathematical techniques need to be applied to
understand the resulting behavior. Physical systems to be studied include the
two-dimensional electron gas which forms at semiconductor interfaces exposed to
high magnetic fields, quantum dot arrays, and magnetic waves induced in organic
conductors. The chaotic limit will also be studied. The results of this work
will yield generic techniques to handle these type of systems and will assist in
interpreting the behavior of these technologically important materials.