* 9216034
* Queueing Dynamics and Optimization Issues in Parallel and   Distributed Processing Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1992,10/31/1996
* Nicholas Bambos, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 10/31/1996
* USD 194,780.00

In this project parallel and distributed processing systems will be studied
from a queueing theoretic point of view, and related problems of dynamical
optimization will be addressed. A fundamental understanding of how concurrency,
coordination and scheduling issues, emerging at the level of basic operations,
affect the macroscopic dynamics and performance of such systems will be
acquired. General analysis techniques and systematic design principles will be
identified. The design (synthesis) of efficient operational schemes will be
addressed, for the optimization of parallel and distributed processing systems
arising in computing and flexible manufacturing, with respect to criteria
concerning throughput, delays buffer occupancies, lead balancing, fault-
tolerance etc. Basic prototypical models, extracted from various practical
processing situations in computing and manufacturing, will be studied in a
unified framework, with emphasis on rigorous mathematical results and provable
bounds. New queueing models will be developed to capture essential features of
concurrency and coordination and allowing the systematic analysis of the
dynamics and performance of processing protocols. Real-time scheduling and
resource allocation schemes will be studied in a natural stochastic framework.
In cases where the relevant optimal scheduling algorithms are of high
complexity, the focus will be on exploring simple (low complexity) scheduling
schemes. Other aspects of stochastic, dynamic scheduling will also be examined,
if necessary by simulation. The research should develop an understanding of the
dynamical aspects of parallel and distributed processing in computer systems and
flexible manufacturing, at a fundamental mathematical level, and for
establishing techniques to optimize performance, based on a solid mathematical
methodology. The applied branch of this research will study specific practical
systems that motivate the general models.