* 9216680
* Workshop on Earthworm Ecology in Forest, Rangeland and      Crop Ecosystems in North America
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1994
* Paul Hendrix, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1994
* USD 24,899.00

This proposal request funding for a workshop to evaluate the state of our
understanding of earthworm ecology in North America. The earthworm fauna and
their role in ecosystem function in the western hemisphere are poorly known
compared with other regions of Earth, especially Europe and Oceania. Although it
is widely recognized that earthworms can exert significant influence on
physical, chemical and biological processes in soils, it is not clear how
generally results from other biogeographic regions apply to ecological
conditions and earthworm assemblages (particularly native earthworm fauna)
prevalent in North America. The focus of this workshop will be on the influence
of earthworms on soil processes in forest, rangeland and crop ecosystems over
the range of climatic and soil conditions that occur in North America, including
Canada and Alaska, the continental U.S., Mexico, and the Caribbean islands.
Investigators from each region will be invited to participate (total of ca. 30
people). Objectives are to evaluate our current understanding and to chart
future research needs in four topic areas: 1) systematics and biodiversity; 2)
biogeography 3) ecosystem processes; and 4) management implications. The final
product of the workshop will be a peer- reviewed volume containing final
position papers in each topic area and short contributions based on poster
presentations. This volume will be a state-of-the-art resource for research,
teaching and application.