* 9216356
* Conference:  Steroid Action on Excitable Cells: November 6, 1993; Washington D.C.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1994
* Harold Zakon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 06/30/1994
* USD 5,000.00

Funds are provided to defray travel costs of young scientists and invited
participants to attend the Conference on Steroid Action on Excitable Cells which
is to be held as a Satellite Symposium at the 1993 Society for Neuroscience on
November 6, 1993 in Washington, DC. Since the 1960's, it has been readily
accepted that the mechanism of steroid hormone action is by a genomic route.
However, in some circumstances, hormones can have effects within seconds to
minutes. Until recently, these data were ignored because it did not fit the
dogma. Now it has become clear that steroid action in the brain is more complex
than that previously thought. Indeed, steroid action is mediated by both genomic
and non-genomic routes. The conference will address the mechanisms through which
steroid hormones and thyroid hormones act on excitable cells. The presentations
will highlight the exciting recent work on (1) the modulatory action of steroid
on amino acid receptors in the hippocampus; (2) the use of simple model systems
as means to examine the actions of hormones on identified, voltage-clamped, ion
currents; (3) novel hormone receptors; and (4) the molecular and biochemical
actions of steroids. These are fundamentally important questions in an field
that is rapidly advancing and changing. This Satellite Symposium offers a forum
for sharing of ideas on this subject which may ultimately lead to breakthroughs
in understanding the mechanisms of steroid hormone action.