* 9216787
* Fifth Conference on the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory,October 22-24, 1992, U of California, Irvine, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1993
* Gary Lynch, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Karen Sigvardt
* 09/30/1993
* USD 20,000.00

This action is provide support for the Fifth Conference on the Neurobiology of
Learning and Memory to be held in Irvine, CA on October 22-24, 1992. The general
theme of this meeting, "Brain and Memory: Modulation and Mediation of
Neuroplasticity" is timely and of high importance to the field. State-of-the-art
lectures will be given by internationally recognized investigators highlighting
four exciting areas. First, the relationship between emotion and memory will be
examined. The findings and theories examined in this session have implications
for understanding the role of motivation, emotion and stress in learning and
memory. Second, recent findings and theory concerning age-related changes in
brain and memory in animals and humans will be explored. The third session will
focus on the plasticity in the cerebral cortex, which has received only limited
attention to date but has long been recognized as the main processing structure
and probably the ultimate forebrain storage site of memories. Finally, the
relationship between long-term potentiation and memory will be probed. The
format of this conference will insure cross-fertilization of ideas on
fundamentally important questions on how we learn and remember. Some of the
funds are to used for support of selected graduate and postdoctoral students who
might overwise not be able to attend this outstanding conference.***//