* 9216807
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:   Asymmetric Induction in Radical Cyclizations
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* David Crich, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1996
* USD 7,000.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in organic
synthesis between David Crich of the University of Illinois at Chicago, and
Michelle Bertrand of the University of Aix Marseille III. The research involves
synthetic applications of radical chemistry and focuses on a series of
experiments to probe, understand and apply radical cyclization reactions in
asymmetric synthesis. The investigators will synthesize a variety of carbon-
carbon dienyl acetates and identify their cyclization reactions. Radical
cyclizations induced through the addition of sulfonyl to alkenes will also be
studied. The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in the
design of new free radical chain reactions and their application to the
synthesis of complex molecules. They will continue to work on acyl radicals and
their cyclizations reactions and the used of diastereoselection radical
reactions in carbohydrate chemistry. This is complemented by the French
investigators' work on the study of sulfonyl radical cyclizations. Radical
cyclizations have been extensively studied in recent years and are now employed
in organic synthesis. Macrocyclizations, which is addressed by the
investigators, have not been studied. Results of this research may lead to new
techniques that provide the basis for designed synthesis of new materials and
natural products.