* 9216130
* Multidisciplinary Synthesis of Chukchi Sea Ecosystem:       Chemical Processes
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Terry Whitledge, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Myers
* 12/31/1995
* USD 150,714.00

This collaborative effort will make use of an extensive and unique data set
collected over several years from the Chukchi Sea. Investigators from three
institutions will study the interactions of physical, chemical, and biological
processes of the Chukchi Sea ecosystem to define its present and perhaps future
trophic status through a series of data and simulation analyses. The chemical
processes associated with biological and physical processes in the Chukchi Sea
will be assessed using data from a series of 13 current meter moorings in
1990-1991 and seven bilateral U.S.-U.S.S.R. cruises during 1988-1991. The source
water concentrations of nutrients flowing through Bering Strait into the Arctic
will be determined on an annual basis for the years 1988-1991 and will be
combined with buoyancy flux estimates to calculate nutrient flux estimates.
Nutrient budgets for the Chukchi Sea shelf will be constructed and compared to
subsurface oxygen inventories and primary production estimates. In addition,
dominant phytoplankton groups will be identified and related to their respective
nutrient habitats. Organic decomposition (regeneration) and respiration
processes will be examined using systematic changes in regenerated nutrients and
dissolved oxygen. The work supports the goals and research priorities of the
Arctic System Science (ARCSS) program of the Global Geosciences Initiative.