* 9216798
* Quantifying Charge and Stability Influences on Protein      Adsorption with Synthetic Mutants of Bacteriophage T4       Lysozyme
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Joseph McGuire, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1997
* USD 201,973.00

This project deals with application of a kinetic model describing the general
sequence of events undergone by protein at an interface to quantify protein
charge and stability effects on interfacial behavior. Selected synthetic mutants
of bacteriophage T4 lysozyme are produced form transformed cells obtained from
the Institute of Molecular Biology at the University of Oregon. Mutants
exhibiting differences in thermodynamic stability and charge are used to
quantify the influences of these molecular properties on reaction rate constants
describing protein attachment and unfolding at each of a series of solid
surfaces differing in hydrophobicity. Silicon surfaces will be modified by
silanization with dichlorodimethylsilane, and in situ ellipsometry will be used
to measure the adsorption kinetics and isotherm describing each specific
protein- surface contact. Upon completion of the project, current multi-protein
adsorption models could be re-examined and refined by studying adsorption from
mixtures of lysozyme mutants. Experimentation with more relevant mixtures of
proteins would then allow deviations from predicted behavior to be related to
properties such as molecular size and shape in a more readily quantifiable way.
This approach is expected to result in a sound starting point for quantifying
competitive adsorption from complex media and may lead to new separation
techniques.