* 9216914
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:   Measurements of         Beryllium-10, Aluminum-26 and Helium-3 in Antarctic Glacial Deposits
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Mark Kurz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1996
* USD 12,100.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in glacial
geochronology involving Mark D. Kurz and Edward J. Brook of Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute and Grant Raisbeck of the Center for Nuclear
Spectrometry, Orsay. The principal objective of this research is to take
collaborative measurements of cosmogenic isotopes - beryllium, aluminum and
helium in order to define the chronology of Antarctic glaciations. These isotope
measurements are particularly suited for dating glacial deposits in Antarctica
where erosion is slow and the surface exposures are excellent. Dr. Kurz is a
specialist in helium isotopes. He and Mr. Brook will work together on the
measurements. This is complemented by Dr. Raisbeck's pioneering work in
radionuclides and collaboration with the AMS (Accelerator Mass Spectrometry)
group at Orsay and their expertise in the analyses of beryllium and aluminum.
Inclusion of these two isotopes will provide useful chronological information
and strengthen this technique for dating and detecting potential analytical
problems. Exposure age dating, using cosmogenic isotopes, is an important
technique in the reconstruction of paleoclimate. This collaboration is part of a
worldwide effort to establish this technique. Results will contribute to our
understanding of historical climate change and the chronology of Antarctic
glaciations.