* 9216882
* Isolation of Copper-Complexing Organic Ligands from Seawaterand Characterization of Their Copper-Complexation           Characteristics
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Andrew Gordon, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 06/30/1995
* USD 164,384.00

Dissolved copper in surface seawater in many locations exists primarily in
complexes with strong organic ligands, which are distinguished by their
complexing strengths. However, these ligands have never been isolated and
characterized; thus, almost nothing is known about their chemical nature.
Isolation and characterization of these ligands is extremely important to our
understanding of the biogeochemical cycling of copper and the ligands
themselves, and perhaps that of other metals which may be similarly complexed.
Recently, immobilized metal (Cu2+) affinity chromatography (IMAC) has been used
to purify extracellular copper- binding proteins produced by marine bacteria,
and also to isolate and partially characterize organic compounds with affinity
for copper from estuarine, coastal, and open ocean waters. IMAC- isolated
ligands have depth distributions similar to those of ligands that strongly
complex Cu in the Atlantic and Pacific. This pilot project will determine
whether IMAC, using either established or modified protocols, can isolate these
ligands, ligands detected in seawater by differential pulse anodic stripping
voltammetry (DPASV) and ligand competition/differential pulse cathodic stripping
voltammetry (LC/DPCSV). The appropriate IMAC protocol will then be used in
conjunction with DPASV and LC/DPCSV to characterize the ligands in coastal
surface seawater with respect to: their concentrations, conditional stability
constants, relative proportions of protein and polysaccharide comprising them,
and molecular weight.