* 9216909
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Giant Magnetoresistance  of Magnetic Multilayers
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1997
* Jack Bass, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1997
* USD 15,850.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in condensed
matter physics involving Peter A. Schroeder, William P. Pratt and Jack Bass of
Michigan State University and Albert Fert of the University of Paris (Orsay),
and M. Panissod of the Institute of the Physics and Chemistry of Materials in
Strasbourg, France. The subject of the research explores the recent discovery
that metallic multilayers with one ferromagnetic component, display Giant
Magnetoresistance (GMR). GMR, a large drop in resistance when a magnetic field
is applied, has been observed in several systems of metallic materials. The
investigators propose to understand the physics involved and find other systems
which exhibit similar properties. The research has important practical
applications in the area of magnetic storage and magnetic sensors and could lead
to improved commercial devices based on GMR. This cooperative research project
takes advantage of unique facilities in Orsay and Strasbourg and complementary
expertise of the U.S. and French research groups. The Michigan State group has a
unique sputtering system, which has produced record high GMR samples. They have
also developed techniques for measuring magnetoresistance of metallic
multilayers. The Orsay group was the first to discover the GMR phenomenon and
bring to this collaboration their expertise in characterization of materials,
which is further enhanced by NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) techniques and
theoretical expertise of the Strasbourg investigators.