* 9216221
* Path Integral Theory of Electron Transfer in Chemical and   Biological Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1993,03/31/1996
* Chi Mak, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Lesser Blum
* 03/31/1996
* USD 120,000.00

Dr. Chi Ho Mak is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to study electron transfer reactions occurring in various
chemical and biological systems. Fully quantum mechanical theories will be used
to study nuclear tunneling as manifested in the isotope effect in aqueous
electron transfer reactions in the inverted region and highly nonadiabatic
reactions in the normal region. The mechanism of coherence-mediated transfers
involving a possibly highly delocalized electron will be investigated by direct
simulations to understand the spectroscopic properties of Creutz-Taube
compounds. Finally, questions concerning the possible role of coherence and the
effects of an intermediate state in the photosynthetic reaction center will be
addressed by fully dynamical quantum Monte Carlo methods. %%% Electron transfer
reactions are ubiquitous in many chemical and biological processes. Underlying
all oxidation reduction reactions is a process in which an electron is rapidly
transferred from one chemical species to another. One very important electron
transfer system occurs in the photosynthetic reaction center of plants and some
bacteria. Since the electron is a very light particle these transfer processes
must be treated using quantum theory to account for the nonclassical tunneling
which takes place. Mak's research will help to elucidate the quantum mechanical
nature of this tunneling electron transfer process.