* 9216859
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Small Angle X-Ray        Scattering Studies of Block Copolymer Ionomers and their    Blends
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1997
* Robert Weiss, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1997
* USD 14,650.00

This award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in materials science
between Robert A. Weiss of the University of Connecticut and Claudine Williams
of the University of Paris Sud (Orsay). The investigators plan to conduct small
angle x-ray scattering studies of block copolymer ionomers and their blends.
They propose to characterize the microstructures of lightly sulfonated di- and
tri-block copolymers to determine their composition, sulfonational level and
cation. Microstructure and temperature studies will be carried out using the
synchrotron light source available at LURE (Laboratoire pour l'Utilisation du
Rayonnement Electromagnetique). Dr. Weiss brings to this collaboration extensive
experience in the synthesis and characterization of block copolymer ionomers.
This is complemented by Dr. Williams' expertise in the use of synchrotrons for
small- angle x-ray scattering studies generally and specifically related to
ionomers. The project will benefit from the excellent facilities at LURE.
Copolymer ionomers are an important class of materials whose chemical
composition, properties and microstructure can be adapted by polymer chemists
for specific applications. Polymeric materials are utilized in microelectronic
and information storage devices and in the aerospace, marine, automotive and
biomedical fields. Ionomers have important applications as membranes,
thermoplastic elastomers and adhesives. This project will advance our
understanding of structure-property relationships of copolymer ionomers and
their potential as advanced materials.