* 9216078
* Continuous Multicomponent Focusing of Solutes and Particles Using Spatially Stabilized pH
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1998
* Mark Burns, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* ELDRED H CHIMOWITZ
* 03/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

This study proposes using a magnetically stabilized fluidized bed (MSFB) to
separate zwitterionic molecules (i.e., molecules containing negatively and
positively charged moieties) by virtue of differing isoelectric values (i.e.,
the pH at which the molecule is not charged). The fluidized bed consists of a
tube in which negatively charged resin particles are added from the top of the
tube, and the fluidizing liquid is distributed from the bottom. Removal of the
particles from the bottom, and liquid from the top allows for continuous
operation. A pH gradient is maintained in the bed by inserting the liquid feed
at a high pH and the solid particles at a low pH. A mixture containing dissolved
solutes (one of which is targeted for separation) is fed into the liquid stream
somewhere near the bottom, and to one side of the column. As the solute moves up
the bed by virtue of the liquid motion, the local pH that the solute is exposed
to decreases. The reduction in the local pH causes the solutes to eventually
become positively charged (at the positions in the bed just above the positions
where the local pH is equal to the isoelectric values of the solutes). Once
positively charged, the solute binds electrostatically to the negatively charged
resin, and is carried with the resin particles down to the bottom of the column.
As it descends down the column, the local pH decreases, and this causes the
solute to reverse its charge, remove itself from the resin particle, and become
entrained in the upflowing liquid. The solute thus becomes trapped in a narrow
zone at a level in the column where the local pH is equal to the solute's
isoelectric point. Ideally, the solutes in the mixture will separate out into
zones occupying different levels in the column. By withdrawing fluid and solid
from these zones, liquid rich in one solute can be obtained, thereby effecting
the separation. The proposed research will develop a working prototype, and
scope the effectiveness of the bed to prepare separations of biological
molecules.