* 9216728
* Mathematical Sciences: NSF/AWM Workshops for Women Graduate Students and Postdoctoral Mathematicians
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1995
* L. Pamela Cook-Ioannidis, Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1995
* USD 40,000.00

This project will support four workshops to encourage and support young women
mathematicians. The first and third workshops will be held immediately prior to
the Joint Meetings of the American Mathematical Society (AMS) and the
Mathematical Association of America (MAA) in January 1993 in San Antonio and
January 1994 in Cincinnati, respectively. The second and fourth workshops will
be held immediately prior to the national meeting of the Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) in July 1993 in Philadelphia and July 1994 in San
Diego, respectively. These workshops will bring together women who are recent
doctoral recipients or graduate students in mathematics, and several established
mathematicians. Each workshop will involve approximately ten recent doctoral
recipients who will present thirty minute talks on their research, aimed at a
general mathematics audience. The graduate students will present their research
projects in a less formal poster session. The workshop participants will be
selected by a panel of mathematicians on the basis of a competitive application
process, It is expected that the opportunity to meet and interact with one
another, as well as with a few established mathematicians, will enable the
participants to promote their own research, to increase their professional
contacts, and to increase their commitment to research.