* 9216634
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research: Isolation of         Myosin-like Organelle Motor
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* George Langford, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1994
* USD 40,000.00

The aim of this SGER proposal is to extend a truly novel observation of actin-
based motility in axoplasmic extracts. The project calls for the histochemical
characterization of the movement system via immunofluorescence and immunogold
labelling. S1 decoration will be used to determine actin filament polarity in
the context of vectoral particle movement. In addition, the project aims toward
the biochemical purification of the motor and its subsequent characterization in
terms of its molecular structure, and enzymatic properties in a longer-term aim
of establishing its ability to move particles along actin filaments in a
totally- characterized system. %%% This project has the potential to alter our
perception of axoplasmic particle movement significantly. During the last
decade, a growing literature has developed in favor of a microtubule-based
motility system for axoplasmic transport. Unidirectional motors that interact
with microtubules and operate in anterograde or retrograde particle movement
have dominated our thinking about the process. Actin-based motility has received
far less attention in this process, though microfilaments have long been known
to be present in the axoplasmic extracts that have served as the starting
material for the particle movement assays. It is now clear that microfilaments
may also serve in particle movement. The clear demonstration that actin-based
motility is vectorial, and dependent on the polarity of the actin filaments
under physiologically- relevant conditions would be a major contribution to our
understanding of cell motility.