* 9216225
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1994
* NONE NONE, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 01/31/1994
* USD 5,993.00

The right of appeal is a critical factor in the American judicial system not
only because of its implications for the status of the individual in the
political system but also because its use defines the real scope of the
judiciary. Therefore, the decision by a losing litigant to appeal, or not to
appeal, carries great import for the functioning and legitimacy of the political
system. This issue has been addressed at the theoretical level, producing a
range of models purporting to account for the decision to appeal: a systemic
model, that locates the explanation of a decision to appeal in the structure and
process of the judicial system itself; an individual resources model, that
imputes the decision to the litigant's access to resources; an economic model
suggesting that a calculus of costs and benefits determines the decision; and a
psychological model that posits three motivational processes of naming, blaming
and claiming. These models all assume that the decision to litigate is
determined by some kind of response to the outcome of the case at trial, but no
empirical work has yet been done to test the validity of these models. Another
theory of litigant decision-making focuses not only on the outcome of any case
but also on how the procedure to reach that outcome affects the litigant.
Empirical studies of this "procedural justice factor" at the trial level suggest
that it could be applicable to the decision to appeal. This doctoral
dissertation proposes to test hypotheses drawn from these various theories. Data
will be collected from several sources. First, the investigator will analyze
interview data from the RAND/ICJ study. Second, 60 open-ended interviews will be
conducted with losing litigants in tort and contract cases who filed a Notice of
Appeal with the Court of Appeals of Cook County in Chicago. For purposes of
testing external validity, a comparable group will be interviewed in Ramsey
County in Minnesota. A control group of losing litigants who chose not to appeal
will also be interviewed in each jurisdiction. Third, an extensive questionnaire
will be administered to 100 appellants and 100 non- appellants in tort and
contract actions, including both plaintiff and defendant appellants. Various
quantitative and qualitative analyses will be employed to test the validity of
the various explanatory models discussed above. The research will make an
important theoretical contribution to our understanding of individual dynamics
within the judicial system. The findings will clarify a continuing debate over
the character of litigant motivations, and provide an empirical basis for
interpreting how these motivations affect the appellate process.