* 9216258
* Nonspecific and Specific Adhesion of Bacterial Cells to     Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1993
* Kimberly Anderson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 11/30/1993
* USD 42,505.00

This proposal is concerned with studying the adhesion of bacterial cells to
membranes which are used in a variety of industrial scale separations
technologies such as reverse osmosis and desalination. The adhesion of a cell to
a membrane surface is a two step process. First, cells in the vicinity of the
membrane surface are immobilized by both long- range colloidal forces such as
van der Waals attraction, electrostatic attraction, and short range interactions
such as hydrogen bonding. Once immobilized, the cells begin to project
structures and synthesize extracellular polymeric molecules which bridge the gap
between the cells and the membrane, and firmly adhere the cell to the surface.
Experiments will be undertaken in a parallel plate flow chamber which is mounted
onto the stage of a phase contrast microscope equipped for videomicroscopy and
sensitive light intensity measurement via a photomultiplier tube. The bottom
plate of the chamber is a glass slide onto which thin polymeric membranes are
cast. The membranes will be made of various polymers such as cellulose acetate
and polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), and these will have different surface
charges (characterized by zeta potential measurements) and hydrophobicity
(characterized by contact angle measurements). Two experiments will be
undertaken using the cell. In the first, a dilute suspension of cells wills be
slowly perfused through the chamber, and the cells will be allowed to absorb at
low density onto the polymeric membrane support. The separation distance between
the cell and the membrane will be measured by total internal reflection
microscopy. In this technique a laser beam, impinging against the glass slide at
a small angle of incidence, is totally reflected off of the glass surface and
produces an evanescent wave which propagates normal to the surface and into the
chamber. The scattering of the wave by the cell is detected by the
photomultiplier tube, and the distance of separation of the cell from the
membrane can be obtained from this measurement. The cell separation distance
will be measured as a function of both the polymeric membrane surface charge and
hydrophobicity, and the charge and hydrophobicity of the bacterial cell. The
latter will be correlated with the growth cycle phase. In the second set of
experiments, the detachment to attached cells will be measured as a function of
applied shear rate by observing the fate of attached cells by video microscopy
as the flow rate through the parallel plate chamber is varied. The detachment
characteristics will then be correlated with the distance of separation, and
ultimately to the hydrophobicity and surface charge characteristics of the
membrane and cell.