* 9216058
* Travel Support: 20th International Congress on High Speed   Photography & Photonics: September 21-25, 1992, Support for Graduate Students and Post-Doctoral Fellows
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1992,05/31/1993
* Dennis Paisley, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/1993
* USD 5,000.00

This grant provides support for travel funds for graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows to attend the 20th International Congress on High Speed
Photography and Photonics, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada, on
September 21- 25, 1992. This is a venerable international conference, dating its
inception to the early 1950's, which provides a forum for discussion of advances
in the rapidly advancing field of high-speed imaging technologies. The advent of
ultrashort pulse lasers, of picosecond and now femtosecond time duration, and
concomitant advances in time-resolved methods of detection has kept this a
vibrant field of study, with strong input both from industry, government
laboratories, and academia. The International Advisory Committee of this
Congress has expressed concern of the limited number of young scientists and
engineers, particularly at the graduate student and post-doctoral level, who
have the financial resources to attend the International Congress. To address
this problem, they have approached the NSF to provide resources for travel
support, with the intent of using this as leverage to raise matching funds from
industry groups active in the field. This is an opportunity to help raise the
visibility in industry of the need to strengthen the academic infrastructure and
provide for young researchers in this important technology field.