* 9216981
* The Reproductive Ecology of Fucoid Algae:  Fertilization and Early Embryogenesis
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Susan Brawley, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1997
* USD 332,006.00

Although most marine organisms have external fertilization, very little is know
about the processes that control fertilization success and early embryonic
survival. Inter tidal fucoid algae represent an ideal model system in which to
study these processes in nature. Periods of gamete release, current velocities
during fertilization, and degree of aggregation of male/female plants will be
determined and /or varied experimentally to determine how they influence
fertilization success, which will be determined cytological. Whether
fertilization can adapt to low salinity environments is unknown; of particular
interest is how the polyspermy block is affected, because this is Na+-dependent
in may marine species. Electrophysiological and physiological techniques will be
used to study the polyspermy block in fucoid algae from low salinity habitats.
The ability of embryos of intertidal algae to survive the stresses encountered
in the intertidal zone is poorly known. Stage- specific survival of fucoid
embryos during low tidal emersion will be studied in the laboratory and in
nature. The role of the hormone abscisic acid (ABA) in conferring tolerance to
desiccation and freezing will be examined by quantitative immunoassay and by
treating sensitive stages with exogenous ABA. Taken together with existing data,
this work will offer an unusually complete understanding of the ecological
processes affecting recruitment of a marine organism.