* 9216320
* Analysis of Microbial Community Structure and Function Alonga Detrital Particle Size Gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Robert Sinsabaugh, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1995
* USD 180,000.00

In most streams, community production is sustained by the decomposition of
imported plant litter. The early stages of plant litter decomposition have
received much study; but little work has focused on the fate of fine organic
particles (FPOM), the form in which most particulate detritus moves through
stream ecosystems. Utilizing recently developed biochemical techniques, I
propose to investigate the structure and activity of FPOM- associated microbial
communities in two concurrent field experiments. The first is intended to
evaluate a series of basic hypotheses about microbial production, extracellular
enzyme activity and community structure over a broad range of conditions. The
second is focused specifically on the relationship between FPOM degradation
rates and the activity of lignocellulose-degrading enzymes. %%% This work will
contribute to our basic understanding of the operation of attached microbial
communities, a topic of broad interest. In addition, it may lead to the
formulation of models that relate FPOM mass loss, currently difficult to
determine in situ, to the activity of lignocellulose-degrading enzymes, a
readily quantified measure. Such a model would permit routine monitoring of FPOM
degradation rates, an application that could contribute to future studies of
ecosystem processes and management.