* 9216784
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Construction and         Evaluation of Accuracy Estimators
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,12/31/1996
* George Casella, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1996
* USD 17,000.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in statistics
and probability between George Casella of Cornell University and Christian
Robert of the Laboratory for Theoretical and Applied Statistics, University of
Paris VI. The research is concerned with statistical inferences from
experiments. In addressing this problem they proposed to further develop
procedures for accuracy estimation. Post-data statistical inferences are based
on all information in an experiment, including the knowledge of the data. The
proposed research will integrate and evaluate approaches to post-data inferences
using decision theory and conditional inferences. They will investigate
fundamental questions on the behavior of estimators under different loss
functions and in loss function robustness and explore problems of assimilating
decision theory with stochastic simulation techniques. The cooperative research
project takes advantage of complementary interests and expertise. The U.S.
investigator brings to this collaboration his expertise in decision theory. This
is complemented by the French investigator's extensive experience in
computational and algorithmic statistics. Together, their efforts may result in
new techniques and methodology of statistical computing, including, better
procedures for post data inferences and efficient methods for computation of
accuracy measures.