* 9216686
* Soft Decision Decoding For Block Codes Using Artificial     Neural Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Stephen Wicker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 01/31/1996
* USD 125,291.00

9216686 Wicker The revival of interest in artificial neural networks (ANN's) in
the early 1980's has spurred research into their application in many engineering
fields, including digital signal processing and communications. The pattern
recognition capabilities of ANN's allows them to emulate a variety of functions.
This emulation is enhanced through the use of training algorithms, such as back-
propagation, that allow some types of ANN's to "learn" desired functions. This
research is an investigation into the application of ANN's to the soft decision
decoding of block error control codes. In the past two years, experimental
studies have demonstrated that certain ANN's can perform error control decoding
for some block codes. The experimental results have so far shown that ANN's can
perform hard decision decoding, but soft decision decoding results have been
extremely limited. In this investigation, the error control problem is first
translated into the terms of functional analysis. Decoding is viewed as a
mapping from a continuous received signal space onto a discrete information word
space. Decoder design is thus translated into a problem of functional
approximation. The next step is to use a highly promising class of ANN's,
feedforward neural networks (FFNN's), to implement the decoding function in an
efficient manner. The operation of FFNN's can be viewed geometrically, with each
layer in the network carving up the received signal space into increasingly
lower dimensional subspaces, culminating in an output decision layer that
provides estimates of the transmitted information bits. The functional
approximation approach thus allows for ideal soft decision decoding, while the
FFNN design uses the algebro-geometric redundancy within the block code to
reduce the decoder complexity. The performance of these decoders will be further
enhanced through the use of ANN training techniques that will match input layer
decision metrics to channel conditions w hile the decoder is operating. The
result will be a series of efficient soft decision decoders for a variety of
block codes in a variety of applications. ***