* 9216621
* Polymethylene Intermediates in Thermal and Photoinduced     "Charge Transfer" Polymerization
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Henry Hall, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1996
* USD 270,000.00

Spontaneous polymerizations, observed when electron-rich and electron-poor
olefins are mixed, are initiated by tetramethylene intermediates which can be
either zwitterionic or diradical in nature. Spontaneous free-radical
copolymerizations have similarly been shown to compete with the Diels-Alder
cycloadditions in reactions of dienes and olefins; these polymerizations are
proposed to be initiated by 2-hexene-l,6-diradicals or zwitterions. To date,
highly functionalized olefins have been used to obtain fast and clean reactions.
These investigations will be extended to common industrial olefin/olefin
reactions, such as styrene and acrylonitrile, and diene/olefin reactions, such
as the isoprene/maleic anhydride system. Moreover, the effect of added Lewis
acid to increase the electronphilicity of the electron-poor olefin will be
studied in each case. The generation of diradicals or zwitterions from suitably
substituted cyclopropanes and cyclobutanes will be used for initiation of
polymerization of other monomers. The photochemical behavior of these systems
will be compared to the thermal reactions and a uniform mechanistic picture will
be established. This study is a continuation of the principal investigator's
elucidation of the mechanism of spontaneous charge- transfer polymerizations.
This research has as its aim to understand how, under certain well-defined
conditions, some monomer pairs can polymerize in the absence of the usually
needed initiating substances. Greater control of the kinetics of polymerization
and the resulting structures is a likely outcome.