* 9216667
* A Workshop on: Integrated Regional Models and Analysis of   Human-Nature Interactions, to be held October 4-8, 1992,    Millbrook, NY
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Gene Likens, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Allen
* 12/31/1995
* USD 114,769.00

This project will support a workshop on Integrated Regional Models (IRM) for
analysis of human-nature interactions. Integrated regional models are conceptual
and mathematically based models that include within the structure of the model
mathematical descriptions of the physical environment, biological interactions,
and human decision making and its consequences. Despite concerns about "global"
change, many key scientific and policy issues in the environment are developed,
considered and ultimately implemented on regional scales - local jurisdictions,
watersheds, agricultural production regions. At these scales, regional
interactions of physical, biological and social systems play a critical role in
defining the problems that must be resolved. Environmental issues which require
an integrated analysis include coastal zone management, regional atmospheric
chemistry and pollution, non-point source pollution, commodity production in
forested landscapes, and urban growth. Progress on coupling models from
physical, biological and social sciences has been limited by lack of
interactions between disciplines, differences in technical approaches, and the
absence of appropriate interdisciplinary data sets. The objective of the
workshop will be to provide a forum for scientists from different disciplines to
learn about the state of knowledge and models in other disciplines, and to
explore ways that scientists from different disciplines can work together on the
same problems. Further, the workshop will identify specific steps and data
requirements necessary for the development of IRM's for specific environmental
problems. The workshop will open with paired overviews of physical, biological
and social science models by scientists from both within and outside of each
discipline. The workshop will then move on to group discussions of specific
problems requiring IRM's, and finally to group discussions of specific regions
and how differences in physical, biological and social variables in different
regions will affect the development of IRM's. Workshop participants will be
evenly divided between physical, social, biological and integrative disciplines,
and will include scientists from several countries.