* 9216939
* Kinetics, Structure, and Properties of Crosslinked          Polymer Films Formed by Cationic Photopolymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,11/30/1996
* Alec Scranton, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1996
* USD 314,362.00

The emission of volatile organic components (VOCs) from curing inks, films and
coatings is a leading cause of atmospheric pollution. Volatile organic solvents
have traditionally been used to impart desirable viscosity and cure rate
properties to ink and coating formulations. An ink or coating formulation must
be sufficiently fluid to be easily applied (often onto a rapidly moving
substrate through a series of transfer rollers), but must cure rapidly to a hard
film. Historically, these processing demands have been met through the use of a
rapidly evaporating organic solvent in the ink and coating formulations. When
these volatile organic solvents enter the atmosphere, they result in the
formation of smog and air pollution. There is a need for the development of high
performance inks and coatings that will not emit VOCs to the atmosphere.
Cationic photopolymerizations of diepoxides and bisvinyl ethers exhibit
potential for the development of high- performance inks and coatings which emit
no VOCs during cure. However, because appropriate monomers and initiators have
been developed only recently, the characteristics of these reactions and the
structure of the resulting polymer films are not well understood. This research
project will provide fundamental experimental and theoretical investigations of
UV- initiated cationic photopolymerizations. Detailed profiles of the reaction
temperature and the extent of reaction will be obtained using in situ time-
resolved fluorescence and raman experiments, and the thermal, mechanical, and
physical properties of the resulting highly crosslinked polymer films will be
thoroughly characterized. Nuclear magnetic resonance spin diffusion experiments
will be used to investigate the homogeneity and morphology of the polymer films.
The goal of the theoretical effort is to develop computer simulations of the
photopolymerization reactions which account for molecular mobility in a
realistic manner. These simulations should provide insight into the development
of the highly crosslinked network structure. The research will help evaluate the
potential of these reactions for the development of high- performance, solvent-
free inks and coatings.