* 9216958
* Electrolytic Steelmaking:  Environmentally Sound Metal      Production
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Donald Sadoway, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/1996
* USD 276,000.00

It is estimated that the steel industry generates 5 percent of all greenhouse
gases produced by human activity. This is a consequence of the intensive use of
carbon as a reductant to extract metallic iron from its ore. The purpose of the
proposed work is to examine the feasibility of electrolytic steelmaking, a
process of direct electrolysis of molten iron oxide to produce pure liquid iron
and oxygen gas. While electrochemical processing in molten oxides has enormous
potential for the carbon-free extraction and refining of metals, to date there
has been no sustained effort to develop a commercial process based on this
technique, in part due to the inadequacy of the database. The question under
study in the proposed investigation is the following: is it possible to conceive
of a chemistry to support the direct electrolysis process described? To answer
this question the high- temperature physical chemistry of molten oxide solution
will be studied. Their electrical properties will be investigated by
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). A new cell for electrical
conductivity measurements of highly reactive oxide melts has been designed for
this purpose and is being certified in tests with aqueous KC1 solutions and
melts of NaC1 and KC1. The thermodynamics of molten oxide solutions will be
investigated by emf measurements. Reference electrodes have been designed for
this purpose and will be examined during the course of investigation. Finally,
electrolysis trails will be conduced in laboratory-scale cells designed to
operate in the parameter ranges indicated by the data taken earlier. On an
empirical basis, such tests have been conducted with feed consisting of oxide
mixtures containing iron oxide and chromium oxide and oxygen evolution has been
observed on an inert anode made of platinum. This confirms that faradaic
processes can be made to operate in these melts. With a deeper understanding of
the fundamentals it will be possible to optimize the system. Successful
completion of the work will enable the development of a new carbon-free
steelmaking process which in principle has the capability to be modified in
accordance with different feedstock chemistries. For example, one could make
ferroalloys such as ferrochromium (as a precursor for stainless steel) by
electrolysis of the mixed oxides of iron and chromium. Similarly, one could
produce ferromanganese by electrolysis of iron oxide-manganese oxide. Thus,
metal production by direct electrolysis in molten oxides would not only solve a
wide array of environmental problems facing the steel industry but also would
serve as the basis for leapfrog technology to strengthen the U.S. industry's
international competitive position.