* 9216562
* BAC: Sensory Feedback and Control of Legged Locomotion:          Biological Simulation and Robotic Implementation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1992,12/31/1996
* Fred Delcomyn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 12/31/1996
* USD 473,940.00

An important problem in robotics research is how to build a robot that can move
over steep, irregular, or otherwise rugged terrain in a flexible and agile
manner. Because wheeled vehicles do not perform well over such terrain,
engineers have attempted to design legged robotic vehicles for this purpose. The
idea is to use such vehicles to explore places where humans cannot easily go,
such as the surface of other planets, or rugged or dangerous places on earth.
Insects represent an extraordinarily variable life form that has the
characteristics of adaptability and versatility of locomotion on land that
engineers desire. In this award to Drs. Fred Delcomyn, Narendra Ahuja and Mark
Nelson, a robotic, legged vehicle will be modeled after an insect. First the
control system for locomotion will be designed and simulated on a computer. The
unique aspect of the present design will be a deliberate adherence to the
functional operation of the insect, especially in its use of feedback from sense
organs in the legs to help it deal with uncertain footing. By building into the
robot a rich array of sensory feedback from the legs, this device should emulate
the versatility and adaptability of the insect, and impart to the robot the
fault- tolerance and agility of the biological system. This research wil
contribute to engineering a machine which utilizes the biological characteristic
of locomotory adaptability.