* 9216918
* Maintenance of Preindustrial Atmospheric pCO2 Levels:       Recalibration of a Carbon Isotopic Paleobarometer and pCO2  mapping of the late Quaternary Global Ocean.
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1995
* John Jasper, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/1995
* USD 298,900.00

The carbon-isotopic compositions of long-chain alkenones will be compared to
those of coexisting foraminiferal carbonates in representative in representative
ocean waters for which the concentration of dissolved carbon dioxide is also
known. The objective will be to examine relationships between carbon-isotopic
fractionations and CO2 levels, thus calibrating a "CO2 paleobarometer." In cold,
high latitude waters, both suspended and sinking materials will be examined in
materials collected during the JGOFS North Atlantic Bloom Experiment. Extensive
data on the concentration and isotopic composition of dissolved CO2 are already
available for that site. Alkenones and carbonates from Southern Ocean transects
are also available, as are data on carbonate chemistry and isotopic composition.
At lower latitudes with warmer surface waters, materials from the Eastern
Equatorial Pacific JGOFS site will be examined. Alkenones will be obtained from
suspended particulate organic carbon. Concentrations and isotopic compositions
of dissolved CO2 are available from JGOFS reports and the isotopic composition
of forams will be determined in the course of this work. Isotopic signals
actually reaching the sediment water interface will be examined through analyses
of materials from core tops in the Norwegian Sea (high-latitude, low-temperature
site) and at the Eastern Equatorial Pacific JGOFS site.