* 9216923
* Supercritical Spray Application of Paints and               Coatings
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Marc Donohue, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1997
* USD 259,732.00

Each year, American industry spray applies more than 500 million gallons of
paints and other coatings. For every gallon of paint sprayed, an average of four
and one half pounds of solvents are released into the atmosphere. These solvents
are mixtures of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that are chosen for their
ability to dissolve the coating's materials and to reduce their viscosity. A new
process has been developed for the spray application of paints and other
coatings. It was conceived by the PI and is being commercialized by the Union
Carbide Corporation and other companies. The process, which improves the quality
of sprayed coatings for automobiles, furniture, and other commercial products
and reduces pollution, is based on the use of supercritical carbon dioxide as a
replacement for organic solvents in spray-coatings' formulations. The result is
a more uniform and improved coating and a reduction of the emissions of VOCs by
up to 80%. Though the process is in commercial use, there are problems that must
be overcome before there will be widespread adoption of this technology, and
hence large reductions in VOC emissions from spray-coating operations in the
U.S. The major impediment is that each paint must be reformulated before it can
be used in this process. Since there are hundreds of different paint
formulations, each with dozens of different components, this will be a major
undertaking because relatively little is known about the phase behavior of
polymer-solvent-supercritical fluid mixtures, particularly when solid phases can
form. Hence, the reformulation must be done by trial and error changing many
different variables. Also, the reformulation process will be done separately,
and secretly, by every paint manufacturer. The PI plans to study the
thermodynamic and rheological properties of polymer-solvent-carbon dioxide
mixtures. The experimental part of the project will involve measurements to
determine phase diagrams and solution viscosities for these mixtures. The
theoretical portion will involve the development of models for the effects of
hydrogen bonding on the liquid-liquid phase behavior and on modelling the
effects of solids precipitation on the overall phase diagram. This should
facilitate the implementation of this technology for a wider variety of paint
formulations and should help eliminate process shut-downs that result when
solids form in these systems.