* 9216912
* UV/Visible Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* John Lemasters, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 12/31/1995
* USD 90,503.00

9216912 Lemasters This is a proposal for an UV/visible laser s,canning confocal
microscope system. The microscope system consists of a UV/visible scanning
imaging head with dual detectors, a scan control and imaging acquisition system,
a Z-focus controller, argon and argonlkrypton lasers for illumination at
351-363, 440, 488, 568 and 647 nm, and an inverted fluorescence microscope. The
microscope will be used to examine single living cells, fixed tissue and
isolated perfused organs that have been labeled with multiple fluorescent
probes. In living cells and tissues, confocal images of the parameter-specific
fluorescence of each probe will be collected and stored during experi mental
manipulations. UV capabilities are specifically sought in order to use UV
fluorophores for imaging of ions, chromatin, and protein and non-protein thiols,
and for use with caged compounds. The confocal microscope is also sought to
relieve the critically high demand for a visible light (non-UV) confocal
microscope already in place, whose high utilization curtails confocal instrument
availability to all users. The equipment will be utilized by many investigators
on independent projects in 8 departments of the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill. Housed in the productive environment of the Video Microscopy
Facility of the Laboratories for Cell Biology, the UV/visible laser scanning
confocal microscope system will substantially extend our ongoing efforts
applying digitized optical microscopy to problems of biology.