* 9216217
* U.S.-Bulgaria Research on Neogene Extension and its         Relations to the Regional Tectonic Setting of the Eastern   Mediterranean Region
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1992,05/31/1997
* B. Clark Burchfiel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 05/31/1997
* USD 27,100.00

This US-Bulgaria research project between Dr. B. Clark Burchfiel of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Dr. Christo Nikolov Dabovski of the
Geological Institute, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences proposes an
interdisciplinary program designed to document and understand late Cenozoic
extensional deformation in Bulgaria from a regional tectonic and process
oriented perspective. Bulgaria is part of the broad eastern Mediterranean region
of active extensional tectonism. Bulgarian geologists have done excellent work
on the late Cenozoic tectonics of the region and this permits a rapid synthesis
of existing data and focusing on the key areas within Bulgaria where additional
work will enhance the data so that the study of both local and regional
extensional processes can yield well constrained results. The research consists
of two parts: (1) a study of young extensional deformation in Bulgaria from a
regional and process-oriented perspective, and application of fluid dynamic
concepts to understanding the role fo lower crustal flow. These two basic goals
overlap in that models of lower crustal flow driven by extensional deformation
will be applied to gravity, topography and geomorphological data from Bulgaria.
Both parts of the research are of broad applicability in understanding the
relationship between surface deformation and deeper processes in the crust and
mantle: the first part bears on the relationship of subduction and its driving
forces to regional deformation in the upper lithosphere, while the second is an
essential step toward understanding the processes and consequences of
continental deformation. This project in geological sciences fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts
in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and
pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.