* 9216232
* Conference:  Organization of the 1992 Surface Roughness and Scattering Topical Meeting to be held in Tucson, Arizona on June 1-3, 1992.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1993
* Jarus Quinn, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/1993
* USD 4,600.00

This grant is for partial support of the 1992 Surface Roughness and Scattering
Topical Meeting, Tucson, AZ, June 1-3, 1992. This is the first such meeting to
be sponsored by the Optical Society of America; its purpose is to bring together
a diverse group of researchers, both experimentalists and theorists, to discuss
their work in the area of surface roughness and scattering. The meeting will be
held concurrently with the Topical Conference on Interference Coatings, and will
include a joint session to discuss roughness and scattering in optical coatings.
New fabrication techniques will be discussed, such as methods for achieving
supersmooth surface finish and precision grinding to achieve final shape and
finish, which are critical requirements for mirrors uses in the vacuum
ultraviolet and x-ray spectral regions. Characterization techniques needed to
measure shape, surface finish characteristics, chemical composition and other
properties will be discussed, where emphasis will be on development of new
instrument designs for specialized measurements. This will provide opportunities
for interactions between instrument designers, manufacturers and users. One such
example that will be discussed is the atomic force microscope and its
application to surfaces. A specialized panel will be held to discuss
requirements for statistical analysis of surfaces for various industries needs
such as in semiconductor, optical and other commercial industries, including
automobiles, that rely on high quality surface finishes.