* 9216487
* Intelligent Control of Dynamic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* William Perkins, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/29/1996
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of an intelligent system is to translate high level commands or
specifications automatically into lower level actions upon the environment or
"plant," while fully utilizing any prior information as well as the information
contained in the real time environmental responses. Such an intelligent system
must interface between high level specifications and low level actions; between
prior information and real-time information which may improve; modify or
contradict it; between discrete state or command changes and continuous signals;
between inductive and deductive learning; between real-time actions and off-line
decisions; between various time scales of environmental response; action and
computation; and between models, algorithms, and architectures. At the highest
level, the intelligent system must be able to select classes of models within
which to describe the environment, change between model classes or models in
response to environmental changes such as failure modes or disruptions, and
finally refine the parameters on-line to select a model within a class. At the
operational level, consisting of the core of an intelligent system, it must deal
with the qualitative aspects of discrete and continuous variables, data or
actions, the temporal aspects of multiple-time scales of environmental response,
measurement or action and the spatial aspects of decentralized or distributed
operation, information or control. In the qualitative realm traversing the
purely discrete domain, one has the issues arising from automata theory and
supervisory control for reliable or safe operation of discrete event dynamics.
With the introduction of time, one also has the ability to model performance
measures such as cycle-time in manufacturing systems or throughput in
transportation systems. This leads to several scheduling and optimization
problems. Finally, one has the implementation layer of an intelligent system
which involves a unification of software, algorithms whether parallel or
sequential, computer architectures and ultimately their mapping into chips for
the end user. Thus this layer gives rise to several issues such as data
structures and computer-aided-design. While the above suggests a tripartite
dissection of an intelligent system, our goal is to nevertheless design it to be
transparent to the end user, in a fashion similar to the open systems
interconnection architecture.