* 9216998
* Support of a Gordon Conference on Enzyme Organization and   Cell Function January 18-22, 1993, in Oxnard, California
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1992,08/31/1993
* Harvey Knull, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 08/31/1993
* USD 3,000.00

A Gordon Research Conference entitled: "Enzyme Organization and Cell Function"
will be held from January 18-22, 1993, in Oxnard, California. This will be the
fourth such conference, the first one being held in 1987 under the old title:
"Organization of Metabolic Sequences." There will be 23 invited speakers, all of
whom are at the cutting edge of some aspect of studies on cellular organization
and metabolism. Interactions between enzymes in metabolic pathways, and
structural aspects of macromolecular protein systems will be discussed, which
provide us with a better understanding about functional organization inside the
cell cytoplasm. Composite understanding about this aspect of cellular
organization depends upon research from an array of different areas. The
conference brings together scientists specializing in disciplines such as
enzymology, cell biology, molecular biology, physical chemistry, protein
chemistry, and genetics, as well as researchers from all areas of metabolism
including carbohydrate, amino acid, lipid and nucleic acid metabolism, protein
synthesis and processing, organelle biogenesis, cell motility, and protein
folding. The conference will provide a unique forum in which research scientists
can interact professionally, exchange ideas, and gain information, which will
benefit their individual research programs. %%% The interaction between
cytoplasmic enzymes free in the cell cytoplasm or those in structured protein
complexes will be discussed to gain a better understanding of how the living
cell coordinates between catabolic and biosynthetic activities. Such
organizational control is essential for the survival of every cell.