* 9217648
* Mass Spectrometer for Structure-Function Research
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Robert Trimble, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 12/31/1995
* USD 202,973.00

9217648 Dias Support is requested to purchase a Mass Spectrometer, to serve a
group of investigators currently conducting structure-function research in
biochemistry, molecular and cell biology. The major user group projects include:
1) The characterization of human glycoprotein hormone recombinant mutants being
used for structure-function studies; 2) elucidation of the active site of
deoxynucleotide metabolizing enzymes; 3) characterization of mitochondrial
channel proteins; 4) the identification of substrate binding sites of P450
enzymes, 5) structural characterization of chimeric brain glutamate
decarboxylase recombinants and identification of the ATP binding site; 6)
structural characterization of oligosaccharide structures of glycoprotein
biosynthesis and processing pathways; 7) structural characterization of two
polyglutamyl folate hydrolase forms and of the substrate hydrolysis products; 8)
structural characterization of toxicant-adducts to neurofilament proteins. A
minor users group will: 1) characterize estrogen metabolites (conjugates)
induced by dioxin; 2) determine partial sequence and molecular ion of the major
protein associated with lupus inclusions; 3) determine the structure of as yet
unidentified brain neuropeptides; 4) map the lysine binding sites of plasmin
which bind to cell surface proteins; 5) perform structural characterization of
synthetic peptide products prepared in the WCLR core peptide synthesis facility.
The triple quadrupole tandem mass spectrometer proposed for purchase will be the
centerpiece of a core facility which will service the needs of a primary user
group, but will also be available to all scientists at the WCLR and their
collaborators. The core facility will be staffed with a mass spectrometrist who
will interface between principal investigators and the instrument, and who as
director of the facility will perform the structural analysis of peptides,
proteins, glycoproteins and oligosaccharides by tandem mass spectrometry.
Additionally, the mass spectrometrist will be charged with developing new mass
spectrometry methodologies particularly with regard to the needs of particular
research problems. The mass spectrometrist will also be responsible for
maintenance of the instrument, exclusive of the Service contract, and will serve
as a member of the Internal Advisory Committee. The proposed mass spectrometry
facility will utilize the protein chemistry core facility resources and
personnel to assist investigators with preparing samples for mass spectrometry.