* 9217630
* Nonlinear Optics in Single Crystal Waveguides of Organic    Second and Third Order Optical Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Mrinal Thakur, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 02/28/1997
* USD 179,798.00

The objective of this grant are: (i) preparation of single crystal films and
waveguide microstructures of specific organic second and third order optical
materials, ii) studies of the off-nonlinear optical studies will include phase
matched second order optical waveguides and time and wavelength resolved
nonlinear refractive index measurements for the third order optical waveguides.
The role of two photon excitation in the enhancement of the third order
nonlinearities will be investigated in detail. Specific conjugated polymers such
as polydiacetylenes are known to have extremely large nonlinear refrafctive
indices along with low absorption coefficients in the off-resonant domain. Such
large nonlinearities are obtained only if the polymer chains are organized as a
single crystal. Specific organic molecular crystals such as nitroanilines have
very large and stable second order nonlinearities which can be utilized in many
applications, (e.g., SHG of infrared diode lasers), if single crystal films and
waveguides can be prepared. A method (>shear method>) that we have recently
established will be utilized for the preparation of single crystal films of
these optical materials. Subsequently specific waveguide microstructures will be
prepared from the films. The nonlinear optical measurements in the films and
waveguides will be performed using established procedures. As recent
measurements have shown, single crystal polydiacetylene waveguides are highly
promising for applications in all-optical switches and logic gates that will
operate at the subpicosecond time scale. Similarly various other applications
are expected of single crystal waveguides of organic second order optical
materials. The research as proposed is important for fundamental understanding
of the mechanisms of the nonlinearities and realizing practical applications of
these materials.