* 9217513
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Growth and Process       Induced Defects of InP-Based Heterostructure Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1997
* Dimitris Pavlidis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1997
* USD 17,000.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in
microelectronics among Dimitris Pavlidis, University of Michigan, Frederique
Ducroquet, National Institute for Applied Sciences (INSA), and S. K. Krawczyk of
the Ecole Centrale in Lyon, France. The objective of the project is to study
optimization, process control and reliability of high electron mobility
transistors (HEMTs). The basic heterostructures for HEMTs will be grown,
designed, fabricated and electrically characterized at the University of
Michigan. These samples will be further analyzed by various material
characterization techniques developed at INSA and the Ecole Centrale in Lyon.
The investigators will characterize the material under optimum growth
conditions, analyze the process and defects induced by thermal stress. The U.S.
investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in performance optimization
of HEMTS and other electronic devices and the fabrication of novel HEMTs. This
is complemented by French expertise in various characterization techniques,
which include photo and electro-reflectance characterization. The results from
the material analysis will advance understanding of the effects of growth
conditions on material properties and the reliability of such structures. Such
studies are important to the development of new semiconductor devices.