* 9217695
* Photochemistry and Electrochemistry of Surface-Confined     Organometallic Compounds
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Mark Wrighton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 06/30/1996
* USD 553,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program provides
continued support for the research program of Dr. Mark S. Wrighton of the
Chemistry Department, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. This investigation
is concerned with the photochemistry and electrochemistry of organometallic
molecules attached to surfaces. Four studies will be pursued: (1) the rate and
stability of attachment of various functional groups to metal surfaces; (2) the
photochemistry of surface-confined organometallic molecules; (3) the chemistry
of metal complexes with redox-active pendant groups that can be used to "tune"
the reactivity of the metal center; and (4) synthesis and characterization of
metal complexes which show reversible electrochemical response and can be
attached to metal surfaces. In study (1), particular attention will be paid to
platinum, gold, and indium/tin oxide surfaces which are useful as
microelectrodes. Manganese carbonyl compounds which are photosensitive and can
exchange multiple CO groups will be used in study (2), as will some ruthenium
ammine and ferrocyanide complexes. %%% Dr. Wrighton will investigate the
interaction of organometallic compounds with metal surfaces. By varying the
metal and the groups attached to it in these complexes, electronic and
photochemical characteristics can be manipulated. This research is relevant to
many areas of surface chemistry, such as the functionalization of electrodes and
microelectrodes for energy conversion and sensors, or the synthesis, adhesion,
and wetting of interfaces.