* 9217474
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Study of Fusion-Fission  in the 48Cr System-Structure and Dynamics at Large          Deformation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Francis Prosser, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1996
* USD 17,000.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in nuclear
physics involving Stephen J. Sanders and Francis W. Prosser, University of
Kansas, and Christian Beck at the Center for Nuclear Research, Strasbourg,
France. The objective of the research is to study the details of the formation
and decay of highly deformed quasi-molecular resonances in light to medium mass
heavy ion collisions. Underlying the research is the role of the fusion-fission
mechanism in light nuclear systems. The research involves experimental
measurements in both the United States and France. Initial measurements
establishing the characteristics of the fission process in a mass 48 system will
be done using the ATLAS facility at Argonne National Laboratory. Subsequent
measurement of energy-dependent, side-feeding of states in binary fragments will
be produced using the EUROGAM detector located at the VIVITRON accelerator in
Strasbourg, France. The collaboration takes advantage of unique facilities in
both the U.S. and France. Different aspects of the problem will be addressed at
the two facilities, with the (EUROGAM) work aimed at decay properties. The
project takes advantage of complementary expertise in the fusion-fission process
in light nuclear systems.