* 9217284
* Nonequilibrium Dynamics and Mode Locking in Charge Density  Waves and Flux Lattices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Ofer Biham, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/29/1996
* USD 221,300.00

Sliding charge density waves and flux lattices in superconductors exhibit
unusual transport properties due to cooperative phenomena and quenched
impurities. In the past these systems were studied using mean field theory and
small scale simulations on sequential computers. These simulations provided good
qualitative results and insight, but failed to provide quantitative answers.
Recently large scale simulations on parallel computers, such as those carried
out by the principal investigators of this grant and their collaborators, have
begun to yield new quantitative results in this field. Motivated by these
advances, parallel architectures will be exploited in this grant for an
extensive study of the collective dynamics of charge density waves and flux
lattices. In their simplest version, the numerical models for these systems are
well suited for parallel machines. Our research emphasizes the search for new
algorithms for an efficient parallelization and the use of visualization
techniques. The second stage of our research will focus on strongly disordered
elastic media, where dislocations can tear the lattice, and Multiple Instruction
Multiple Data architecture will be more suited for numerical studies. The
dynamics of strongly disordered elastic media is both a problem of great
theoretical interest in condensed matter physics and a testing ground for
developing new algorithms for a Multiple Instruction Multiple Data environment.
This research is funded jointly by the Materials Theory program in the Division
of Materials Research and the New Technologies program in the Division of
Advanced Scientific Computing. The grant is funded through the Computational
Approaches to Real Materials program which is under the High Performance
Computing and Communication Initiative. %%% This theoretical and computational
research will focus on two problems that share common computational
requirements. One problem deals with the movement of electric charge in solids
due to wave motion, while the other deals with high temperature superconductors.
The research is of fundamental interest to the materials research community and
also has potential to impact industrial applications. What makes this research
program unique is the use of new massively parallel computers to deal with these
problems for the first time. This raises the possibility for significant
breakthroughs, in addition to the development of new algorithms for similar
problems in other areas of computing.