* 9217530
* Structure, Function and Ontogeny of Invertebrate Respiratory Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Nora Terwilliger, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* John A. Phillips
* 08/31/1997
* USD 251,542.00

The purpose of this grant is to study the developmental changes that occur in
structure and function of hemocyanin, the blue copper containing protein that is
found dissolved in the blood of arthropods and molluscs. Respiratory proteins,
hemoglobins, hemocyanins and hemerythrins, are excellent models for unique
insights into the structure of oxygen transport molecules and how the molecules
combine reversibly with oxygen. We have already found that hemocyanin expression
in the locally abundant Dungeness crab, Cancer magister, is developmentally
regulated. The changes in hemocyanin structure and function that occur during
the transition from larval to juvenile to adult crab are especially striking.
Furthermore, the changes operate in synchrony with simultaneous changes in salt
and water balance - which in turn affect hemocyanin oxygen affinities. Most
proteins are regulated at the level of transcription of DNA into messenger RNA.
Therefore, Dungeness crab hemocyanin is an appropriate system in which to study
the molecular basis of stage and tissue specific gene activation and repression
as well as the environmental and/or physiological cues that prompt the changes
in gene expression. Accordingly, we will ask when and where changes in
hemocyanin messenger RNA occur and will investigate the stage-specific sites and
manner of hemocyanin synthesis. We will also determine the effects of daylength
and hormonal regulation on timing of hemocyanin biosynthesis. In addition, we
will characterize an unusual molt-related protein in the blood of the Dungeness
crab and explore its relationship to the oxygen-binding hemocyanins and to
insect blood storage proteins. The successful completion of this project should
significantly increase our knowledge about the structure, function and
development of hemocyanin and other large copper containing proteins. Through an
integration of approaches including ecological physiology, developmental
biology, biochemistry and molecular biology, it will be possible to make major
contributions to our understanding of how the changing structure of hemocyanin
during development of the crab is related to changes in function of the
molecule, physiology of the crab and interaction of the crab with its
environment. Information about the crab's development and the role hemocyanin
plays in its tolerance to environmental conditions will enhance management of
the commercially important Dungeness crab fishery in the Pacific Northwest.