* 9217656
* U.S.-Ethiopia Dissertation Improvement Research on Petrologic and Geochemical Investigation of Volcanism in theMain Ethopian Rift-Afar Transition Region
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* William Hart, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 02/28/1994
* USD 6,950.00

An Ethiopian national, Tadiwos Chernet, (Ph.D. candidate under the supervision
of the PI), will perform field work in Ethiopia to complement initial field
studies conducted by the PI and the graduate student during 1990. The goal of
the research is to establish the geochronologic, geochemical, and petrologic
framework from which important details bearing on the tectonic and magmatic
evolution of the transition zone between the Main Ethiopian Rift (MER) and Afar
can be elucidated. The elemental and Sr isotope geochemistry will be performed
in-house by T. Chernet; the Nd and Pb isotope work will be done by the PI, using
the facilities of the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism, Carnegie Institution
of Washington. This type of geochemical and geochronologic study is of great
interest to the cooperating institution, the Ethiopian Institute of Geological
Surveys, particularly from the standpoints of gaining a clearer understanding of
the duration and thermal evolution of major silicic volcanic centers and of
gaining valuable age and chemical information to aid in ongoing geologic mapping
projects. Thus, the information derived will assist their ongoing efforts to
harness the geothermal potential associated with many of northern MER and Afar
silicic complexes. It is envisioned that collaboration between the PI and the
cooperating institution in Ethiopia will continue well beyond this particular
research effort. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries (SDC) Program with regard to strengthening scientific and
engineering infrastructure in developing countries and increasing cooperation
between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing
countries.