* 9217495
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Processes Governing      Air-Sea Transfer and Oceanic Cycling of Atmospheric Trace   Elements
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1997
* Thomas Church, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1997
* USD 11,455.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in atmospheric
chemistry between Thomas M. Church of the University of Delaware and Alain Veron
of the University of Aix-Marseille III. The collaboration focuses on a problem
of common concern; that is, the delivery of atmospheric pollution from both
North American and the European continents to the North Atlantic Ocean. The
investigators will study the processes governing air-sea transfer and oceanic
cycling of atmospheric trace elements. Sampling will occur on two joint
international cruises for aerosol, precipitation, fog and sea water samples. The
samples will be then be analyzed for trace metals, stable isotopes and
radionuclides which are identifiers of continental sources and atmospheric
transports to the sea. These atmospheric elements and their isotopes are useful
for tracing oceanic circulation and biogeochemical cycling. The U.S. side will
prepare and organize the ocean going sampling equipment. The atmospheric and
oceanic samples will be analyzed jointly in a newly established French clean
laboratory and at existing U.S. laboratories in Delaware and California. The
U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in analysis of stable
elements and radionuclide isotopes. This is complemented by unique atmospheric
trace elements developed by the French investigator. The results will advance
our knowledge of continental origins of air pollutants and their deposition in
the North Atlantic Ocean.