* 9217489
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Comparative Econometric  Studies of Industrial Productivity and its Factors at the   Firm Level
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Bronwyn Hall, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1996
* USD 13,750.00

9217489 Griliches This three-year award supports ongoing U.S.-France cooperative
research on the topic of industrial productivity. The project's investigators
are Zvi Griliches, the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Bronwyn
Hall, University of California, Berkeley, and Jacques Mairesse, Ecole des Hautes
Etudes en Sciences Sociales and Institute National de la Statistique et des
Etudes Economiques. The National Bureau of Economic Research, under the
direction of Dr. Griliches, has been conducting a major study in this area for
the last several years with support from NSF. Joint research to date between the
U.S. and French investigators has concentrated on three major topics:
comparative studies of productivity growth; econometric issues in the analysis
of panel data; and the effect of output-input factor decisions on the sources of
productivity growth at the firm and industry level, particularly in the service
sector. The investigators will continue their work on econometric methods on
panel data, emphasizing those which allow for unbalanced panels. Their
comparative studies of productivity growth will also be extended in several
directions and include factors for capacity utilization, product-line
diversification and the development of firm-level price indices. They also plan
more detailed studies of the contribution of research and development to
productivity and growth, using newly available French data on innovation and
patents. Both French and U.S. investigators are highly regarded experts in this
field. The project addresses important questions for national economic policy in
both countries. It takes advantage of U.S. and French complementary expertise
and provides access to large data sets in France. Results will advance our
understanding of the influence of technological change and other factors on
productivity growth. ***