* 9217637
* RUI:  Collaborative Research:  Role of Localized Material   RNAs in Embryonic Patterning in Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Carey Phillips, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 08/31/1996
* USD 170,000.00

The amphibian egg is axially symmetric before fertilization: its contents are
polarized along one dimension, the animal-vegetal axis. The earliest step in the
establishment of the embryo's bilaterally symmetric body plan, dorsal-ventral
axis specification, occurs after fertilization, but before the onset of zygotic
gene expression. Thus, all the components necessary for this patterning event
are already present at fertilization, and become asymmetrically localized or
modified during dorsal- ventral axis specification. This project proposes to
identify such components, determine the mechanisms of their localization, and
assess their roles in dorsal-ventral patterning in the frog Xenopus laevis. Two
cDNA libraries enriched for either dorsal or ventral transcripts in embryos were
recently constructed. Several clones representing regionally enriched maternal
transcripts have been isolated. Digoxigenin labelled antisense RNA probes are
presently being used for in situ hybridization analysis to learn the details of
localization of the corresponding RNAs during oogenesis and early development.
The spatial, temporal, and quantitative changes in expressions of specific RNAs
will be compared with the final morphology of embryos subjected to
centrifugation, UV irradiation, and over expression of injected maternal mRNAs.
These analyses will be used to ascertain which transcripts are involved in the
initiation of early pattern events. By providing new information on the
relationships between the spatial localization of some maternal transcripts
relative to the regulation of specific zygotic transcripts, these experiments
will lead to a better understanding of the relationship between egg organization
and embryonic patterning.