* 9217831
* Workshop on Facial Expression Understanding; July 29-Aug 1, 1992; San Francisco, CA
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1992,06/30/1993
* Paul Ekman, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Oscar Garcia
* 06/30/1993
* USD 47,725.00

This workshop is and NSF-initiated planning workshop to determine research
problems in the area of facial expression understanding that deserve future
funding. The main goals are (a) to identify the most important areas of research
on how to extract information from facial activity relevant to a person>s
emotional, cognitive and physical state; (b) to enhance communication between
man and machine through the development of emerging computer vision capture
techniques for facial processing and categorization of facial expression; (c) to
consider how we can facilitate the training of new investigators in the relevant
fields. The workshop will produce a set of recommendations to the investigative
community and to NSF to help guide funding opportunities. There will be
publications in standard journals of a report.The workshop participants
represent a balance of researchers in the areas of facial expression
understanding, computer vision and human computer interaction. Participants
include researchers with NSF grants and researchers in government and industrial
laboratories. The workshop will consist of plenary sessions and breakout groups
focused on several research areas. The steering committee includes Dr. Paul
Ekman of the University of California at San Francisco, Dr. Thomas Huang of the
University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana and Dr. Terrence Sejnowski of the
Salk Institute.