* 9217404
* U.S. France Cooperative Research:  Decay of High Lying      States Excited in  Heavy Ion Reactions
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Gerard Crawley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1995
* USD 15,000.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in high energy
particle physics between Gerard M. Crawley of the National Superconducting
Cyclotron Laboratory at Michigan State University and S. Gales of the Nuclear
Physics Institute, Orsay, France. Both research groups will conduct joint,
complementary experiments on decay studies of high lying single particle states
and giant resonances. The understanding of the structure of high lying states in
the nucleus will be enhanced significantly through studies on particle decay.
The investigators will conduct experiments at Michigan State University and at
GANIL facility in France on the following topics: (1) structure of high lying
states observed in heavy ion transfer reactions; (2) proton decay of Gamow-
Teller and other states in heavy nuclei; and (3) the existence and properties of
the giant isovector monopole resonance. This cooperation takes advantage of
unique U.S. and French expertise and facilities. High beam energies, which are
necessary for all of the experiments, are available at Michigan State's National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory. The GANIL facilities in Caen, France,
composed of three connected cyclotrons, a unique spectrometer, and neutron
detector array, are available together with French expertise, to carry out the
complex experiment on giant resonances.