* 9217469
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Qualitative Properties inDynamics and Mathematical Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Jack Hale, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1996
* USD 17,050.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in applied
mathematics. The proposal involves two research groups in the U.S. and France
led by Jack Hale of the Georgia Institute of Technology and Genevieve Raugel of
the University of Paris, South (Orsay). The investigators propose to study the
qualitative properties of infinite dimensional dynamical, physical systems. Such
systems are usually described by partial differential equations (PDE) or by
infinite systems of ordinary differential equations (ODE) or by maps of some
infinite dimensional sets. Utilizing these methods and others related to
mathematical physics and quantum systems, the investigators will investigate
some concrete problems: (1) the properties of flows as defined by dissipative
PDE; (2) notions of turbulence (space- time chaos), coherent structures, and
intermittency in extended dynamical systems; and (3) relationships between the
properties of diffusion in phase space and between the spectrum of the
Schrodinger operator and repellers of dynamical systems. The Georgia Tech group
approaches problems of dynamical systems through the study of ordinary
differential equations and maps. They bring to this collaboration expertise in
functional analysis and mathematical physics. The Orsay group consists of
specialists in partial differential equations as applied to problems in
dynamical systems. They are well versed in operator theory and C*-algebras.
Their combined efforts will extend the theory of dynamical systems to partial
differential equations.