* 9217532
* Dissertation Research: Cook Island Settlement Archaeology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1993
* USD 11,979.00

Under the direction of Dr. Patrick Kirch, MS Julie Endicott, a graduate student
at the University of California, Berkeley, will collect data for her doctoral
dissertation. Working in conjunction with her advisor she will conduct
archaeological excavations on Mangaia, one of the Cook Islands. Excavation to
date indicates that Mangaia was settled by Polynesian peoples and developed a
chieftan level of society. To date however no villages have been excavated and
little is known about how households and larger settlement units were organized.
MS Endicott will conduct large areal excavations of open terraces which contain
habitation sites. Work will involve the removal of overburden and careful
exposure of habitation floors. The spatial distribution of artifacts and
features will be recorded and artifactual, faunal and floral materials recovered
will be returned to Berkeley for analysis. Sediment samples will be taken to
provide information about depositional processes. Through this work MS Endicott
hopes to elucidate the structural context within which household activities took
place, identify individual activities and note variation from household to
household. Polynesian peoples have been the focus of intensive anthropological
study because of the extreme variation in social organization which has been
noted among different groups. Within a relatively short time span Polynesians
expanded from a Southeast Asian point of origin and populated many of the
islands of the Pacific. Anthropologists believe that through comparison across
island groups one can gain insight into the underlying processes of cultural
adaptation and change. However to accomplish this goal one must set present day
groups into a broader historical context and MS Endicott's work is directed
towards this end. Very little is known about prehistoric organization at the
important household level and this work will help to fill the gap. This research
is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of how cultural diversity
originates and is maintained. It will also assist in the training of a promising
young scientist.