* 9217599
* SGER: Ecosystem Recovery Following Three Centuries of       Livestock Grazing in Central New Mexico
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1994
* David Lightfoot, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1994
* USD 25,245.00

Sevilleta LTER study site has become a regional focal point in a debate
centered on whether total release from grazing (a refuge) is detrimental to
diversity and primary productivity. While detailed studies are occurring on the
Sevilleta, there are few comparative studies on adjoining grazed land or land
recently released from grazing pressure. The current Sevilleta LTER Program is
being conducted on a site that may itself be undergoing successional changes
following release from over three centuries of intensive livestock grazing. It
is imperative to isolate and understand the post-grazing changes on the
Sevilleta landscape in order to identify future sources of long-term ecosystem
changes; without a separation of grazing influences, efforts to attribute
observable ecosystem changes to other causes, such as climate change or
anthropogenic factors, will be confounded. The Sevilleta National Wildlife
Refuge was established in 1973, and livestock exclusion fences were erected in
that year. The summer of 1972, one year prior to livestock removal, was an
unusually wet period, and was followed by a strong El Nino during the winter-
spring of 1972-73. The combination of a very wet summer followed by a wet spring
may have only a 20 year frequency pattern. In view of the importance of moisture
regimes on arid ecosystem functioning, the antecedent conditions on the
Sevilleta in 1973 may have fostered an unusual "successional trajectory" that
would be difficult, if not impossible, to simulate experimentally in the field.
However, an opportunity to perform just such an experiment has arisen as a
result of the unusually wet weather patterns that have occurred in central New
Mexico in 1991-92. The Sevilleta experienced an extremely wet summer in 1991.
The Sevilleta is presently in the midst of a strong El Nino that is producing
late winter and spring moisture. The current weather conditions have set the
stage for studies that could simulate the transition that occurred on the
Sevilleta after 1973. This combination of climatological events may occur only
rarely (once every few decades) and it is important to initiate studies
immediately to take advantage of these unusual circumstances. This SGER project
is based on (1) the fundamental need for site- specific information on ecosystem
effects of livestock removal, coupled with (2) the coincidental occurrence of
weather conditions that are very similar to those of nearly 20 years ago.