* 9217297
* Ab-initio Calculations of Properties of Ordered and         Disordered Alloys
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Frank Pinski, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/1995
* USD 206,400.00

This award is being made through the NSF initiative for Computational Approaches
to Real Materials which was part of the High Performance Computing and
Communications Initiative. This award was rated High Priority by panel review.
Research on the electronic structure and properties of substitutional alloys
will be conducted in collaboration with Oak Ridge National Laboratory using the
2048-node Intel PARAGON computer. Recent developments of theory and methodology
have progressed to where calculations of formation energies and other physical
properties of solid substitutional alloys give results that are in good
agreement with experiment. The proposed research will extend this theory and
develop new algorithms to elucidate the underlying electronic mechanisms in
several problems of technological interest, such as the origins of site
selectivity of third alloy additions in binary intermetallic alloys. Since the
required calculations are presently beyond the limits of current vector
supercomputers, the theory will be implemented on the new generation of
massively parallel supercomputers, and the associated algorithms and codes will
be developed. %%% This computational research will focus on calculating the
electronic properties of important classes of metallic alloys. The calculations
are sophisticated ones which are accurate in comparison with actual
measurements. Due to the complexity of this work, the calculations will be
performed on a new generation massively parallel computer at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. The necessary computer codes will be developed. This research is
funded through a NSF initiative called Computational Approaches to Real
Materials which is part of the High Performance Computing and Communication
Initiative.