* 9217443
* Oil-Water Interfacial Synthesis as a Benign and Safer       Alternativ to Conventional Liquid-Phase Syntheses
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,11/30/1996
* Phooi Lim, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1996
* USD 262,000.00

Organic syntheses are often carried out in organic solvents, some of which are
toxic, hazardous, or environmentally troublesome. The choice of a solvent for a
homogeneous synthesis reaction is often limited by the multiple functions
required of the solvent. Two of the more important functions are: (1)
solubilization of the reactants, reaction intermediates, and catalyst, and (2)
rate or selectivity enhancement through the participation of the solvent as a
base or as a catalyst ligand. In the aerobic coupling of 2,6- dimethylphenol,
which is the basis of the commercial production of
poly(2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) (PPO), pyridine and nitrobenzene are
often used as the reaction media because of their high solubilities for
dimethylphenol, PPO, and cuprous chloride (the coupling catalyst). But solvents
such as pyridine and nitrobenzene are highly toxic and noxious. Their use
presents health, safety and environmental concerns and alternate solvents and
technology need to be explored. The objective of this research is to develop
oil-water interfacial synthesis as a benign alternative to conventional
syntheses that require the use of toxic solvents. This technique involves a
combination of innocuous oil and aqueous phases in place of the toxic organic
solvent. The multiple functions which previously limited the choice of solvent
are here decoupled and are met separately by a biphasic mixture. The desired
reaction is effected at the oil-water interface by means of a surface-active
complex and by pH control of the aqueous phase. This project will further
develop the interfacial technique so that it may be (1) optimized and adopted
for commercial PPO synthesis and (2) extended to other synthesis reactions that
have commercial potential. The research will receive intellectual input and
possible long- term financial support from Mallinckrodt Specialty Chemicals
Company.