* 9217012
* Research-Oriented Workshops in South America; LaPlata,      Argentina, Dec. 7-11, 1992 and Sao Paulo, Brazil, December  14-16, 1992
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1992,08/31/1993
* R. Young, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 08/31/1993
* USD 12,940.00

This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program award supports travel expenses of
R.A. Young, Georgia Institute of Technology; R.B. Von Dreele, Los Alamos
National Laboratory; and A.K. Cheetham, University of California at Santa
Barbara, to organize and participate in two research workshops on the Rietveld
method, in La Plata, Argentina December 7-11, 1992, and in Sao Paulo, Brazil
December 14-16, 1992. The Brazilian co-organizer is Yvonne Mascarenhas of the
University of Sao Paulo; the Argentine co- organizer is Graciela Punte of the
University of La Plata. The Rietveld method is a powerful new tool for
extracting detailed crystal structural information from X-ray and neutron powder
diffraction data. Since such structural details dictate many physical and
chemical attributes of materials, knowledge of them is crucial to understanding,
modifying, and creating materials that have properties needed for specific uses.
The Rietveld method plays an important role in research on the crystal
structural origins of HTc superconductivity. Each workshop will include 35
mostly junior local and regional participants. The South American participants
will acquire an important method for understanding structure-property
relationships. All sides will gain new ties for research collaboration on
problems of mutual interest.