* 9217858
* SGER: Development of Scanning Electron Microscope Techniquesto Ascertain the Microscopic Mixing Characteristics of      Atmospheric Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Barbara Turpin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1995
* USD 18,000.00

Most chemical analyses of atmospheric particles are carried out on bulk
samples. However, particle by particle variations in composition strongly
influence atmospheric transformations, visibility degradation, and the fate of
particulate pollutants. In addition, knowledge of the microscopic mixing
characteristics of combustion products is essential to understanding particle
formation in combustion. With the development of computer- controlled scanning
and x-ray detectors which measure elements as light as carbon, the scanning
electron microscope (SEM) has a great deal of promise for this application.
However, more development work is needed to assure that the elemental analysis
accurately reflects the composition of the aerosol. The goal of this research is
to obtain accurate single particle analyses of atmospheric aerosols with an
electron microscope. Monodisperse aerosols of known composition will be used to
1) conduct studies of electron beam damage to major components of atmospheric
aerosols, 2) test methods to reduce beam damage, and 3) validate existing
quantitation methods. The potential of the SEM for measuring carbon will also be
assessed. The techniques developed will be used in the future to identify the
elemental characteristics determining the uptake of water by aerosols.