* 9217735
* Computerization of Invertebrate Paleontology                Collection Records
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* LouElla Saul, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 11/30/1995
* USD 99,929.00

The collection of the Invertebrate Paleontology Section of the National History
Museum of Los Angeles County, ranked sixth in North America in size and
importance by the paleontological Society, contains about 3.5 million specimens
from 26,000 catalogued localities, and more than 8,000 type and figured
specimens cited in about 570 published papers. The collection forms an important
national paleontological resource, but one from which taxonomic data cannot be
quickly retrieved. To alleviate this situation, the institution investigated a
program to computerize its collection records using relational database software
(Paradox 3.5) running inhouse on a DOS platform. The planning phase of
computerization was completed in late 1991 and implementation of data entry and
report forms, testing of database designs with preliminary data sets, and fine
tuning of table and field definitions, data dictionaries, and procedural manuals
will soon be completed. This project will provide one-time assistance for
purchase of hardware (computers, printers, mass storage and communication
devices) to assist in these acquisitions and funding for a full-time curatorial
assistant for two years for data entry and validation of the locality, type
specimen, and bibliographic databases that constitute the sectional collection
records. %%% Collections of this type some as important national resources not
only for fundamental research but also for general public exhibition,
educational programs aimed at all sectors of the population, and as source
materials for the testing are validation of models designed to emulate past
biological/climatological histories and make projections for the future.