* 9217276
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program:  Taxonomic Studies of Plant Pathogenic Ascomycetes in Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Richard Hanlin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 05/31/1997
* USD 34,578.00

This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program award will support collaboration by
Richard Hanlin of the University of Georgia and Maria Menezes of the
Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco in Brazil. The project aims to collect,
identify, and prepare illustrated descriptions of Brazilian ascomycetes.
Ascomycetes comprise a major component of fungal flora in the tropics. Many
species grow parasitically on plants; some cause diseases that imperil crops.
They are often poorly identified and understood. The rapid loss of native
tropical flora makes it important to learn as much about endemic fungi as
possible before more species are destroyed. The researchers, accompanied by two
graduate students working under Hanlin, will focus on plant pathogenic species,
but will collect species from other substrates. They will verify identification
by comparison with type material. Also, they will try to grow species collected
in pure culture and study possible anamorphs. U.S. and Brazilian students and
technicians will learn methods for working with ascomycetes. A book, Illustrated
Genera of Ascomycetes, will be published in Portuguese. Both the U.S. and
Brazilian sides will benefit from the training of junior participants and
expansion of the knowledge base on endangered ascomycetes in the tropics.