* 9217329
* Ionization of Atoms by Electromagnetic Radiation and        Charged Particles, Award in Indian and U.S. Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1997
* Steven Manson, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/1997
* USD 17,300.00

Description: This research proposes a series of calculations to explore the
ionizing interactions of electromagnetic radiation and charged particles with
atoms and ions. The collaborators are Steven Manson of Georgia State University
and Pranawa Deshmukh of the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras. During the
initial phase of the project, the Indian collaborator will be supported with
travel and living expenses to do developmental work using the computational
facilities at Georgia State University. The proposed research will study i) the
influence of relativistic interactions in the photoionization of high-z atoms
using the RRPA formalism with enough channels to obviate truncation errors, ii)
investigate the inner shell threshold behavior of photoionization cross
sections, iii) explore the photoionization of ions with the RRPA technology, iv)
examine the systematics of generalized oscillator strengths for neutral atoms,
excited states, and atomic ions. Scope: This research will provide training for
graduate and advanced undergraduate students in the methods of calculating and
understanding atomic and molecular structure and collisions. The techniques and
computer codes developed will strengthen the theoretical physics program at the
collaborating institutions. The results will provide further insight into the
basic nature of these fundamental atomic processes which are important in plasma
physics, atmospheric, solar, and astrophysics, radiation physics and therapy,
and for studies of possible x-ray and nuclear-pumped laser mechanisms.