* 9217250
* Microbial Food Webs of Marine Intertidal Communities:       Trophic Interactions and Grazing Rates
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1992,10/31/1995
* Kenneth Nealson, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/1995
* USD 159,680.00

This research project will study trophic relations in benthic microbial food
webs. The objectives are: (1) to estimate the rates of bactivory and herbivory
of benthic nanoflagellates, ciliates, nematodes, copepods, and other organisms
in tidal-flat communities; (2) to compare the trophic structures of several
distinct types of intertidal microbial communities inhabiting exposed sandy,
protected sandy and muddy beaches; and (3) to examine changes in the trophic
structure of the benthic microbial community in course of seasonal succession.
These objectives will be conducted through field grazing experiments using
fluorescent-labeled bacteria and diatoms as food tracers. This approach has been
used previously to study planktonic protozoan grazing and it will be adapted
here for studying benthic metazoans. A part of this novel experimental design
has been already tested in the field. The advantage of this experimental design
is that it allows simultaneous measurements of microbenthic bactivory and
meiobenthic herbivory. These data are needed to analyze the energy flow through
benthic communities, to evaluate the role of grazing in controlling bacterial
and algal production and to examine food competition among protozoans and
meiofauna. This research will describe a unique data set that is currently
unavailable for any benthic community.