* 9217459
* Linking Variation in Coastal Oceanographic Conditions with  Local Variation in Rocky Intertidal Community Structure
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1992,09/30/1997
* Bruce Menge, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1997
* USD 526,800.00

Community structure of low rocky intertidal zones is strikingly different on
the Oregon coast. This project will examine why an intertidal zone with high
sessile recruitment and phytoplankton availability supports the highest levels
of prey production, which in turn supports high abundance of carnivores and
herbivores. The postulated result of high consumer abundance is stronger
predation on, and weaker competition among, sessile organisms. For contrast, an
intertidal zone with high nutrients and macroalgal abundance, and low
phytoplankton availability will also be examined. Dr. Menge hypothesizes that
higher nutrient uptake by the more abundant macroalgae and/or shorter residence
time of nutrients and phytoplankton in nearshore is due to stronger offshore
currents. To tests these hypotheses, research scientists will quantify: (1)
nutrients, chlorophyll and productivity on- and offshore, (2) current/upwelling
regimes, (3) recruitment rates and larval abundance, (4) prey and macroalgal
growth rates, and (5) intensities of predation, grazing, and competition at both
sites. The project will also evaluate the generality of the influence of
nearshore water column processes on intertidal community processes by
quantitative surveys of community structure and dynamics, and oceanographic
conditions at other locations along the Oregon coast. The results from the
project will provide considerable insight into the influence of nearshore
oceanographic conditions on community structure in low rocky intertidal
habitats.