* 9217287
* Massively Parallel Algorithms for Modeling the Structure of Liquids and Liquid-Solid Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Yousef Saad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/28/1997
* USD 495,600.00

This grant provides support for a collaborative research project between
materials science and computer science to develop and implement massively
parallel algorithms for modeling the structure of liquids and liquid-solid
interfaces. The grant is funded equally by the Divisions of Materials Research
and Advanced Scientific Computing through the Computational Approaches to Real
Materials program which itself is part of the High Performance Computing and
Communications Initiative. The development of novel, massively parallel
computers has opened new avenues for the application of electronic structure
codes to complex materials systems. New codes will be implemented which will
take full advantage of parallel machines to examine the structure and electronic
properties of liquids and liquid-solid interfaces. Currently, these systems, in
particular the liquid- solid interface, are not accessible to ab initio methods.
The research will employ molecular dynamics simulations using quantum forces
determined from ab initio pseudopotentials. Our first effort will focus on
liquids involving tetrahedral semiconductors. We will calculate the electronic,
structural and dynamical properties of the elemental liquids such as silicon and
simple compounds such as gallium arsenide. With respect to the liquid- solid
interface, we will examine the structural and dynamical properties of the
interface during the melting process. %%% This research will develop and
implement computer programs for the new generation of parallel computers in
order to study the structure and electronic properties of liquid semiconductors
and their interface with solid semiconductors. This work has important
ramifications in the processing of semiconducting materials, in addition to its
fundamental physical interest. The work will also develop new computer
algorithms which will have importance in many fields of science. The research is
funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials Research and Advanced Scientific
Computing through the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative.