* 9217422
* RUI: Behavioral Cues Responsible for the Initiation and     Maintenance of Copepod Swarms
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Julie Ambler, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1996
* USD 70,189.00

This project will examine the potential cues that initiate and maintain swarm
behavior in the marine copepod, Dioithona oculata, by computerized motion
analysis to study individual and swarm responses to light intensity and
pheromones. A conceptual model is presented for the swarming behavior pattern:
diel light cycles provide a releasor cue, a threshold light intensity provides
an arousal cue, and gradients of light intensity elicit a swarming response.
Cues for individuals to orient in the swarm may be light intensity, and/ or
pheromones. The study will first determine photosensitivity by phototaxis, and
response to chemical pheromone signals by recording individual swimming tracks.
The swimming behavior and spatial distribution of individuals in a swarm will be
quantified for laboratory swarms in experimental light gradients, changes in
light intensity, and presence of a swarm marker (beam of light). The life
history stage composition of laboratory swarms will be manipulated to test for
the effect of pheromones from adult females and other swarming stages.
Laboratory swarm behavior will be compared to that of field swarms. Initially
all experiments will be conducted during midday until the presence or absence of
circadian rhythms has been determined. This study will help verify the
conceptual model of swarm behavior, provide a framework for interpreting in situ
observations of zooplankton aggregation, and provide mechanisms for explaining
swarming which can be included in mathematical models.