* 9217751
* Advanced Design Methods for Critical Components of          Concurrent Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Catalin Roman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 06/30/1997
* USD 331,326.00

The objective of this work is to evaluate the potential use of formal program
derivation techniques in the design of critical (yet reasonable-sized)
components of concurrent systems. Several technical issues will be addressed.
The notion of program specification will be extended to include not only a
behavior specification but also formally specified constraints, e.g., the
characteristics of the target architecture. The formally stated constraints will
provide additional formal guidance to the design process and will lead to the
emergence of new program derivation methods. The formal component of this
research will be complemented by experimentation with a number of case studies
ranging from simple problems having popular appeal in the literature to real
components selected in cooperation with an industrial partner. Successful use of
formal derivation techniques on industrial-grade problems will require a careful
blend of formal methods and practical insights. Regarding the latter, experience
to date suggests two particularly promising ideas to evaluate. First, is the
notion of freeing much of the design process from costly formal proofs without
compromising the disciplined thinking typical of formal derivation. Second, is
the idea of providing powerful visual exploration, communication, and
prototyping capabilities supplied by an already developed state-of-the art
program visualization facility.