* 9217414
* Fast Hirerarchical Aggregation and Decomposition Algorithm  for Optimal Routing in Data Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Kevin Tsai, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 12/31/1996
* USD 124,975.00

Optimal routing is essential for efficient operations of computer networks over
a large geographical area. If there is a sudden large disturbance to the
network, severe congestion can occur, and as a result, the best existing optimal
routing algorithm may take a large number of iterations to steer the routing to
a reasonable delay level. The aggregation based gradient projection algorithm
studied in this project has demonstrated speed-up ratios over the existing best
routing algorithm ranging from infinity to 3300% - 700%. This kind of speed-up
result is worthy of further investigation for possible eventual implementation
in large real networks. The idea of exploiting hierarchical aggregation and
disaggregation-decomposition (HAD) is the cornerstone of the project. Fast
computation usually comes from imitating how nature solves its own difficult
computation problems.. For example, several lines of anatomical and
physiological evidence suggest that information processing in the cortex is
fundamentally hierarchical in nature. Intimately related to the concept of
hierarchy are the concepts of good organization, aggregation (or summarized
computation, an almost necessary mechanism for solving large problems)
disaggregation (for accurate solution, details are needed), and decomposition
(the classical idea of divide-and-conquer). The HAD algorithm is the result of
integrating the related concepts into a generic computational system. The
project aims to develop the HAD based algorithms for both conventional packet
switching and ATM networks, to simulate the developed algorithms in a realistic
network environment and to exploit the speed advantage to the fullest extent,
and to establish the theoretical speed-up complexity for the HAD algorithm. This
project is a joint project with G. M. Huang of Texas A&amp;M University.