* 9217260
* Architictures for Digital Multimedia On-Demand Services in  Integrated Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Venkat Rangan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 06/30/1997
* USD 252,026.00

Further advances in networking coupled with rapid advances in storage
technologies will make it feasible to build multimedia on-demand servers capable
of providing services similar to those of a neighborhood videotape rental store
on a metropolitan-area network. In this research we investigate architectures
for multimedia servers that can permit multiple subscribers to interactively
record and playback multimedia objects over integrated computer networks. We
address two main requirements in the development of such a multi-subscriber
multimedia server: (1) Continuity of playback of each media constituting a
multimedia object, and (2) mutual synchrony of playback of the different media
constituting a multimedia object. In order to address the continuity
requirement, we develop admission control algorithms with which a multimedia
server can satisfy the maximum number of subscribers simultaneously without
violating continuity of playback for any of them. One such algorithm is a
quality proportional scheme that retrieves media units at a rate proportional on
an average to their respective playback rates, but uses a staggered toggling
technique by which successive numbers of media blocks retrieved are fine tuned
individually to admit and service an optimal number of subscribers
simultaneously. Initial performance estimation shows that the quality
proportional policy is an order of magnitude more scalable compared to
straightforward admission control policies such as servicing one subscriber per
disk head and round robin servicing of subscribers. During retrieval of a
multimedia object, mediaphones that playback the different media components of
the object may have recording and playback rate mismatches. Furthermore,
emerging integrated networks such as ATM are expected to introduce jitter that
can nevertheless be bounded in the transport of media units from servers to
mediaphones. In order to ensure synchronous playback of multimedia objects, we
study a feedback technique in which a multimedia server uses lightweight
messages called feedback units generated by mediaphones and transmitted back to
the server to detect asynchronies during playback. We study various
resynchronization policies such as aggressive, conservative, and probabilistic
and compare their performance for video/audio playback. Initial performance
estimation shows that whereas aggressive policies are expected to perform best
only at lower playback rates, conservative policies are expected to perform best
only at higher playback rates. In contrast, probabilistic policies have the
potential to perform uniformly well at all playback rates. The policies and
algorithms developed in this project form the basis for a prototype multimedia
server being developed at the UCSD Multimedia Laboratory.