* 9217334
* Temporal Variation in Deep-Sea Benthic Boundary Layer       Communities:  Long Time-Series Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1998
* Kenneth Smith, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1998
* USD 625,739.00

Long time-series studies have extensively altered our basic understanding of
biological processes in the deep ocean. We have established a long time-series
station at an abyssal site in the eastern N. Pacific (4100 m depth) and, over
the past three years, have been measuring particulate matter flux while
concurrently monitoring the sea floor with time-lapse photography. We have found
a strong temporal relationship between the flux of particulate matter entering
the benthic boundary layer and the arrival and residence of detrital aggregates
on the sea floor. The residence of these detrital aggregates spans a six-month
period and coincides with increased abundance and movements of the epibenthic
megafauna. Our results to date suggest coupling exists between near-bottom
pelagic and benthic processes. However, the most important questions still
remain regarding how and on what time scales the pelagic and benthic processes
are coupled in the deep sea, especially in the context of the interannual
variability we have observed over the past three years. We propose to study the
coupling between the pelagic supply of organic matter and its utilization by the
benthic community using in situ measurements of detrital aggregates superimposed
on a continuing time-series study of monitoring the benthic boundary layer.
Specifically, we propose to address three questions. 1) What is the source of
detrital aggregates observed seasonally on the sea floor? 2) How important are
detrital aggregates as sites of sediment community activity? 3) How important
are detrital aggregates as sited of epibenthic megafaunal activity? This study
will improve our understanding of the coupling between pelagic and benthic
processes and broaden current perceptions of biogeochemical cycling over
interannual time scales in the deep ocean.