* 9217331
* Spherical Hydrophilic Polymers:  Synthesis,                 Characterization, and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1997
* George Newkome, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/1997
* USD 315,000.00

Based on the 'void volume' incorporated into the infrastructure of pre-dense
packed, dendritic macromolecules, a series of novel polymers will be constructed
that possess internal, specifically located, metal, metalloid, and/or
heterocyclic moieties. The proposed research will emphasize the synthesis and
characterization of water-soluble cascade polymers with easily functionalized
lipophilic interiors. These transformations will focus on the potential to
manipulate internal reactive sites, at each generation, after cascade
superstructure construction. Modification of the interior of these unimolecular
micelles will allow preparation of metallospheres which are specifically
designed, water-soluble catalysts. Characterization of these macromolecules will
be accomplished via the standard techniques of NMR spectroscopy, electron
microscopy, light-scattering, fluorescent-probe methods, solubility, osmotic
pressure conductivity, and mass spectroscopy. The potential to perform chemistry
within a micellar environment, inside a single molecule, will be investigated in
detail. The use of these cascade polymers as solubilizing agents,
microencapsulating agents, and host- transport agents will be continued. This
research deals with the synthesis and properties of a new class of large
spherical molecules. Because they are designed to have voids in their structure,
it will be possible to incorporate various types of functional materials within
these new structures. Their potential in various applications will be
investigated.