* 9217584
* Atmospheric Oxygen Photoabsorption
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Philip Cosby, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/1996
* USD 222,000.00

9217584 Slanger The photochemistry of the earth's atmosphere is dominated by
molecular oxygen in its diatomic and triatomic forms. Oxygen absorbs much of the
solar radiation in the ultraviolet for 100 to 240 nm, leading to the formation
of ozone. The structured nature of the oxygen absorption spectrum, and the
consequent wide variations in the absorption cross section, mean that uv
radiation is absorbed over a wide range of altitudes. Some wavelengths are
absorbed above 100 km, while others descend below 40km, where they can initiate
chemistry in anthropogenic species diffusing upward from the ground. Thus
quantitative modeling of ozone production and other solar-induced photochemistry
in the atmosphere requires detailed knowledge of the absorption spectrum of
ozone, the spectral distribution of ultraviolet solar radiation (including solar
cycle variations), and radiative transport through the atmosphere. Recent
research in laborators and elsewhere suggests that the existing data and
mechanistic understanding are far from adequate. This project involves
experimental, theoretical, and modeling research to improve our knowledge of the
absorption of ultraviolet radiation in the atmosphere. Four main topics are
emphasized: (1) measurement of rotational and finestructure resolved linewidths
for each upper vibrational level in the ozone Schumann-Runge band system; (2)
theoretical analysis of the interactions between the ozone state and its four
predissociating states, based on the experimental linewidths, (3) comparison of
current models for solar energy deposition with that resulting from folding the
experimental linewidths into the true solar spectrum; and (4) measurement of
line-resolved absolute photoabsorption cross sections for ozone in the A-X,A'-X,
and c-X Herzberg bands.