* 9217294
* Development of Parallel Car-Parrinello Code and Application to Simulations of Liquid Silicon and Aluminum
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Hannes Jonsson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Lesser Blum
* 02/29/1996
* USD 127,800.00

Hannes Jonsson is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, the Materials Theory Program in the
Division of Materials Research, and the New Technologies Program in the Division
of Advanced Scientific Computing to develop scalable, portable computational
algorithms for performing Car-Parrinello (CP) simulations on MIMD computers.
This grant is part of the Computational Approaches to Real Materials initiative
in Division of Materials Research and the High Performance Computing and
Communications Initiative. Jonnson will optimize the CP code for massively
parallel computers, and use it to perform simulation studies of short range
order in Silicon and Aluminum bulk liquids and solid-liquid interfaces. For
comparison with these first principles simulations, Jonnson will also carry out
Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics Simulations using empirical potential
functions, in particular the Stillinger- Weber potential for Silicon and and
Embedded Atom Method potential for Aluminum. %%% A molecular level understanding
of the atomic and molecular interactions is of key importance in the rational
design of new materials. Theoretical and computational approaches to this
problem will be significantly enhanced through the use of massively parallel
computers. The Car-Parrinello methodology shows great promise as a first
principles approach to understanding such interactions, but its applications are
currently limited by the speed of vector processors. Jonnson proposes to adapt
the Car-Parrinello algorithms for massively parallel computers which should
significantly enhance their applicability to more complex materials systems.