* 9217212
* U.S. France Cooperative Research:  Numerical Methods and    Parallel Algorithms for Advanced Applications in Materials  Preparation Process Modelling
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1993,02/29/1996
* J Iwan Alexander, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 02/29/1996
* USD 12,400.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in numerical
methods and parallel algorithms in materials processing. The investigators are
J. Iwan D. Alexander of the University of Alabama, Patrick Bontoux and Jalil
Ouazzani of the Institute for Fluid Mechanics in Marseille, France. The
objective of the research is to integrate parallel computing strategies with
computational problems in materials processing. The investigators will identify
and develop techniques and algorithms with which to solve materials processing
models. Then they will apply the methods to crystal growth and transport
processes in other fluid systems. The research focuses on developing new
predictive models. Current numerical methods and models are limited and large
computation times are required to produce meaningful solutions. The results of
this research will advance predictive capabilities in materials processing, in
particular, for highly complex processing situations. Dr. Alexander brings to
this collaboration his expertise with materials process modeling and techniques.
The code development requirements will be significantly strengthened by the
considerable expertise of the French investigators in this area and in fluid
dynamics. The investigators complementary expertise provides a sound basis for
the collaboration.