* 9217523
* Enzyme Activities as Shipboard Biochemical Indices of       Condition in Zooplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1992,11/30/1995
* M.Elizabeth Clarke, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1995
* USD 140,000.00

A major area of interest within the biological oceanographic community is the
ability to assess the factors affecting population abundances of marine
organisms and the potential role of climate change on marine species. For
zooplankton species, it is hypothesized that nutritional regime can profoundly
affect zooplankton abundance and survival. However, current techniques to assess
nutritional and physiological condition in zooplankton to evaluate this
hypothesis are rather insensitive and/or difficult to apply. Additionally,
analysis of field data from biological studies usually lags behind the
availability of physical measurements. This project will develop shipboard
activity (rate) assays for enzymes of metabolism and growth in several species
of marine zooplankton including two species (larvae of the cod, Gadus morhua and
the copepod, Calanus finmarchicus) which are important components of an of the
Georges Bank ecosystem, which is a region of interest in the zooplankton and
fisheries community. The assays once developed will be used to test the
vertical-stratification hypothesis for zooplankton survival in the Georges Bank
region. The objectives will be accomplished by: (1) laboratory optimization of
the enzyme assay conditions; (2) correlation of physiological parameters (e.g.,
respiration rates) with enzyme activities to validate molecular proxies; (3)
estimation of physiological condition in field-caught specimens by use of these
enzyme activity proxies.