* 9217512
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Theoretical Studies and  Implementation of On-Line Arithmetic
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1996
* Milos Ercegovac, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1996
* USD 13,470.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in massively
parallel computer systems between Milos Ercegovac of the University of
California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and Jean Michel Muller of the Ecole Normale
Superieure, Lyon, France. The research focuses on theory, design and
applications of an on- line arithmetic approach with the ultimate goal of
implementing a class of fast and cost-effective algorithms suitable for specific
parallel computer systems. The UCLA group brings to this collaboration their
expertise on theory and design of an on-line arithmetic approach and
implementation of arithmetic algorithms and structures in field programmable
arrays. This is complemented by the French investigator's extensive experience
in custom VLSI (Very Large Scale Integration) and its application to massively
parallel computers. Fast implementations for basic arithmetic operations have
been of major interest since the development of the first generation of
computers. Most current designs have been used in general- purpose and multiple
processor systems, so that solutions that are suitable for more specialized
situations have not been fully explored. The proposed cooperative research
explores possible solutions and will enhance the development of specialized
systems which require both high speed and the capability for executing
algorithms composed of a large number of arithmetic operations.