* 9217193
* Chemical Scavenging in the N. Atlantic and N. Pacific:  The Rare Earth Elements
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Robert Sherrell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 11/30/1995
* USD 134,348.00

This research is a new and detailed approach to the investigation of chemical
scavenging processes in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, using the distributions
of the rare earth elements (REE) as indicators of particulate removal and redox
cycling under varying conditions of primary particle flux and water column
structure. In situ pumping, will be used to collect large suspended particulate
samples as part of an ongoing study of dissolved/particulate fractionation for a
suite of major and minor elements. Established trace metal seawater sampling
techniques will be used to collect REE water samples. The dependence of
dissolved and particulate REE patterns and cerium anomalies on the mass
concentration, composition, and vertical flux of the suspended particle field
will be explored. This will be accomplished by profile measurements at four
oceanographically distinct sites: 1) the productive Northeast Pacific margin
environment, 2) the oligotrophic Northeast Atlantic, 3) the Gulf Stream/NW
Sargasso Sea frontal system, and 4) the variably productive Central Equatorial
Pacific. The REE will be used as probes of scavenging processes over spatial and
temporal gradients in primary and new production. Results will have broad
implications for the critical variables which regulate biological uptake,
adsorptive scavenging, and redox-controlled removal of trace inorganics in open
ocean and ocean margin environments.