* 9217714
* The Role of Hydrothermal Systems in Controlling             Concentrations of Trace Metals in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1996
* John Trefry, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 06/30/1996
* USD 278,814.00

The hydrothermal vent/seawater mixing zone is truly one of the most intense
interfaces on Earth. A whole series of reactions alter the incipient
hydrothermal flux and regulate the net transfer of elements from metal-rich vent
solutions to seawater. Some metal precipitate while others escape in dissolve
form. Some metals precipitates scavenge trace metals from seawater and other
partially redissolve. However, within this conceptual framework, the complex
interactions and net effects of hydrothermal processes on the concentrations of
trace metals in seawater are just beginning to be pieced together. This effort
will carry out an integrated program on trace metals in hydrothermal systems
during the next three years. The research will include analyses of samples
already on hand as well as new field and experimental work to be coordinated
with several independently-funded researchers in the following areas: (1) Vent
Fluid and Plume Processes, (2) Preservation of Hydrothermal Precipitates, and
(3) Implications for Geochemical Cycles. The investigation will focus on trace
metals that have values for the Ä±(M/Fe)plume particles/(M/Fe)vent fluid! ratio
&gt;10 or &lt;0.1 (excluding Mn) and/or some of the metals as yet univestigated
in vent fluids/plumes for which preliminary data is very promising including Ga,
Bi, Sb, Co, Ni and Tl.