* 9217417
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Relationship Between     Molecular Suprastructure and Barrier Properties of MainchainLiquid Crystalline Glassy Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1998
* Benny Freeman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1998
* USD 17,000.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research between Benny
D. Freeman of North Carolina State University, and Claudine Noel of the Ecole
Superieure for Physics and Industrial Chemistry in Paris, France. The research
focuses on mainchain liquid crystalline polymers (LCPs). The investigators
propose to determine the effect of systematic structure changes on phase
morphology, thermal properties, and penetrant sorption and transport properties
of LCPs. LCPs offer promise as thermal or chemical resistant barrier films and
coatings of potential use to the chemical processing industry. Recent studies of
LCPs suggest that these materials are among the most impermeable barrier
polymers currently available. However, practical difficulties have limited the
success of studies to date in decoupling chemical and morphological effects on
the transport properties of small molecules through these polymers. The
investigators propose to advance understanding of the effects of LCPs' molecular
structure on penetrant sorption and transport properties and, in turn, determine
their high barrier properties. At North Carolina State, the sorption and
transport properties of small molecules in these polymers will be studied;
whereas, the French research group will conduct studies on characterization and
their thermal properties. The novel polymeric materials for this study will be
provided by Hoechst Celanese and Miles Laboratories. The collaboration takes
advantage of the expertise of the investigators and complementary approaches to
this problem.