* 9217997
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowhip Program:  Growth of InxGa1-xAs    by Molecular Beam Epitaxy with In Situ Carbon Implantation
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Charles Tu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 07/31/1995
* USD 25,000.00

WPC&lt; 2 B J Z Courier #| x ._ x 6 X @ `7 X @ HP LaserJet 4 HPLAS4.PRS x @ \ X
@ 2 6 V &gt; Z Courier ? x x x , ._ x 6 X @ `7 X @ HP LaserJet 4 HPLAS4.PRS x @
\ X @ 2 * F Z : #| x INT 9217997 Tu This award supports a two year continuing
grant under the NSF CGP (Center for Global Partnership) Science Fellowship
Program for Professor Charles W. Tu, Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of California, San Diego. During two three month visits
to Japan in 1993 and 1994, Professor Tu will work with Dr. Yunosuke Makita,
Optoelectronics Division, Electrotechnical Laboratory (ETL), The Agency of
Industrial Science and Technology, MITI, located in Tsukuba Science City. The
focus of this project will be in growing Inx Ga1 xAs by molecular beam epitaxy
(MBE) with in situ carbon ion implantation for a wide range of composition x on
GaAs and InP substrates. Carbon doped Inx Ga1 xAs is important as a base layer
in hererojunction bipolar transistors (HBT) because carbon has a much lower
diffusivity than other commonly used p type dopants, making a thin base with
extremely high doping concentration possible for high performance HBT's. Carbon
ion implantation may be an effective method of introducing active carbon dopants
into the films, as compared to some of the other techniques. The combined ion
beam MBE system at ETL offers a unique opportunity to investigate this
scientifically interesting and technologically important materials problem.
Extensive charactrization, including structural, electrical, and optical
measurements and some device fabrication, will be performed both at ETL and at
the Un iversity of California, San Diego.