* 9218530
* Time Averaging in the Formation of Fossil                   Assemblages
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1994
* Eric Powell, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 12/31/1994
* USD 48,000.00

PI will investigate the time span required for death assemblage formation and
the extent to which the temporal events in its formation, and hence the temporal
history of the community, are discretely preserved. To do so requires an
inexpensive method for dating time-since-death of shells. The method under
development is based on the observation that the proteinaceous matrix in the
shells of bivalves gradually decomposes, freeing protein-bound amino acids which
then accumulate, and the observation that these free amino acids gradually
diffuse out of the shell. Accordingly, the degree of proteinaceous matrix
remaining and the amount of free amino acid present (determined by the balance
of production and diffusional loss) are both time dependent properties of the
shell. For the technique to be useful, it is essential that it be usable on
shelf assemblages. The shelf is typified by a preponderance of small species and
a significant cross-shelf thermal gradient, each of which would tax the
capabilities of the technique. Accordingly, the purpose of this proposal is to
demonstrate the ability of the amino acid dating method to answer the following
important questions about death assemblage formation: (1) What time span is
required for death assemblage formation in clastic depositional regimes? (2)
Which temporal events in the community are discretely preserved during death
assemblage formation (not how stratigraphically compressed they are, but are
they discreetly preserved in stratigraphic sequence)? (3) Can the rates of
taphonomic alteration be determined or at least can the extent to which
taphonomic alteration is correlation with shell age (time-since-death) be
measured?