* 9218300
* Institute for Mechanics and Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1992,11/30/1999
* Marc Andre Meyers, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel C. Davis
* 11/30/1999
* USD 5,400,367.00

An Institute of Mechanics and Materials (IMM) is being established at the
University of California at San Diego to integrate research and industrial
applications in mechanics and materials. The Institute will foster
interdisciplinary communication and liaison between academia, industry and
governmental organizations. The principal activities will include short courses
on frontier, interdisciplinary areas; workshops on specific industrial problems
and innovative materials; and short and intermediate length visits of graduate
students, post-doctoral fellows, faculty members, and scientists and engineers
form government laboratories and industrial organizations. The Institute will
not conduct extensive research projects, per se, but will aim to serve as an
intellectual forum to catalyze the formation of research groups when new areas
or methods of approach are identified. This will include novel techniques for
materials development, synthesis and processing; characterization and
identification of properties-microstructure relations; physically-based
micromechanical and computational modeling; and constitutive relations for
nonlinear response and failure analysis; as well as design and performance
analysis of complete structural entities. Timely topics will be discussed in
think-tank-style workshops which will also be used for periodic assessments of
long-term goals in mechanics and materials science and engineering. An external
Board of Governors of prominent senior scientists and engineers will direct the
Institute activities through action subcommittees and regularly assess the
Institute's progress. The educational efforts of the Institute will include all
levels of engineers and scientists in academia, industry and government (both
national and international); and a strong outreach program to high school
students and their teachers on a nationwide basis wherever there is interest,
with a deliberate effort to reach minorities and under-represented segments of
the population, as well as the gifted.