* 9218024
* U.S.-Czechoslovakia Mathematics Research on Iterative       Methods for Nonsymmetric Linear Systems and Eigenvalue      Problems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Anne Greenbaum, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 11/30/1996
* USD 10,101.00

The primary objective of this U.S.-Czech research project between Anne
Greenbaum of the New York University Courant Institute and Zdenek Strakos of the
Institute of Computer and Informations Science, Czech Academy of Sciences, is to
analyze and develop iterative methods for solving the non-symmetric linear
systems and eigenvalue problems that arise in many areas of scientific
computing. Current iterative methods for solving such problems are sometimes
effective but lack a firm theoretical foundation and may not be robust. Dr.
Greenbaum and Dr. Strakos intend to develop criteria for determining the
effectiveness of an iterative method and to design new methods for which these
criteria will be satisfied. They will analyze Krylov space methods for shich
these criteria will be satisfied. They will analyze Krylov space methods and
consider the advantages of choosing approximations from different spaces as
well. The researchers hope to explain the success of the biconjugate gradient
and QMR (Quasi-Minimal Residual) methods and to analyze the effects of finite
precision arithmetic on these algorithms. They also will study the potential for
parallelism in various algorithms and develop parallel implementations for
specific machine architectures. Altogether results are expected to contribute to
our ability to solve large sparse linear equations. Iterative algorithms for
such problems are keys to numerous computational solution methods in science and
engineering. This project in computational mathematics fulfills the program
objectives of advancing science by enabling leading experts in the U.S. and
Czechoslovakia to combine complementary talents and pool research resources in
the areas of strong mutual interest and competence.