* 9218717
* Global Change:  Quaternary Paleoclimate Record from Salt    Cores  (Death Valley, Saline Valley and Bristol Dry Lake,   California)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Tim Lowenstein, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1996
* USD 340,774.00

Halite-bearing evaporites occur to substantial depths in 3 arid closed-basins in
the western U.S. and preserve a record of paleoclimate for more than 2 million
years. This project will examine the paleoclimate record in salt deposits from
these basins over the last 3 glacial-interglacial cycles (approximately 300,000
years) using existing samples and materials from 2 boreholes to be drilled to
depths of 100 m. Emphasis will be on chemical analyses of fluid inclusions in
crystals of primary halite and other evaporite minerals to obtain: activity of
H2O and the major element chemistry (microthermometry and leachate analysis),
hydrogen and oxygen isotopic composition of fluid inclusion waters (Mass
spectrometry), and atmospheric gas composition, for those crystals which contain
trapped air (quadrupole mass spectrometry). Fluid inclusions and supplementary
data (sedimentology, mineralogy, petrography) may potentially be used to
interpret paleoclimates, in terms of: (1) basin aridity, (2) relative
temperatures, (3) atmospheric chemistry, (4) lacustrine water chemistry and
brine evolution, and (5) closed-basin depositional settings. Local and global
influences on paleoclimate will be distinguished by comparing data with the
record from a fourth closed-basin (Searles Lake), Great Basin vein calcites,
polar ice cores, and the marine oxygen isotope record. Possible local influences
of hydrothermal fluids on the hydrologic record will be examined at Bristol Dry
Lake, where Holocene volcanic activity is well documented. Dating of halite will
done using U-series methods and 36Cl, and will be supplemented by
tephrachronology. Long term records of the hydrosphere and atmosphere are needed
to document continental paleoclimates and how such climates have been influenced
by global and local processes. Nonmarine evaporites and associated closed-basin
sediments, because of the special climatic and hydrologic conditions necessary
for their formation, hold great promise for understanding ancient continental
climates.