* 9218093
* Undergraduate Materials Education Initiative:  Undergraduate Degree in Chemistry of Materials Synthesis and Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/1992,03/31/1999
* Kamil Klier, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/1999
* USD 373,840.00

Lehigh University has established as a high priority the strengthening of its
undergraduate chemistry programs in the area of synthesis and diagnostics of
advanced materials. To implement these priorities, Lehigh will develop a series
of four integrated lecture-laboratory courses leading to B.S. and M.S. degrees
in chemical science for materials synthesis and processing. The courses will be
centered around nanostructure materials such as fine particulate matter, thin
layer materials, and materials for future electronic and photonic applications,
which are areas of faculty expertise and existing facilities. The program will
include a student science seminar running throughout to get talented students
interested in science, make them aware of their career opportunities, and assist
them in developing their individual and social priorities. Ten-week student
internships involving research projects jointly supervised by Lehigh faculty and
industrial scientists are also planned for the summer periods. The program will
be continuously evaluated by the review committee of the Chemistry Department
and the Center for Surface Science and through formal review meetings with a
consortium of academic and industrial scientists. The program will be
disseminated through reports, publications, and computer programs describing
course materials and laboratory experiments as well as through 2-3 day workshops
involving faculty, students, and industry.