* 9218460
* Alpha-2-Macroglobulin of Invertebrates
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1998
* James Quigley, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 03/31/1998
* USD 323,000.00

The alpha-2-macroglobulins are plasma proteins that are present in all classes
of vertebrates and that function as broad-spectrum protease inhibitors. The
proposed research will investigate the structure and function of a form of
alpha-2-macroglobulin from the horseshoe crab, Limulus polyphemus. This
laboratory has obtained extensive peptide sequence information and antisera to
Limulus alpha-2-macroglobulin which will be used to isolate and sequence the
full length cDNA from a CDNA library developed to the poly (A)+ RNA of the
Limulus amebocyte. In contrast to vertebrates, which possess a large number of
plasma protease inhibitors, alpha-2- macroglobulin is the only protease
inhibitor in the plasma of Limulus, which should facilitate its functional
characterization in vivo. The proposed research will investigate the possibility
that alpha-2-macroglobulin participates in a receptor-mediated clearance pathway
for proteases. Alpha-2-macroglobulin also participates in a cytolytic system in
the plasma of Limulus that may be homologous to the vertebrate complement
system. This system will be characterized, the participating molecules
identified, and their sequence of action and mechanism of cytolysis
characterized. This study, which represents the first molecular characterization
of a complement-like cytolytic system in an invertebrate, should yield valuable
information concerning this important immune-like defense system. %%%
Multicellular organisms have a varied array of defense strategies that limit
their susceptibility to damage by potential pathogens. These defense mechanisms
generally involve cells and soluble factors of the blood. One of the most
ancient of these blood factors is the plasma protein, alpha-2-macroglobulin.
This molecule is found in a wide range of animals from invertebrates to humans.
Alpha-2-macroglobulin appears to have two general types of function, one as a
trap for enzymes in the blood or on cell surfaces that might otherwise do damage
by digesting other proteins, and the second is as a part of a specific
biochemical chain reaction that functions to kill invading pathogens or foreign
cells. The purpose of this research is to characterize the structure and
function of the alpha-2-macroglobulin from the horseshoe crab, Limulus, a
relatively primitive animal. The results of this research will contribute to
understanding of the diverse array of defense mechanisms found in nature, and
may also shed light on the functioning of the defense molecules of higher
organisms.