* 9218796
* Bacterial Glycogen Synthesis: Regulation and Biological     Function
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1998
* Tony Romeo, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 257,782.00

The transition from exponential to stationary phase growth in bacteria heralds
extensive changes in biochemical, macromolecular, morphological and
physiological properties. Stationary phase conditions in the laboratory may
accurately reflect predominant conditions in the environment, where the unique
properties of stationary phase cells are probably critical for competition and
survival. Current evidence suggests that alterations in the pattern of gene
expression, mediated via the effects of a few global regulatory factors, program
these extensive changes. Glycogen (a-1,4 glucan with a-1,6 branches)
biosynthesis is transcriptionally activated during early stationary phase in
Escherichia coli. Our recent analysis of glycogen-overproducing mutants
indicates that a previously uncharacterized regulatory system controls glycogen
synthesis. This project is testing the hypothesis that the pleiotropic
transposon-insertion mutation, TR1- 5, disrupts a component of a novel global
regulatory system. The mutated gene is being sequenced and the mechanism of its
effects on the expression of glycogen biosynthesis genes (glg) and other E. coli
genes will be studied to elucidate its potential role in stationary phase
adaptation. Although a-1,4 glucans are the predominant biological storage
compounds and are important industrial products, the biological function of
bacterial glycogen has not been rigorously established. Therefore, this project
will also address the biological function of glycogen using survival and
recovery experiments conducted with isogenic glycogen mutants. %%% This research
is expected to provide information useful in achieving maximum gene expression
in bacteria growing in industrial fermentors.