* 9218901
* Investigation of Enzyme Catalysis:  Mechanism at the        Levels of Subunit Function and the Chemical Transformation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Michael Dunn, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1997
* USD 274,000.00

The goals of this research are (1) to understand the roles of allosteric
interactions in the regulation of metabolite transfer between sequential enzymes
in a metabolic pathway, (2) to understand the relationship between enzyme
conformation change, substrate specificity, and catalysis, and (3) to explore
the significance of direct metabolite transfer in systems which contain more
than one type of catalytic site. Tryptophan synthase systems from E. coli and S.
typhimurium (bienzyme complexes) and yeast and blue-green algae (multienzymes)
will be studied utilizing rapid mixing kinetic techniques in combination with
absorbance and fluorescence spectrophotometry, and high resolution nuclear
magnetic resonance. %%% The efficiency of cellular metabolism requires the
existence of multienzyme complexes which catalyze a sequence of chemical changes
on metabolites. The efficiency derived from not having to recapture
intermediates from the exterior milieu is suspected to be the primary reason for
such highly organized processing. The proposed research explores an ideal model
system for such linked enzyme-catalyzed processing of substrates. In the case of
tryptophan synthase, substrate is passed through a "tunnel" between the enzyme
active sites. The studies planned will examine how the two active sites interact
with each other in order to optimize catalysis and transfer of metabolites
between them. A great deal will potentially be learned through this work about
the way this complex protein machinery works and why it is designed as it is.