* 9218823
* The Role of G Protein Phosphorylation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Robert Gundersen, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 01/31/1997
* USD 239,300.00

9218823 Gundersen Recent reports describing in vivo phosphorylation of the
guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory protein (G protein) alpha subunits, G
alpha-i in hepatocytes, G alpha-z in platelets, and G alpha-2 in Dictyostelium
suggest that alpha subunit phosphorylation is an important mechanism of G
protein function. The significance of alpha subunit phosphorylation however
remains unknown. Dictyostelium offers a powerful system for analyzing this
question through the use of molecular biology and biochemical methodologies. The
goal of this research is to examine the role of G alpha-2 phosphorylation in
Dictyostelium. The site(s) of phosphorylation, which occurs on serine in G
alpha-2. will be identified using peptide mapping, alpha subunit chimeral, and
site-directed mutagenesis. The function of G alpha-2 phosphorylation will be
determined by transforming G alpha-2 sequences that can not be phosphorylated
into a cell line lacking the G alpha-2 gene. Chemotaxis and differentiation in
the transformants will be compared to wild-type. The G alpha-2 effectors
adenylyl cyclase, guanylyl cyclase and phospholipase C will be assayed to
identify changes resulting from the loss of G alpha-2 phosphorylation.
Phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated G alpha-2 will be purified to compare GTP
binding affinity and GTPase. Purified G alpha-2 will also be used to produce a
polyclonal antiserum. The kinase that phosphorylates G alpha-2 will be
characterized by developing an in vitro assay and purified using standard
chromatographic approaches. %%% Guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins
(G proteins) play an essential role in the signal transducing pathways of
numerous extracellular stimuli which include hormones, neurotransmitters, growth
factors, odorants, and light. Recent research has identified a number of
stimulus-response pathways in which G proteins play a role, and a number of
types of G protein subunits have been identified. Thus, the system for signal
transduction in cells is very complex. In fact, most stimuli probably do not
activate a single biochemical response pathway, but instead activate a network
of response pathways. A key question is, how to cells coordinate and regulate
these diverse networks of responses to come out with an appropriate response to
an environmental or internal stimulus? G proteins play a key role in signal
transduction pathways and are likely to be important sites for modulation. The
goal of this research is to understand the mechanisms that modify G proteins by
covalent attachment of phosphate groups (phosphorylation) under some
physiological conditions. The system to be used is the slime mold,
Dictyostelium. This relatively simple organism offers important experimental
advantages for these studies. The results of this research should provide
important new insights into the molecular mechanisms that regulate the responses
of cells to environmental and internal signals. ***