* 9218358
* Effects of Manipulating tRNAs on Protein Synthesis in       E. coli
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Emanuel Goldman, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 09/30/1996
* USD 240,000.00

The proposed research deals with in vivo studies of the role of charged and
uncharged tRNA molecules in the efficiency, accuracy, and regulation of
translational elongation. (1) Cells with two kinds of tRNA mutations, miaA and
ts-tRNATRP, will be transformed with modified RF2 frameshift constructs and
tests will be made of the efficiency of the programmed frameshifts. Effects on
these frameshifts of overexpressing tRNATRP from a cloned plasmid gene will also
be determined. (2) Both wild type and hyperaccurate Smp strains containing the
modified RF2 frameshift constructs will be subjected to manipulation both of
charged and uncharged tRNATRP. Effects of uncharged tRNA and the fraction of
charged tRNA on these programmed frameshifts will be determined. (3) A specific
peptide from the MS2 coat protein containing residue 32, encoded by a UGG (Trp)
codon, will be isolated in order to determine (by radioactive lableing and
peptide mapping) what amino acid(s) is inserted at this position during Trp
limitation. (4) The effect of manipulating charged and uncharged tRNATRP levels
on the frequency of substitutions at Trp codons during rate-limiiting elongation
will be examined. (5) A vector system to test translational efficiency of low-
versus high-usage codons will be placed in the hyperaccurate Smp strains in
order to test whether fidelity conditions alter "translational polarity". %%%
During cell growth, aging, starvation, and disease protein synthesis is
modulated. Although many hypotheses have been developed about how such
regulation is accomplished and what the cell gains through such regulation, very
few studies have been designed to evaluate the regulation of synthesis at the
level of translation in living cells. The studies proposed here take advantage
of a unique genetic/biochemical system which permits control of the
concentrations of specific tRNA molecules in living cells and evaluating the
protein synthetic effects of varying these tRNA levels.