* 9218417
* Dissertation Research: Human Impacts on Prehistoric Faunas: A Zooarchaeological Analysis of San Francisco Bay Shell-     mounds
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1992,09/30/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1994
* USD 9,261.00

Under the direction of Dr. Donald Grayson, Mr Jack Broughton will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze faunal materials from
archaeological sites in the San Francisco Bay region of California and use this
information to reconstruct patterns of changing environment and human
subsistence over an approximately 4,000 year period. Since the beginning of this
century archaeologists have directed attention to the numerous shellmound sites
located in the Bay region. Many of these mounds were of tremendous size,
measuring up to 100 x 300 meters across and as much as 9.8 meters in depth.
Excavations of them have documented thousands of years of human prehistory and
because of the abundant mammal remains it is possible to examine how human diet
changed over time. Mr Broughton will study faunal materials from a number of
sites. In addition to identifying bones by species, he will measure then to
reconstruct body size. In this way he will be able to determine the effect of
human predation on prey populations. Using ideas derived from optimum foraging
theory he has predicted how degree of predation should be reflected in these
remains. This research is of significance for several reasons. First it will
increase our understanding of how prehistoric U.S. populations subsisted and
adapted to environmental conditions over thousands of years. Of equal importance
is what it may reveal about the population dynamics of animals such as sea
otter, deer and elk. It appears that at some times in the past - such as when
the first Spanish explorers entered the region - herds of deer and elk were
enormous. At other times in the more distant past such species appear to be less
common and Mr. Broughton wishes to determine the extent to which human predation
was responsible. This research should not only increase our understanding of the
past but also suggest optimum game management strategies. It will also assist in
the training of a promising young scientist.