* 9218113
* Undergraduate Materials Education Initiative:  A New        Paradigm for Teaching Undergraduate Materials Synthesis and Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/1992,03/31/1997
* Kristen Constant, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 03/31/1997
* USD 360,080.00

Existing curricula in materials processing are generally outdated, lack an
interdisciplinary approach, and are limited in their scope and availability to
undergraduate students. Iowa State University will address these shortcomings by
developing eleven flexible course modules, each of 4 to 6 weeks duration, which
emphasize ceramic powder processing, metal powder processing, and the processing
of glass and of electronic materials. Industrial practice will be introduced
prior to designing model experiments and discussing fundamental concepts. Each
module will also be linked to appropriate structural and mechanical
characterization activities. The modules can be used either to update existing
courses by inserting them in place of outdated materials or to form an entire
new course. Each module will be in the form of a booklet, video tape, and
computer disk. Modules will be made available for use and evaluation by other
institutions as they are developed and tested at Iowa State. Evaluation will be
carried out on the basis of the effectiveness of the modules in addressing the
key weaknesses in current undergraduate materials curricula and in terms of
their effectiveness in attracting more students, particularly minorities and
women, into the materials field.