* 9218732
* Sulfide Detoxification Mechanisms of the Epithelia of       Urechis Caupo
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Alissa Arp, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 08/31/1997
* USD 289,297.00

Hydrogen sulfide is an extremely toxic industrial waste responsible for a
number of deaths in California in the last year alone. These incidents involved
a paper recycling factory in Los Angeles enveloped by a cloud of toxic sulfide
gas and a railroad spill of metam sodium resulting in the release of methyl
isothiocyanate and hydrogen sulfide gas as breakdown products. The proposed
project investigates sulfide detoxification in the peripheral tissues of a
marine worm. Although our previous studies of adaptations to low oxygen and
sulfide indicate that this animal detoxifies sulfide in internal fluids, the
question of how the body tissues are protected or tolerate toxic sulfide remains
unanswered. Preliminary data suggest that the peripheral tissues possess
distinct sulfide detoxification or tolerance mechanisms, including the presence
of sulfide-oxidizing bodies and symbiotic bacteria. The binding or
transformation of sulfide to nontoxic forms of sulfur in the external body
tissues. Elucidation of these peripheral defense mechanisms will provide a
significant contribution to the understanding of tolerance and treatment of
sulfide poisoning. Additionally, the studies outlined in the proposal will
contribute to the well established field of sulfide metabolism and
detoxification in animals. Funding of the research project would result in
continued assistance to undergraduate and graduate students and be a significant
contribution to the research environment at San Francisco State University.