* 9218850
* The Biology of Gelatinous Zooplankton:  Investigations on   the Trophic Relationships of Salpa thompsoni and Salpa      gerlachei in the Southern Ocean
* O/D,OPP
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* G. Richard Harbison, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 02/29/1996
* USD 291,590.00

Two species of salps, Salpa thompsoni and S. gerlachei, occur in the Southern
Ocean near the Antarctic Peninsula. Both are known to form immense blooms that
almost entirely dominate the biomass. A knowledge of the biology of these
species is essential to understand the trophic relationships and global
processes that occur in the Southern Ocean. This project will investigate the
feeding rates, defecation rates, assimilation efficiency, growth, reproduction
and metabolism of both species, in order to develop an energy budget. The
behavior of salps will be studied in the field, and laboratory experiments will
incorporate these field observations. Feeding rates will be measured both in the
laboratory and in the field, and the results will be compared. Growth,
reproduction and metabolism will be measured in the laboratory. In addition, the
hyperiid amphipod parasites of salps will be examined using a combination of
field and laboratory methods. The potential effect of these parasites on the
growth and reproduction of salps will also be considered. Several species of
Antarctic fish will be observed in the laboratory to study predation on salps
and other gelatinous zooplankton. A number of fish that occur near Palmer
Station feed heavily on salps. Fish will be fed known quantities of gelatinous
prey, and digestion rates will be determined. These studies will assess the
ability to identify and quantify the remains of gelatinous organisms with gut
content analyses. These studies will provide important data on the trophic
position of salps in the Southern Ocean, both as consumers of phytoplankton and
as prey of other organisms. These studies are an essential prelude to further
studies on recruitment and population structure in Southern Ocean planktonic
communities. In addition, the research proposed herein will provide basic
information on the ways in which oceanic zooplankton cope with the seasonally
variable food resources of the Southern Ocean.