* 9218936
* Physiological Role of Intracardiac Shunting in Chelonians
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1997
* James Hicks, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Stacia A. Sower
* 03/31/1997
* USD 235,240.00

Turtles exhibit intermittent ventilatory patterns in which brief periods of
ventilation are interspersed with apneas of variable duration. Associated with
this ventilatory pattern are cyclic changes in pulmonary and systemic blood
flow. Due to the anatomy of the heart, these changes in blood flow may be
associated with both right-to-left (R-L; pulmonary bypass) and left-to-right
(L-R; pulmonary recirculation) intracardiac shunting. These cardiovascular
changes can influence pulmonary gas exchange, affecting both CO2 and O2
transport. The functional significance of intracardiac shunting has remained
primarily speculative. This study will determine the physiological role of
intracardiac shunting during intermittent ventilation in turtles. Specifically
the study will determine; 1) the flow ratios between the pulmonary and systemic
circuits (i.e. R-L and L-R shunts) during ventilation and apnea and 2) the
effects of cholinergic and adrenergic blockade on the direction and magnitude of
intracardiac shunt and correlate these effects with changes in ventilatory
patterns, pulmonary gas exchanged and blood gas transport. Studies will be
conducted in the turtle, Pseudemys scripta, in vivo at 25oC. All objectives will
be accomplished in chronically instrumented, freely diving, spontaneously
ventilating animals. Continuous measurements of pulmonary and systemic blood
flows, ventilation, gas exchange, lung gases and blood gases will be made. The
results will be analyzed within the context of several current hypotheses
addressing the respiratory "benefits" of intracardiac shunting. The hypotheses
presented are not necessarily novel, however, the experiments outlined in this
proposal will for the first time specifically examine the functional
significance of this distinctive type of cardiovascular regulation.