* 9218220
* LMER Coordination
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* John Hobbie, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1995
* USD 222,589.00

The LMER (Land Margin Ecosystems Research) program addresses the need for
research on land-margin ecosystems, those at the interface of continental land
masses and coastal oceans. The LMER program is part of the U.S. Global Change
Research program supported jointly by the Biological Oceanography Program of the
Division of Ocean Sciences and the Long Term Ecosystems Studies Program of the
Biological Sciences Directorate. These land margin ecosystems are being affected
by direct and indirect results of human population growth, and land use changes.
In the future, they may be severely affected by rising sea levels as a result of
global climate change. The LMER program is designed to document and evaluate the
changes going on at this land sea interface. The LMER program at present is made
up of five large multi-investigator, interdisciplinary research projects that
emphasize experimental studies, various types of models, and a comparative
ecosystems approach. This project seeks to establish and maintain an LMER
coordinating office and committee headed by John Hobbie of the Marine Biological
Laboratory as chair in order to carry out the many functions necessary for a
large interdisciplinary program. The various tasks of the coordination office
include: the planning and coordinating meetings for the Steering committee and
the LMER scientists to facilitate activities, synthses and intercomparisons
within the LMER research projects and coordinating activities with other coastal
oriented programs as well as other global change research programs on the
national and international level.