* 9218081
* U.S.-Japan Seminar: Hyperon-Nucleon Interactions/October    1993/Hawaii
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1994
* Peter Barnes, Los Alamos National Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1994
* USD 14,000.00

This award supports the participation of eleven U.S. scientists in a U.S.-Japan
Seminar on Hyperon-Nucleon Interactions, to be held in Hawaii October 25-28,
1993. The co-organizers are Dr. Peter Barnes, Director of the Los Alamos Meson
Physics Facility (LAMPF) and Professor Kozi Nakai, Head of the Proton
Synchrotron Physics Division, National Laboratory for High Energy Physics (KEK),
Japan. In addition to participants from the United States and Japan, scientists
from Canada, France, Germany, Israel, The Netherlands, and Korea have been
invited. The seminar will focus on investigation of techniques to perform
hyperon-nucleon scattering experiments in the U.S. facilities at the Brookhaven
National Laboratory and Los Alamos and the Japanese facilities at KEK. The
utilization of modern kaon and pion beans, combined with new techniques in
tracking detectors, makes possible a new generation of hyperon production and
decay measurements. Special emphasis will be placed on the status of theoretical
approaches to these problems and identification of those observables, which will
clarify the theoretical issues. The discussion will include analysis of topics
related to hyperon-nucleon scattering such as hypernuclear spectroscopy, H
dibaryon searches, polarization in hyperon production, and hyperon semileptonic
and nonmesonic weak decay. The participants will formulate specific plans for
realistic experiments.