* 9218921
* Weak Complexes Studied by Fourier Transform Microwave       Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Robert Kuczkowski, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 01/31/1997
* USD 452,500.00

In this project the structures of weakly bound molecular complexes are to be
investigated by means of high resolution Fourier transform microwave
spectroscopy. The project has six components: binary complexes containing 1)
sulfur dioxide molecules, 2) water molecules, 3) cyclopropane molecules, and 4)
rare gas atoms; 5) complexes formed by three monomer molecules; and 6) high
temperature investigations. The complexes will be formed in the supersonic
expansion into a vacuum of a high pressure mixture of component gases with a
neutral carrier gas. Through this expansion the complexes are also cooled to
very low translational and rotational temperatures, about 10 degrees above the
absolute zero. The work will provide information on the structures and internal
motions (dynamics) of the complexes, as well as on their electronic properties
such as the electric dipole moment. The results will provide fundamental
information about the nature of weak interaction forces between molecules and on
intermolecular potential functions, and will contribute to the data base needed
to develop and test models and theories which can guide chemists and biochemists
in how compounds can interact and grow into larger clusters. %%% The clusters
which will be studied constitute a state of matter that is intermediate between
that of the dilute gas and the condensed phase and play a crucial role in
condensation and evaporation phenomena. Weak intermolecular forces also play a
decisive role in the structure and function of biological systems, in which
parts of a biological molecule interact with other parts to give it a structure
characteristic of its function. Fundamental investigations on intermolecular
forces as conducted in this research will also contribute to the data base on
which the theories for the prediction of new biochemical substances can be
tested and calibrated.