* 9218633
* "Fostering academic membership on JvNCnet among             institutions of higher education..."
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1996
* Sergio Heker, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* George O. Strawn
* 03/31/1996
* USD 412,707.00

Consistent with the mission of the JVNCnet which is to support the Academic and
Research networking communities in the Northeast and to facilitate the provision
of networking services to these institutions, Princeton is requesting partial
support for the addition of 15 predominantly undergraduate institutions to the
NSFNET family of networks through the JVNCnet midlevel network. Each institution
has separately included information regarding their facility and their need to
be a member of the NSFNET. The list of schools includes: St Joseph College - CT,
County College of Morris - NJ (2yrs), Essex County College - NJ (2yrs),
Princeton Theological Seminary - NJ, Raritan Valley College - NJ (2yrs), Union
County College - NJ (2yr), Bucks County College - PA (2yr), Lehigh County
College - PA (2yr), York College - PA, Iona College - NY, Ithaca College - NY,
Mount Saint Mary - NY, Touro College - NY. These fifteen institutions
participating in this proposal represent the diversity of the educational system
in the United States. Schools range from two-year to four-year institutions,
from primarily teaching facilities to research environments, and from small to
large student bodies. All share the desire to gain access to the resources and
people made reachable through the NSFNET, with the goal of improving the quality
of their educational offerings and outreach to their communities. JVNCnet, now
part of Princeton University, will act as a regional or mid-level agent to
identify the networking needs and assist the academic institutions in the
Northeastern United States to meet those needs by providing connectivity,
education and training. In addition, the JVNCnet is working towards achieving
financial self-sufficiency by increasing its membership.