* 9218949
* Continued Study of the Boundary Layer Dynamics over West    Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1996
* David Bromwich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 05/31/1996
* USD 199,992.00

This project is the continuation of an observational and numerical study of the
surface wind field of the Siple Coast, Antarctica. the antarctic surface wind
field is highly irregular, is strongly affected by the surface slope, and has
marked areas of convergence and divergence inland from the coastal margins. the
interior provides large reservoirs of cold, negatively buoyant air which produce
a persistent katabatic wind system. These convergent features appear to dominate
the antarctic surface climate regime. This current phase of the project is based
on observations made in the confluence zone upslope from the Siple Coast, which
offers a different dynamical setting from earlier experiments in the Terra Nova
Bay region of East Antarctica. In addition, the lower average elevation of West
Antarctica allows synoptic disturbances to penetrate more deeply into the
interior and to affect the surface outflow. Specific tasks to be undertaken are
to complete the analysis as the comprehensive data set collected under the
previous grant, and to analyze the behavior of the katabatic winds over West
Antarctica, as well as identifying how the observed changes are forced by the
synoptic circulation. Numerical simulations using several mesoscale models will
provide the integrating picture of the governing dynamics.