* 9218152
* Zooplankton Variability and Particulate Fluxes at Station   ALOHA:  A Contribution to the Hawaii Ocean Time-Series (HOT)Program
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1998
* Michael Landry, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1998
* USD 330,657.00

The general objective of this project is to contribute to the understanding of
time-varying biogeochemical fluxes in the oceanic subtropical Pacific by adding
a zooplankton sampling component to the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) Program.
The first three years of sediment trap data from this Program have revealed
seasonal and interannual patterns in export fluxes that cannot be adequately
explained by concurrent variations in primary productivity. Since large
zooplankton and micronekton are implicated in the export of organic material
from surface waters by virtue of their production of large, rapidly sinking
fecal debris and active vertical migrations, we propose to use this opportunity
to test the hypothesis that observed seasonal and interannual variability in
sediment trap flux are related to patterns in the occurrence of zooplankton. The
research program will include: (1) determining the community biomass structure
of zooplankton from dry weights, carbon, and nitrogen analyses of size-
fractionated net collections; (2) estimating the relative magnitudes of
migrating and nonmigrating zooplankton from comparison of day- and night-time
catches: (3) assessing relative changes in the role of zooplankton as direct
consumers of primary producers from bulk gut fluorescence analyses; and (4)
estimating, from microscopical analyses, patterns in the direct contribution of
zooplankton fecal material to export flux.