* 9218494
* Direct Maxwell's Equations Computational Modeling of  Optical Pulse Propagation and Switching in Semiconductor Waveguides
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Peter Goorjian, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* George K. Lea
* 12/31/1996
* USD 224,907.00

9218494 Taflove This project seeks to develop novel three-dimensional time-
domain algorithms for optical pulse propagation, scattering, and switching
(including femtosecond pulses) using the full vector nonlinear time-domain
Maxwell's equations, with specific applications of glass and semiconductor
materials. Algorithms will be implemented on supercomputers of the class of the
Cray C-90 or Cray T3D. One algorithm to be explored involves solving a time-
domain system of ordinary differential equations for the bandgap physics of
semiconductor materials concurrently with the time-domain vector Maxwell's
equations. This algorithm could permit detailed modeling of the pulse dynamics
of passive and active optical and electrooptic devices including switches and
laser sources. A second approach of interest involves applying computational
fluid dynamics techniques for tracking shock waves to model possible optical
shock waves in nonlinear media. Overall, the project will develop and apply
novel time-domain algorithms to explore the dynamics of a variety of optical
wave species in nonlinear media in three dimensions, including "light bullets"
and shocked-wave optical pulses. These may exhibit favorable properties with
respect to all-optical switching at relatively low laser power levels because of
unique properties arising form their temporal and spatial confinement or shocked
carrier, respectively. There would exist potential engineering applications in
the realization of novel ultra-fast sub-millimeter- size all-optical digital
logic elements operation at low laser power levels. ***