* 9218411
* A Mechanistic Study of High-Temperature Oxidation of        Organic Carbon in Carbon Analyzers
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1992,09/30/1996
* Michael Rodgers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 09/30/1996
* USD 364,844.00

The mechanistic aspects of the oxidation of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in
high temperature combustion (HTC) carbon analyzers are largely unknown. For
example, it is not known whether 02(g) is needed to oxidize DOC, whether
"catalysts" are needed at all, or whether carbonaceous impurities in catalysts
contribute significantly to system blanks. Until the situation changes, HTC
analyzers will continue to be designed and used in an empirical manner. This
research will test the hypothesis that oxidation of DOC in HTC instruments is
largely due, in a mechanistic sense, to the reaction of DOC with hydroxyl
radicals (OH) and other reactive species that are generated by thermal homolysis
of injected H20. This hypothesis is amenable to direct experimental
investigation. A commercial HTC carbon analyzer will be modified extensively and
interfaced with several specialized instruments (e.g. gas chromatograph; gas
chromatograph-mass spectrometer) that are used to quantify major and minor
gaseous species that may form during analysis of a DOC sample. The compositions
of carrier gases and catalysts will be varied systematically to clearly resolve
the roles of 02(g) and OH in the oxidation process. Temperature- programmed
volatization/combustion will be evaluated as a means of measuring inorganic
carbon, volatile organic carbon, and non- volatile organic carbon. A new
generation, mechanistically based HTC carbon analyzer will be designed and
tested.