* 9218683
* Continued Used of Cosmogenic 3HE                            and 21 NE in Dating Geomorphic Surfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Thure Cerling, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1996
* USD 77,056.00

We will continue to refine the production rate of cosmogenic 3He and 21Ne by
collecting additional samples of well-dated lava flows, and we will extend the
production rate determination back in time by analyzing K-rich lava flows that
can be dated using the laser fusion 39Ar/40Ar technique. We will analyze these
recent flows for 3He and 21Ne to establish the production rate beyond 14C
chronology. We will also measure 21Ne production rates in quartz and feldspar
from Holocene and late Pleistocene flows. In addition we will measure the 21Ne
contents of co-existing minerals to establish the compositional dependency of
21Ne production. In addition , we will begin a concentrated effort on
determining the mountain deglaciation at the end of the Wisconsin of two
regions: the western United States and Canada, and the southern Andes. We will
concentrated on volcanic terrains because 3He and 21Ne is quantitatively
retained in volcanic pyroxene and olivine; plutonic terrains will be analyzed
after we establish the 21Ne production rate in quartz and can separate it from
nucleogenic 21Ne production in old (&gt;20 Ma) plutonic rocks. Western North
America and the southern Andes will be studied because it is in those two
regions that we have established the production rate of 3He and 21Ne (North
America), and will extend it back in time (South America). Such constrasting
studies will help to establish the Northern and Southern Hemisphere ice sheets
were retreating at the same time or not and if the younger Dryas is to be found
in western North and South America.