* 9218512
* Quantitative Role of Glycine Betaine and DMSP in Cellular   Nitrogen and Sulfur Budgets of Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Maureen Keller, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1997
* USD 212,754.00

Marine phytoplankton produce a variety of organic osmolytes including the
nitrogenous compound glycine betaine (GBT) and its sulfur analog,
dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP). It appears that GBT and DMSP make large and
hitherto unrecognized contributions to the cellular nitrogen and sulfur pools in
many species of marine phytoplankton and to particulate organic nitrogen (PON)
and particulate organic sulfur (POS) pools in surface sea water. Very little is
known about the production, distribution and cycling of these labile biogenic
compounds. Information from the literature and from preliminary studies suggests
that many species of phytoplankton produce both GBT and DMSP simultaneously and
that nitrogen availability may affect the relative proportions of GBT and DMSP.
This project will conduct laboratory and field studies to test the following
hypotheses: 1) GBT makes up a significant (5-20%) fraction of cellular nitrogen
in certain species of marine phytoplankton and DMSP is a major constituent of
cellular sulfur; 2) There is a relationship between taxonomy and GBT and DMSP
production; 3) The levels of GBT and GMSP in phytoplankton are a function of
nitrogen availability, with DMSP favored under N-limitation; 4) Phytoplankton
take up GBT and DMSP from their surroundings and release them under certain
conditions; 5) Production of GBT over DMSP, or selection of species which
produce GBT, will be favored in high nitrogen environments. This study will
provide new and important data on the quantitative role of methylated nitrogen
and sulfur osmolytes to the cellular nitrogen and sulfur budgets of
phytoplankton and to PON and POS in the sea. This information will lead to a
better understanding of the biological cycling of nitrogen and sulfur in the
ocean.