* 9218096
* Undergraduate Materials Education Initiative:  Emerging     Electronic and Photonic Materials Synthesis &amp; Processing    Technology
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1996
* Yang Zhao, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/1996
* USD 310,000.00

The technology of electronic and photonic materials has an impact on and is of
vital importance to most of the leading manufacturing industries and government
laboratories in the United States. In fact, direct feedback from local
industries indicates a pressing need for students with a strong background in
new advanced electronic and photonic materials synthesis and processing
technology. On-the-job training in high-technology industries costs enormous
resources in time and money. For this reason Wayne State University will develop
a unique sequence of two courses on materials synthesis and processing that
builds on existing courses and covers new electronic and photonic materials of
current and future importance. Key topics include plasma, ion beam, and laser
deposition and processing technology; key electronic and photonic materials such
as wide bandgap semiconductors, high-Tc superconductors, low dimensional
structures, and associated new synthesis and processing techniques. Special
attention will be paid to the incorporation of Computer Aided Engineering of
processsimulation into the education process. This course sequence isalso
designed to give real world experience using hands-onlaboratory experiments and
directed projects in advanced electronicand photonic materials synthesis and
processing. Evaluation willbe carried out by direct student feedback, together
with review bya committee of faculty and industrial researchers. The
developedcourse will be published as a text accompanied by a laboratorymanual
and associated simulation software. The college ofengineering will sponsor a
workshop after completion of course development to disseminate this course to
other universities and institutions.