* 9218526
* Investigation of Guangala Exchange and Production
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1993,02/28/1994
* Maria Masucci, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1994
* USD 16,547.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Maria Masucci will conduct neutron
activation analysis of clay samples collected in the southwestern portion of
Ecuador. She will also conduct neutron activation as well as petrographic
analysis on a series of ceramics which date from Guangala Phase
(100B.C.-A.D.800) sites located in the same region. These studies will shed
light on details of the ceramic manufacturing process and also allow the clay in
finished vessels to be traced back to raw material source areas. This
information in turn will permit Dr. Masucci to reconstruct the economic and
political interactions among individual Guangala Phase communities and determine
how they changed over time. The Andean region was home to one of the world's
great civilizations which saw the incorporation of large numbers of individuals
into a state comparable in size to those which exist in the region today.
Centralized authorities commanded enough labor to erect monumental constructions
and maintain an extensive road system. Archaeologists wish to understand the
processes which lead to the rise of complex societies and many believe that
trade, and relative inequities which developed through it may have played an
important part. While much is known about the prehistory of Peru, relatively
less information is available for Ecuador, its northern neighbor, and as the
political situation in Peru has grown more difficult, archaeologists have
focussed their attention more in other Andean regions. The Guangala Phase
appears to mark a period of incipient political centralization and therefore the
results of Dr. Masucci's work should shed light on the state development
process. This project will produce data of interest to a large number of
archaeologists. It will also help to develop analytic techniques which may be
applied in many archaeological situations.