* 9218842
* Modeling Solution Crystal Growth Processes:  Toward Three-  Dimensional, Transient Simulations on Massively Parallel    Supercomputers
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1997
* Jeffrey Derby, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1997
* USD 146,479.00

Large, single crystals of exacting quality are needed for the fabrication of
advanced optical, magnetic, and electronic devices, and the growth of these
crystals is one of the most difficult challenges in modern materials processing.
The properties responsible for the performance of a crystal in a device are
determined by crystalline structure or composition. Often, these characteristics
are affected during the growth of the crystal by processes which link
molecularscale growth processes with macroscopic transport processes. A long-
term goal in crystal growth modeling is to understand the mechanisms which
influence crystal quality through the hierarchy of length and time scales
relevant to these molecular-scale and macroscale processes. The immediate goal
of this research is to develop the tools necessary to understand the
interactions of transport phenomena, crystal growth kinetics, and
crystallography in solution crystal growth processes. The realistic modeling of
fluid flow, and mass transfer, and crystal growth habit in these systems has not
been possible in the past due to the extreme computational challenges posed by
these truly three- dimensional, time-dependent systems. However, the coming
generations of massively parallel supercomputers promise to deliver the
performance (in terms of speed and memory) to make such computations viable. The
principal investigator will develop, test, and apply new algorithms for modeling
solution crystal growth systems. This work will place particular emphasis on
algorithms appropriate for massively parallel supercomputers. The benefits of
this work promise to be enormous, both in the development of appropriate
algorithms for this type of supercomputer and in their application to
understanding the complexities of solution growth systems.