* 9218249
* Phase Transitions and Volume and Energy Band Gap Variation  in the Multimegabar Regime
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Arthur Ruoff, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 02/29/1996
* USD 365,000.00

Techniques for x-ray diffraction studies (using Cornell High Energy Synchroton
Service) and optical studies which will extend the static pressure range higher
than the 560 GPa attained will be developed. To do this requires further
miniaturization of diamond tips, of sample size and of x-ray apertures and
optical beam diameters. The crystal structure of oxygen and sulfur will be found
?materials which have previously been metallized (they have 60% reflectivity at
the diamond sample interface at high pressure)! since this should induce
theorists to work on these materials. Superconductive bahavior will be looked
for in them. Hydrogen, nitrogen (including high temperature) and LiH will be
pressurized to pressures in excess of 4 Mbars and higher with the intent of
reaching meatllization. The metallization of alkali hydrides as an analogous
series with hydrogen hydride as the highest member of the series will be
studied. %%% Ultrapressures cause enormous changes in solids. Solid xenon has
its volume decreased by 72% at 1.5 Mbars while silicon has its volume decreased
by 34% at 2.5 Mbars (the pressure at the earth's core is 3.6 Mbars and at the
deepest spot in the ocean only 1kbar). These enormous changes cause changes in
crystal structure, and changes in electronic structure resulting in important
changes in physical properties. Theorists, using quantum mechanics with
approximatims (necessary to make the problem soluble) attempt to calculate these
structural changes. Results provide an exacting test of their theories and set
the stage for doing computer based solid state physics. Interest is also in
developing new materials with possible exotic properties. It has been predicted
that hydrogen will become metallic at high pressure and that it will be a high
temperature superconductor. Metallic xenon and metallic oxygen have been made
and work is being done to make metallic hydrogen to see if it indeed is a high
temperature superconductor. High pressure is viewed as a tool for making and
processing new materials with unusual properties.