* 9218375
* Carbon Affinities-Energetics of Bond Formation and Cleavage of Organic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1992,05/31/1996
* Edward Arnett, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 05/31/1996
* USD 349,800.00

This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of
Professor Edward M. Arnett at Duke University. Heats of heterolysis, homolysis
and electron transfer for a wide spectrum of organic compounds will be
determined using calorimetry and electrochemical techniques. The heterolytic
bond strengths will be determined from heats of reactions of carbon
electrophiles (e.g., carbenium ions, carbonyl functions, Michael acceptors,
activated aromatics) with a wide range of nucleophiles (e.g., carbanions,
ylides, alkoxides, thiolates, nitroanions). These experiments will be used to
compare directly heterolytic and homolytic cleavages of covalent bonds. This
work will allow the building of a basic thermodynamic framework by which many
processes for making and breaking bonds to carbon can be compared directly. %%%
A thermodynamic framework will be built for bonds between carbon and hetero
atoms. Calorimetry and electrochemical techniques are the experimental methods
of choice. By measuring bond dissociation energies and the heats of reaction
between ionic species, a common scale can be determined for a large spectrum of
bonds. The data to be obtained from this research will form an important
thermodynamic database that is to provide fundamental insight in the bond
making/breaking processes of all organic reactions.