* 9218720
* Cenzoic Paleoceanographic and Climate Development of the    Antarctic Region Based on Oceanic Sediment Sequences
* O/D,OPP
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1997
* James Kennett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 01/31/1997
* USD 285,000.00

This award supports a continuing investigation of the oxygen and carbon isotopic
composition and biostratigraphy of marine sedimentary sequences from the circum-
Antarctic oceans. These studies are aimed at reconstructing the paleoclimatic,
paleoceanographic, and biotic evolution of the Antarctic region during the
Cenozoic. Oceanographic and climatic evolution since the middle Eocene (the last
52 million years) consists largely of progressive cooling and glaciation of the
polar regions and perhaps warming in the tropics. The climatic and glacial
evolution of polar regions, including Antarctica, is crucial to our
understanding of long term global climatic change because high latitudes are
among the most sensitive regions to externally driven change. Strong feedback
mechanisms involving ice albedo and bottom water formation contribute to the
development of polar regions. The Cenozoic marine stratigraphic record is
largely the product of this climate evolution at high latitudes and hence it is
crucial to have the most complete record possible. This investigation will add
to the record of proxy climate and environmental indicators by using existing
Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) cores. For the Paleogene (Paleocene through
Oligocene), work will focus on cores from ODP Legs 113, 119, and 120. For the
Neogene (Oligocene through present), work will focus on ODP cores from low and
middle latitudes in the southwest and equatorial Pacific. This work will
contribute significantly to a general understanding of the role of polar regions
in global climatic change. In addition, this work will contribute to our
understanding of the significance of the Circum-Antarctic Current in Antarctic
and global climate processes. This work is particularly relevant in addressing
the important question about the stability of the marine-based ice sheet of West
Antarctica.