* 9218376
* Numerical Modeling of Mesoscale Airflow over Mountains
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 323,000.00

Accurate weather forecasting in the vicinity of major mountain ranges is an
extremely difficult meteorological problem. Interactions between large-scale
weather systems and mountainous regions often spawn complex mesoscale weather
patterns. Efforts to forecast the development of these weather patterns are
limited by deficiencies in understanding of the physical processes governing
mesoscale circulations in complex terrain. Additionally, mesoscale orographic
effects also influence the global circulation through the action of gravity wave
drag. Errors in the parameterization of gravity wave drag in global scale modes
are believed to be a major source of error in extended range forecasts. Under
previously supported research on this topic the Principal Investigator has found
that vertically propagating mountain waves appear to be not as sensitive to the
asymmetry of the underlying terrain as previously thought. Using free slip
conditions, he has found that maximum lee slope winds also are not sensitive to
asymmetry of the terrain. When surface friction is included, however,
sensitivity to terrain is enhanced, but the primary regulator of maximum winds
appears to be the steepness of the lee slope. The Principal Investigator will
continue this line of research with the ultimate goal of improving weather
forecasts for locations in the vicinity of mountains and to improve extended
range forecasts and climate models. The major areas of concentration are:
investigation of airflow in complex three-dimensional topography with emphasis
on mountain barriers with and without mountain gaps, and isolated mountain
peaks; study of momentum fluxes in orographically forced gravity waves and the
interactions of these waves with the larger scale flow through gravity wave
drag.