* 9218593
* Global Change: Genesis & Paleoenvironmental Record of Dunes on the Southern High Plains
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Vance Holliday, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1996
* USD 150,600.00

The proposed research is an investigation of the paleoclimatic significance and
late-Quaternary history of sand dune fields and lunettes (dunes fringing playa
basins) on the Southern High Plains. Three principal hypotheses will be tested:
1) the sand dune fields on the Southern High Plains formed synchronously between
9000 and 4500 yrs B.P., since 1000 yrs B.P., and historically; 2) the lunettes
of the Southern High Plains formed synchronously and episodically during the
late Quaternary and were derived from sediments in adjacent playas during
droughts; 3) Holocene construction of the sand dunes and the lunettes occurred
synchronously and was the result of regional drought. There are several
significant aspects of the research. The record of dune construction and dune
movement should provide a long-term (late Quaternary) record of drought and wind
erosion of the High Plains surface. Studying the historic record of dune
activity along with historic climate data will begin to provide some estimates
of the climatic thresholds that must be crossed before desertification begins in
the region. Studying the lunettes is also important because they are the only
sites of deposition on the Llano Estacado with a demonstrated potential for a
dateable paleoenvironmental and stratigraphic record spanning the past 30,000+
years. The proposed research on the Southern High Plains complements current
dune studies on the Northern High Plains (sponsored by NSF, USGS, and NASA) and
will contribute to a subcontinental-scale view of late-Quaternary eolian erosion
and sedimentation and attendant climatic implications.