* 9218018
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Ultrafast     Coherent Phenomena in Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1996
* Stephan Koch, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 10/31/1996
* USD 240,000.00

In this project we will investigate the semiconductor nonequilibrium many-body
effects in a theory- experiment collaborative effort. We will attempt to
demonstrate the first observation of Rabi oscillations (RO) and resonant
propagation of strong femtosecond pulses in a semiconductor. Rabi oscillations
and resonant pulse propagation, even self-induced transparency (SIT), have been
seen in atomic systems, but have not yet been observed in semiconductors. Our
many-body calculations have predicted that RO may be seen in semiconductors when
femetosecond laser pulses shorter than the dephasing T2 times are employed.
Also, these calculations predict significant modifications of strong pulse
propagation and self-induced transparency in semiconductors, as compared to
atomic systems. One of our goals is to perform cross- correlation experiments
for pulses tuned to the excition resonance in a GaAs-AlGaAs multiple quantum
well sample to verify these predictions and demonstrate the differences between
SIT in semiconductors versus atomic systems. We plan to quantitatively
investigate carrier relaxation and dephasing in quantum wells as well as in bulk
materials under well- defined conditions. Theoretically, we recently found a new
undamped acoustic plasmon mode in bulk semiconductors for suitable
nonequilibrium carrier distributions. According to our calculations, the related
ultrafast carrier-carrier scattering and dephasing should be significantly
different for intrinsic, n- and p- doped materials, since the electrons in low
momentum states are primarily responsible for the acoustic plasmon damping.
Spectral hole burning in the gain region of semiconductors will be performed,
and polarization dephasing times will be measured using the width of the burned
holes. These measurements, which will be compared with our calculations, should
yield important information on carrier relaxation and dephasing rates.