* 9218618
* T4 Phage dNTP Synthetase, a Multienzyme Complex for          Dexyribonucleotide
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Christopher Mathews, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1996
* USD 330,000.00

The long-range goals of this research are (1) to understand how DNA precursor
biosynthesis is regulated; (2) to understand how regulatory mechanisms affecting
DNA precursor synthesis control the rate and fidelity of DNA replication; (3) to
understand the metabolic and genetic consequences of pertubations in DNA
precursor biosynthesis; and (4) to contribute toward an understanding of
mechanisms of action of the enzymes involved. The proposed research involves a
multienzyme complex, formed in T4 phage- infected Escherichia coli, which
carries out the synthesis of deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs). This is
the T4 dNTP synthetase complex. The wealth of genetic and biochemical knowledge
of T4 permits a variety of powerful approaches to understanding protein-protein
interactions in this system. %%% DNA replication uses precursors, the
deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates, which are specialized for that purpose and
for little else. In addition to replication, dNTPs are used in DNA repair and in
recombination; also, bacteria used dTTP in cell wall synthesis. This limited
repertoire of metabolic role makes it possible for DNA synthesis to be regulated
specifically at the level of precursor formation. This research attempts to
describe how dNTP synthesis is controlled and the extend to which these
mechanisms contribute toward the control of DNA replication.