* 9218139
* USA/CIS Joint Conference on Environmental Hydrology and     Hydrogeology, May 15-21, 1993, Washington, D.C.
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1994
* Roman Kanivetsky, American Institute of Hydrology
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 03/31/1994
* USD 30,000.00

This is an award to assist in the support of a conference on Environmental
Hydrology and Hydrogeology. This conference under joint sponsorship of the
United States Geological Survey and the Russian Academy of Sciences will be held
in Washington, D.C. from May 15- 21, 1993. The conference will address major
issues that relate to impacts of industrial and agricultural practices on the
hydrologic environment including their impacts on global climate change.
National Science Foundation (NSF) programs jointly supporting this award are the
Environmental and Ocean Systems and the Natural and Man-Made Hazards Mitigation
Programs in the Engineering Directorate; the Hydrologic Sciences Program in the
Directorate for Geosciences; and the former Soviet Union Program in NSF's
Division of International Programs. Results of this conference are expected to
provide guidance to the National Science Foundation in planning and support of
research in environmental and ocean systems engineering, natural and man-made
hazards mitigation, hydrologic sciences, and to assist in improving the
participation and understanding of U.S. science and engineering communities in
new opportunities for research cooperation with scientists and engineers in
countries of the Confederation of Independent States, formerly known as the
Soviet Union.