* 9218803
* A Pore-Scale Computational Model for the Simulation of      Mass Transfer From Nonaqueous Phase Liquids
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Michael Celia, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/1997
* USD 275,000.00

This study will provide a physically-based description of the mass transfer
process in multi-fluid porous media. By developing a pore-scale miscible
transport model and coupling it with existing pore-scale models for fluid-fluid
displacement, a complete and self-consistent mathematical description of
capillary displacement, fluid motion, interphase mass transfer, and miscible
contaminant transport will be obtained. With this model, mass transfer
coefficients will be predicted as functions of interfacial areas, which will be
directly related to fluid saturations. comparison of model results to a number
of reported laboratory experiments involving non-aqueous phase liquid (NAPL)
dissolution will be used to validate the model. Correlations between predicted
mass transfer coefficients and capillary pressure-saturation-relative
permeability relations will be explored. The model will be used to investigate
the functional dependence between dispersivities and fluid saturations,
including examination of possible hysteresis. Finally, the influence of material
heterogeneity will be explored, with an emphasis on determination of effective
mass transfer coefficients and macrodispersivities. The practical utility of the
results will be demonstrated by coupling the continuum-scale transport
properties predicted by the pore-scale models to more traditional continuum-
scale multi-phase simulators.