* 9218126
* Undergraduate Materials Education Initiative: An Innovative Undergraduate Materials Curriculum
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1996
* Kevin Trumble, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/1996
* USD 350,000.00

During the past few years, a new core undergraduate materials educations
program has been introduced at Purdue. This core program is based upon an
integration of structure, properties, processing, and performance across the
classes of materials. A major need in the full curriculum is to emphasize the
development of microstructure through synthesis and processing. To meet this
need, Purdue will develop six new senior level courses. Four courses in the
inorganic materials area will involve deposition processing, solidification
processing, powder processing, and deformation processing. Two courses on
organic materials will include synthesis and manufacturing and physical
chemistry and microstructures, together with a new comprehensive polymer
engineering laboratory. An Advisory Committee involving representatives from
industries with processing operations will assist in all stages of the proposed
program. Evaluations by this Committee and input from students at all phases
will be utilized to maintain a focus and provide direction for the development
of instructional materials. Dissemination of information will be made by
presentations at various professional society symposia and by monographs.
Culmination of this effort will be a special symposium on Materials Synthesis
and Processing Education at Purdue.