* 9218477
* Structure and Function of RNA Replicases and the Mechanism  of RNA Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1998
* Donald Mills, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 03/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

Single stranded RNA viruses contain both messenger RNA for protein synthesis and
an RNA template for replication. Utilizing an experimental system which permits
the study of each of these functions separately both in vivo and in vitro, the
proposed research aims at characterizing the functional domains of the QB
replicase. Such domains involve the catalytic site, RNA recognition and binding,
and interaction sites for a variety of host proteins. Studies planned involve
manipulation of viral RNA sequences. A second objective is the study of the
viral nucleotide sequences coding for the production of the QB replicase.
Chemical, biochemical and molecular biological approaches will combine to
correlate the function of the viral genome with its primary and secondary
structure. %%% The genome of single stranded RNA viruses is extrordinarily
susceptible to mutation. One consequence of this is a pronounced difficulty in
developing host resistance to viral attack. Since the viral RNA codes both for
its replication and for synthesis of critical proteins, it has been difficult to
study these two activities in isolation. The proposed research into the details
of the behavior of the viral genome is based on work in the investigator's
laboratory which resulted in the development of an experimental system
permitting study of these two aspects of viral genome function independently. A
variety of molecular biological and biochemical approaches will be employed to
relate the structure of the viral genome with its ability to reproduce and
infect cells.