* 9218536
* Foraging Ecology and Reproductive Energetics of Antarctic   Petrels
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1998
* Wesley Weathers, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/1998
* USD 294,124.00

The feeding ecology and energetics of two common surface-nesting petrels that
breed in the high Antarctic, the Cape Pigeon and the Snow Petrel will be
addressed through a variety of field and laboratory techniques. Both the diet
and energy requirements of adults and their offspring will be quantified. By
conducting measurements over three consecutive breeding seasons, interannual
variation in feeding ecology and reproductive performance will be assessed. The
field metabolic rate of adult petrels will be determined during the incubation
and chick-rearing stages of the breeding cycle using the doubly labeled water
technique. Basal metabolic rates of adults will be determined from laboratory
measurements of oxygen consumption and their reproductive effort expressed as
the ratio of field metabolic rate to basal metabolism. Foraging trip length of
adults will be partitioned into time spent resting on water and in flight and
foraging energy cost will be estimated. Nestling growth will be assessed from
measurements of body mass, size and composition as functions of nestling age and
nestling energy budgets will be constructed. Diet of nestlings and their parents
will be determined from parental food deliveries and stable isotope analysis of
prey and feces. Diet information combined with doubly labeled water measurements
will allow calculation of rates of food consumption, and, hence, the trophic
impact of these breeding fulmarine petrels on the surrounding marine ecosystem.