* 9218457
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Science Program:  Taphonomy,     Technology and Paleoecology on the Eastern Pampas of        Argentina
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Eileen Johnson, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 11/30/1995
* USD 26,956.00

This US-Argentina Cooperative Science award will support the collaboration of
Eileen Johnson of Texas Tech University and Gustavo Politis of the National
University of La Plata, Argentina. The project aims to explore the taphonomy,
technology, and paleoecology of early Pampean sites, in an assessment of whether
there is evidence that Early Man kill- sites occur in South America. In the last
20 years, late Pleistocene and early Holocene Early Man sites have been
discovered on the Pampas. These sites are critical to understanding the early
peopling of Argentina and South America. This project will conduct bone studies
aimed at delineating formation and disturbance processes at the sites, the
subsistence base and social structure of the hunter-gatherers occupying these
early sites, the use of bone as a resource, and the environmental and climatic
setting of these early occupations. The researchers will analyze bone material
from four sites in Argentina, which will provide a broad view of the range of
variation in activities, topographic settings, space, and time. The Argentine
side will contribute access to the research sites, expertise in local
archaeology, and laboratory facilities. The US side will contribute its
expertise in US grasslands models and training for several Argentine students,
including one who will spend a half-year in Johnson's lab.