* 9218972
* The Dynamics and Evolution of a Coastal Water-Table Aquifer Under a Regime of Slowly Rising Sea Level
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1997
* Leonard Gardner, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 10/31/1997
* USD 280,117.00

This project addresses the problem of the dynamics and evolution of the
freshwater - saltwater interface in ground water along the forest - marsh
boundary in South Carolina. The position and expression (i.e. clarity versus
diffuseness) of this interface is governed by short-term forcings (diurnal
tides, daily ET cycles and rain events), episodic storm surges and long-term sea
level rise. Prediction of the fate of contaminants released on land and their
impact on adjacent marshes depends on a clear and quantitative understanding of
the movement of ground water at and near this interface. Because of the complex
forcings and boundary conditions, presently available models for coastal
aquifers are too simple to adequately simulate such systems. In addition,
adequate field measurements of head and salinity are not available to test
complex numerical models that might be used. As a remedy to this problem, the
objectives of this project are to collect long-term measurements of head and
salinity along transects across the forest-marsh boundary and to use the data to
develop, calibrate and validate a numerical model of the system. A spatially
dense network of piezometer along each transect will be equipped with recording
pressure transducers (assembled in house) that will gather data on the effects
of short-term forcing. Based on geomorphic and stratigraphic criteria and C-14
dating of tree roots found in high marsh soils, transects will be selected to
represent stages in the conversion of a forested, pleistocene beach ridge
terrain into a Holocene salt marsh under a regime of rising sea level. This will
provide a unique opportunity to test our numerical model against truly long-term
data. The results of this project could be used by regulatory agencies for
environmental impact assessment and planning and by ecologists interested in
interactions between forest and marsh ecosystems.