* 9218810
* Structure and Evolution of Southern Ocean Mesocyclones usingMultiple Satellite Systems
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Kristina Katsaros, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 11/30/1996
* USD 189,422.00

The proposed project is a study to determine the meteorological characteristics
of Southern Ocean mesocyclones by combining Special Sensor Microwave/Imager
(SSM/I) data, TIROS Operational Vertical Sounder (TOVS) data, and satellite-
based radar altimeter data for selected case studies of mesoscale cyclone
occurrences, and validating these characteristics with European Center for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) analyses. It is a joint project of the
University of Washington and Indiana University. The project will use retrieved
satellite observations of winds, atmospheric moisture, and thermal parameters
that will be applied to mesocyclones previously identified and catalogued from
satellite image analyses. Included in the analyses will be an evaluation of the
performance of SSM/I algorithms in retrieving surface winds and moisture
parameters. For the austral winter of 1992 wind vector information obtained from
the European Remote Sensing satellite (ERS-1) scatterometer will be included.
The large-scale environment in which these mesocyclones occur will be studied by
comparison with fields of diagnostic variables taken from the ECMWF synoptic
analyses. The expected result of this project is the development of a conceptual
and statistical model of Southern Ocean mesocyclone evolution. This is a
necessary first step toward the inclusion of polar low processes in operational
numerical analysis and prediction schemes, and the determination of their role
in the general circulation of the atmosphere.