* 9218573
* Multi-Nuclear, Multi-Dimensional Experiments for            Biomolecular NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Erik Zuiderweg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1995
* USD 300,000.00

This investigation is concerned with the further development of Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (NMR) as a method to determine the three-
dimensional structures of larger biomolecules in solution. It is only very
recently that labeling with stable isotopes and the use of three- and four-
dimensional heteronuclear NMR has allowed the structure determination of
proteins larger than 10 kDa in solution. Here the solution structure
determination of a larger alpha helical proteins. These challenges form the
backbone of the proposal and will be approached with improvements in efficiency
by using heteronuclear cross polarization, with improvements in resolution by
using multiple quantum filters and a larger number of dimensions and with
improvements in analysis of key multi-dimensional NMR experiments. %%% Recent
developments in the methods of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy have made
possible the determination of the three- dimensional structures of smaller
proteins in solution. Three dimensional solution structures are relevant to the
understanding of their biological functioning, can convey dynamic information
and may be obtained by NMR in cases where other methods fail because of lack of
crystals. This proposal describes investigations into the development of more
advanced NMR methods to help analyze the solution NMR spectra of larger
proteins, nucleic acids and complexes thereof. The studies will be carried out
with a medium- sized protein as a model system. The new methods will make NMR
structure determination possible for larger proteins and nucleic acids and thus
contribute to the better understanding of structure and function in this larger
class of biomolecules.