* 9218104
* Undergraduate Materials Education Initiative:               Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Program in Materials        Synthesis and Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/1992,03/31/1997
* Lester Hendrickson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/1997
* USD 350,000.00

Arizona State University will undertake a three year program to develop,
implement and evaluate four core courses on Materials Synthesis and Processing.
These courses are distinguished by an interdisciplinary approach, involving
students and faculty in Engineering, Physics, and Chemistry. The courses will be
integrated into academic programs at Arizona State University as a Materials
Science option in the degree programs in Engineering, Physics and Chemistry.
They will have a direct impact on the integration of programs in Materials
Science and Engineering within ASU and will complement and strengthen the
graduate program in the Science and Engineering of Materials. The four proposed
courses are: 1) A sequence of two lecture courses in advanced material synthesis
and processing with emphasis on thin films of electronic materials; and 2) Two
laboratory courses consisting of 3 projects each semester chosen from a wide
range of 20 topics that emphasize synthesis and processing, followed by
characterization and property evaluation of advanced materials. The majority of
the projects will be carried out in a new laboratory specially dedicated to
these courses. Novel features of the courses include the use of case studies in
lectures and videotaping of student presentations in laboratory projects. The
courses will be evaluated by faculty, students and an external advisory
committee. It is planned to publish a text on the lecture courses, and the
experiments for the laboratory course will be available in manual form. It is
also planned to publish descriptions of the courses in the Materials Research
Society Bulletin.