* 9218373
* Magnetic Microscopy Using Superconducting Quantum           Interference Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Frederick Wellstood, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 10/31/1996
* USD 210,000.00

Project Description (Technical): This project will develop a new measuring
instrument, called a magnetic flux microscope, which is based on a SQUID
(superconducting quantum interference device) sensor. The objective is to obtain
images of magnetic fields near surfaces with a resolution at the micron length
scale. The instrument should be able to scan an area one centimeter on a side,
resolve features as small as 1 mm and sense magnetic fields as small as 10
December 22, 1992picoTesla. The instrument will be able to sense currents as
small as 12 picoAmperes. The new instrument will be used in investigations of
superconductivity, and will address issues such as the pinning and motion of
individual vortices. In addition, the instrument will be used to obtain images
of a range of magnetic materials, as well as working microcircuits. Project
Description (Non-Technical): This project continues the instrumental revolution
based on surface microscopy techniques such as scanning tunneling microscopy and
atomic force microscopy. In this case a new surface microscopy is being
developed to sense not atomic positions but the magnetic fields produced by the
atoms and molecules. It will sense surface atoms and subsurface atoms as well.
The sol-called magnetic flux microscope will be used to study superconductivity,
magnetism and will also be used to sense current flow in work microcircuits. The
technique should provide new information about the fundamental aspects of
superconductivity and magnetism and will provide a new diagnostic tool to
improve microcircuit performance.