* 9218177
* Collections Improvement of Vertebrate Fossils at the Denver Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Logan Ivy, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1996
* USD 234,450.00

The collection of vertebrate fossils (VF) at the Denver Museum of Natural
History (DMNH) is an important resource for research on the history of life in
the Western Interior region. There are approximately 37,000 specimens in the
collection, including 52 holotypes and a number of scientifically important
assemblages from the Cenozoic and Mesozoic. Highlights include fossil dinosaur
and mammal skeletons, the original Folsom Bison and Dent mammoth remains from
early human sites in North America, Oligocene and Miocene collections from the
Great Plains, and growing Jurassic, Paleogene, and Pleistocene collections. Most
of the collection was amassed prior to 1947, but field work over the past three
years has added about 5,500 specimens. In 1989, the Department of Earth Sciences
(DES) at DMNH began efforts to improve the condition of the collection and
increase its availability for scientific research. In the past three years, part
of the collection has been placed in new steel cabinets, 5,000 new specimens
have been cataloged, and approximately 3,000 specimens have been entered into a
computerized data base. In addition, DMNH has purchased new research and
collection management equipment and supplies, increased the number of permanent
staff dedicated to paleontology from 0.33 FTE in 1988 to 4.25 FTE, constructed a
new laboratory, and more than doubled the storage space for the VF collections.
Although recent DMNH support has improved the condition of the collections
considerably, approximately three-fourths remain in poor condition. The bulk of
the older collections have not been properly curated. Approximately 80% of them
have never been cataloged or inventoried and 70% are housed in overcrowded
conditions within wooden cabinetry or unstable steel shelving. Almost all of the
older collections still have original field labels and miscellaneous notes
associated with them. Although most of the collection has been prepared, many
specimens are broken and in need of repair and conservation. This DMNH project
will catalog, computerize and restore the older collections to make them more
available for research and allow for continued growth. Primary needs are for
space efficient cabinets and compactors, computer hardware, an hand-operated
forklift, and additional personnel to curate and computerize specimens over two
years to bring the entire vertebrate fossil collection up to modern standards.