* 9218635
* Biophysical and Cell Biological Approaches to the           Cryopreservation of Embryos From Lines of Drosophila of     Genetic Interest
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Peter Mazur, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1994
* USD 150,000.00

By carefully controlling the developmental stage of Oregon R Drosophila
embryos, we have succeeded in subjecting them to cryogenic temperatures with
reasonably high survivals; Some 65-70% hatch and nearly 40% of the resulting
larvae develop into fertile adults. The purpose of the proposed work is (1) to
identify the especially critical factors and their tolerances so as to
facilitate the use of the procedure by the Drosophila community; (2) prepare a
detailed protocol of the procedure which identifies the critical steps and their
tolerances; and (3) test the applicability of the procedure to two
representative mutant lines. With respect to Aim (1) we are finding that the
step that limits survival is the exposure to 8.5 M ethylene glycol that precedes
vitrification. Part of the damage from that exposure could be a result of the
osmotic dehydration accompanying the addition of concentrated ethylene glycol or
it could be osmotic swelling associated with the removal of ethylene glycol
after vitrification. Part of the damage could be the result of chemical toxicity
of the high concentrations of glycol used. The damage associated with shrinkage
and toxicity could be ameliorated by reducing the extent and duration of
shrinkage by reducing the concentration of glycol, by changing the exposure
temperature, or by the use of a more permeable cryoprotectant like perhaps
dimethyl sulfoxide, all of which will be tested. A critical point to be
determined is to what extent one can manipulate these aspects of the
cryoprotectant and still achieve vitrification. To reduce potential damage from
osmotic swelling, we shall optimize the sucrose dilution procedure used to
control that swelling. We also propose to determine the tolerances to certain
critical steps during vitrification per se. These include (a) can boiling liquid
nitrogen be used in place of nitrogen slush? If so, it will simplify the
procedure; (b) are the 15-hr embryos now being used as sensitive to brief
exposures above -100 C and to warming rates slower than ultra rapid as the 12-hr
embryos used previously? Knowledge on these points will be important to users of
the procedure. %%% Because Drosophila melanogaster is such an experimentally
powerful organism, the numbers of mutant and/or genetically modified stocks has
become an overwhelming problem. To date, all stocks must be transferred about
every two weeks. The development of a method to freeze embryos which is simple
enough to be used in biology laboratories and yet allows a recovery of fertile
at a 40% level will save millions of dollars and man-hours of work in a
reasonably short time. It should also help to ensure that important stocks do
not undergo genetic drift over time.