* 9218780
* Dissertation Research: Archaeological Spatial Patterning in the Courland River Valley, Tobago, W.I.
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1992,11/30/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1993
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Peter Schmidt, Mr Christopher Clement will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct an archaeological study of
historic plantations located in the Courland River Valley of Tobago. Because
very little recent development has taken place on this island, early historic
structures remain relatively visible and intact; thus the selection of this
research location. The project includes three stages. First Mr. Clement will
conduct broad scale survey to locate plantations and determine how they were
distributed over the landscape. Secondly he will map their internal layout to
examine the arrangement of slave, manufacturing and overseer arrangements.
Finally he will survey and make surface collections from the slave living areas.
While much is known about the organization of cotton plantations in the U.S.
South, adaptations to sugar cane production are not well understood. Because
sugar cane must be processed quickly it is likely that the spatial arrangements
and internal social dynamics were different in such situations. New World
slavery, because it brought together very distinct cultural groups and placed
them into very specific and varying contexts provides an excellent basis to
study culture contact and change. Mr. Clement's project will contribute to this
goal. This grant will produce information of interest not only to historians but
also to a broad range of anthropologists. In addition, it will assist in the
training of a promising young scientist.