* 9218534
* SGER:  Salvage of Valdez Bird Specimens
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Sievert Rohwer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 12/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

This SGER will support the urgent salvage of approximately 3000 rare and
valuable bird carcasses recovered from the Exxon Valdez oil spill in Prince
William Sound, Alaska. The birds, stored in four enormous freezer vans, have
been held as evidence in legal proceedings by the U.S. District Court for Alaska
since 1989, but are now scheduled to be destroyed on or before September 30,
1992. Two basic reasons to salvage the Valdez birds are: (1) to complement the
world's holdings of rare specimens; and (2) to provide rare material for
important research on avian biology. The Valdez seabirds represent a Spring
sampling, whereas most seabird holdings in museums are Summer/Fall. Further, 11
species of seabirds in the Valdez collection are represented by fewer than 100
skeletons in the world's collections, and four of the species are listed as
either endangered or threatened. Other species that the PI will salvage can no
longer be collected in large numbers to study morphological variation. Research
projects made possible by the salvage collection include the study and
recognition of new species (Red-faced and Pelagic Cormorants), the ecology of
seabird molt, the origin (which breeding colony) of winter and early spring
seabirds along the western coast, and growth patterns in seabirds. These
specific studies will be cross-disciplinary, involving ecology, molecular and
morphological systematics, population biology, and physiological ecology, and
will enable a better understanding of avian systematics, breeding ecology and
conservation biology.