* 9219485
* Dissertation Research: Ceramic Production Labor Estimates asIndices of Economic Transformation and State Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1992,12/31/1997
* NONE NONE, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1997
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Carol Kramer MS Louise Senior will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. She will study ceramic materials excavated from the
site of Tell Leilan which is located in Northern Syria. Tell Leilan was occupied
from approximately 5000 - 1750 B.C. and has been excavated by a Yale University
archaeological team for a number of years. The importance of the site is now
clear because it documents the rise of complex state level society. Over the
course of the 3rd millenium BC Tell Leilan was transformed from a rural town to
the center of an urbanized state. MS. Senior wishes to learn how production of
ceramics changed over this time period. In particular she wishes to know
whether, in effect, mass production techniques were adapted and less time and
care were devoted to producing individual objects. To accomplish this she will
study potsherds from a number of perspectives. She will reconstruct the method
by which they were made and the amount of care devoted to clay preparation.
Through neutron activation analysis it will be possible to determine where clays
were collected and whether standardization emerged. Through reconstruction of
firing temperatures MS Senior will learn how much fuel was expended per pot.
Anthropologists wish to understand how economic organization changed as complex
societies emerged in regions such as the Near East. From the study of buildings
such as temple mounds and identification of status objects much has been learned
about the development of religious and political organization. However it is
more difficult to gain insight into changes in production and economic
organization. Since ceramics was one of the main classes of objects produced at
Tell Leilan (and many other archaeological sites as well) and since they
preserve well in the archaeological record they afford an excellent data base to
examine such an issue. MS Senior is not interested in ceramics per se but rather
what they reveal about more basic processes. Since the site covers the change
from more simple to more complex society comparison of earlier and later
assemblages will provide insight into change over time. This research is
important for several reasons. It will increase our understanding of how complex
societies emerged and were organized. It will help to develop an analytic
technique which will be useful in many archaeological situations. It will also
assist in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.