* 9219709
* Water-Assisted Time-Dependent                               Compaction on Natural Quartz Sands
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Thomas Dewers, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1995
* USD 97,940.00

This collaborative research explores the physico- chemical means by which
sediments deposited at the earth's surface become lithified during burial.
Solution-transfer creep is a possible mechanism, but the kinematics are not well
defined. Experiments at Texas A&amp;M University will monitor rates of pore-
volume loss and water-rock interaction in sand-water mixtures under hydrostatic
and nonhydrostatic conditions as a function of temperature, confining pressure,
fluid pressure, grain size, clay content and aggregate volume strain. These will
be performed in reactively inert pressure vessels that simulate temperature and
pressure conditions typical of diagenesis. Experiments at University of Oklahoma
will be conducted in a similar vessel, but with the added capabilities of
triaxial loading and constant fluid flow. This effort will study compaction as a
function of applied differential stress, study stress-related sand- water
reaction kinetics, long-term constant flow conditions, and effects of solution
undersaturation on compaction rates. data sets from both institutions will be
interpreted in terms of constitutive "creep" laws for time-dependent volume
strain, and together with reaction rate laws of mineral- water interaction under
nonhydrostatic conditions (also experimentally determined), will be extrapolated
to geological scenarios using numerical methods. The aim of this research is
ultimately to quantify rates of pore-volume loss in sandstones during burial and
to understand the thermodynamics kinetics of water-rock interaction under
hydrostatic and nonhydrostatic conditions.