* 9219330
* Coelomocyte Activation and the Sea Urchin Immune System
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1996
* Eric Davidson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 01/31/1996
* USD 326,766.00

The purpose of this investigation is to explore the immune system of the purple
sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and the molecular mechanisms of
coelomocyte activation. The profilin gene (SpCoel1), cloned from coelomocytes,
is upregulated in cells responding to injury or to injections of foreign
coelomic fluid. This molecular parameter denotes changes that occur during
activation of coelomocytes and will be used to assess the magnitude of responses
shown by the sea urchin immune system to experimental challenge. We will
identify stimuli that are most effective in maximizing the transcription rate of
SpCoel1 and in activating coelomocytes. This analysis will indicate the
recognition capabilities of the coelomocytes, and suggest the range of ligands
these cells can detect. To further analyze the response to external stimuli,
coelomocyte proliferation, including the time course of the appearance of new
cells in the coelomic fluid, and the location of the proliferative centers in
the animal will be characterized. Coelomocyte activation most likely involves
the appearance of a number of new transcript species that are required for
defense functions. Differences in the transcript population in activated cells
compared to resting cells will be used to clone and characterize activation
related genes. To provide a molecular understanding, the regulatory region of
SpCoel1 will be analyzed by comparing protein-DNA binding patterns that regulate
expression in activated and resting coelomocytes, and in early developmental
stages when this gene is also expressed in cells that may be coelomocyte
precursors. %%% The echinoderm immune system responds quickly and efficiently in
protecting sea urchins from infection and repairing injuries. It is a non-
specific system, the effector cells of which are the coelomocytes found within
the body cavities. Although this system appears primitive compared to the
mammalian immune system, it may be functionally homologous to important elements
of higher vertebrate immune systems. Primary cellular responses in vertebrates
that underlie adaptive immunity are mediated by cell types that also function in
a non-specific manner, so the echinoderm defense system may not have changed
much from the basic, ancestral form. Gene expression and the regulation of gene
expression in invertebrate immune systems is an almost unexplored area of
biology. Initial results of research on sea urchins have identified a critical
gene that is activated in early stages of a defense response. Further studies of
how this gene is regulated and how the gene-product functions in immune-cell
activation will shed new light on the cellular mechanisms of non-specific immune
function and how these ecologically important organisms defend themselves from
injury or infection.