* 9219880
* "Collaborative Research: Circadian Rhythms of Gene          Expression in Cyanobacteria"
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Carl Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 09/30/1996
* USD 204,000.00

Circadian rhythms are an adaptation of organisms to the regular daily change of
their environment. Although much is known about the formal properties of
circadian rhythms which allow them to synchronize to the daily light\dark
cycles, almost nothing is known about how these rhythms work on a biochemical
level. This project is two-fold. First, the simplest organism now known to
express circadian rhythms will be used namely, prokaryotic cyanobacteria.
Second, genetic tools will be used to analyze its mechanism. A reporter gene
encoding a bioluminescence enzyme has been attached to an endogenous promoter.
Not only does this construct make these cyanobacteria bioluminescent, the glow
meets all of the salient criteria of circadian rhythmicity| This is the first
"artificial" overt rhythm of a circadian clock yet described. This unique case
of circadian gene expression will be exploited to: (1) identify by action
spectroscopy the photoreceptor involved in the clock's entrainment; (2) analyze
the control pathway by which the circadian clock regulates this "artificial
rhythm; and (3) search for genes which are involved in the clock's central
mechanism. Using a simple prokaryotic system should accelerate the
identification of cellular mechanisms by which circadian oscillators operate.
%%% Most organisms respond to the cycles of light and dark by physiological
mechanisms that are not well understood. Plants respond to these cycles by
turning on and off certain genes. By genetic manipulation these investigators
have introduce a light emitting enzyme gene into a gene that is turned on by a
daily light-dark cycle. Thus after light exposure these bacteria will begin to
glow as the gene is turned on. This novel technique will allow the investigators
to better understand the biochemical genetic mechanisms by which organisms
respond to light-dark cycles.