* 9219371
* Analysis of Doa, the Drosophila homologue of mammalian      cdc2-like kinase.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Leonard Rabinow, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1997
* USD 343,820.00

9219371 Rabinow We are studying the structure and function of the Darkener of
apricot locus of Drosophila, and two tightly linked functionally related and
interacting loci, Rem and Msu. These loci were identified in mutagenic screens
for dosage-sensitive modifiers of gene expression. Doa mutants display a
maternal effect, are recessive lethal, increase transcription of the copia
retrotransposon and alter the expression of a number of host genes, as based
upon genetic and morphological criteria. Many of these properties are shared by
Rem and Msu, which interact with Doa allele specifically. By sequencing cDNA
clones, we found that Doa encodes the Drosophila homologue of murine and human
cdc2-like protein kinase (clk). Clk kinase is unusual in that it is structurally
related to serine/threonine protein kinases, but auto- phosphorylates on
tyrosine residues as well as serines and threonines. We will: 1) Examine the
structure/function relationship among Doa, Rem and Msu, whether they are in fact
separable genetic loci, and their functional relationship to cdc2 like kinase.
2) Generate antibodies to Doa protein as reagents to determine its intracellular
localization and expression during embryonic and imaginal development outside of
the eye and eye- antennal imaginal disc. We will also examine Doa mutant embryos
to determine the effects of mutations in the kinase on early Drosophila
development. 3) Characterize the specificity and substrates of Doa kinase in
vitro and in vivo. 4) Determine whether Doa mutations affect mitosis. %%% Our
long range goals are to understand the significance and function of dosage-
sensitive transcriptional regulators, as one aspect of the regulation of gene
expression yielding normal development. Our system provides a unique example for
the study of the functions of a dual-specificity kinase in the context of an
organism amenable to genetic analysis and which undergoes complex development.
***