* 9219806
* Redesigning Trypsin Via Mutagenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Charles Craik, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 05/31/1997
* USD 261,000.00

To provide insight into the substrate specificity, catalytic mechanism and
structure of a proteolytic enzyme, mutant trypsins will be generated using
current methods of protein engineering. Two general approaches are used to alter
the enzyme: 1) targeted substitutions followed by analysis of the variant enzyme
2) region specific substitutions coupled with a genetic selection\screen. In
each case, mutants of trypsin are generated according to structural and/or
functional principles to 1) understand the specificity and catalytic power of
the enzyme and 2) use our understanding to alter the activity of the enzyme in a
predictable fashion. Variant enzymes are designed, isolated and purified, and
their kinetic parameters compared with the native enzyme. Selected mutants are
then chosen for more detailed kinetic, theoretical and 3-D structure analysis.
Results from the initial modifications will provide a basis for introducing
future amino acid changes into the enzyme. Initial experiments have been
successful in addressing the role of specific amino acids in substrate
recognition and catalytic mechanism of the enzyme and in using that information
to alter the enzyme activity using designed metal binding sites. Proposed
experiments involve amino acid replacements of active site residues for studies
involving the catalytic mechanism and substrate recognition. Variant trypsins
are designed by computer modeling based on our current understanding of trypsin
and/or its structural and functional relationship to related enzymes such.
Methods are also being developed to screen large libraries of variant trypsins
using genetic selections and bacteriophage display technologies. %%% These
studies will contribute to our understanding of structure/function relationships
in the enzyme trypsin and related serine proteases. In addition, these studies
will help provide a framework for the de novo design of enzymes. //