* 9219796
* Collaborative Research:  A Combined Observational and       Theoretical Investigation of Thermal and Chemical Transport in Subduction Zones and the Evolution of Active Continental
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1998
* Christopher Kincaid, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 02/28/1998
* USD 181,202.00

9219796 Kincaid The role of subduction and magmatism in the growth of the
continental crust and the evolution of the crust/mantle system has long been
recognized, but a detailed, process-oriented under- standing of the subduction
cycle has been elusive. In this project the principal investigators will combine
experimental petrology and geochemistry, observational seismology, isotope and
trace element geochemistry and laboratory convection experiments with numerical
approaches to the thermal structure and large-scale convection of the slab and
mantle wedge, and porous flow models for melt and fluid migration in the arc
environment. Heat flow and various analyses of seismic data, from primarily the
Japan arc, will constrain the thermal structure and rheological properties used
in the initial calculations (2-D and some 3-D) of flow in the slab and mantle,
using a temperature-dependent viscosity. Models developed for Japan, where
seismic constraints are strongest, will be used as a base for Central America
and for the Cascades, where a young hot plate is subducting and conditions are
far from steady state. Models for transport of hydrous fluids in the vicinity of
the slab, and of melts through the mantle will be calculated using the stress
and flow fields from the thermal and convection modeling. Plate scale mass
transport delivers chemical elements derived from the continental crust,
hydrosphere and lithosphere to the deep source of arc magmas; fluid and melt
transport processes translate some fraction of these elements back to the
surface in crust building magmas. Documentably slab-derived elements such as
10Be (1.5 Ma half-life), B and U (75 ka half-life in disequilibria series) will
be incorporated as chemical tracers in fluid/melt migration models, with fluxes,
transport paths and characteristic transport times constrained from chemistry of
subconducting sediments and erupting lavas. Fluid partitioning studies on key
elements will further con strain input to migration models. Predictions from
coupled thermal, convection and transport models regarding spatial distribution,
character and chemistry of lavas along the length and across the width of arcs
will be compared with observed values, and evaluated against observed variations
in subduction parameters from arc to arc to arrive at an integrated model of the
subduction cycle and its role in crustal growth and evolution of the mantle. ***