* 9219561
* Isolation of Genes Mediating Cell-Surface Induction of      Infection Structures
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Ralph Dean, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1996
* USD 270,000.00

The overall objective of the proposed research is to identify genes that
regulate the development of highly specialized structures (appressoria) that are
essential for rice plant infection by Magnaporthe grisea. M. grisea is ideal for
these studies since infection structure formation can be induced in vitro, the
fungus is highly amenable to both Mendelian and molecular genetic manipulation
and as a plant pathogen it is of major importance. Infection structure formation
is initiated following conidia germination on certain hydrophobic substrata.
After limited extension, the germ tube tip swells to form a dome shaped
attachment structure, the appressorium. An infection hyphae emerges from the
appressorium at the contact interface and penetrates directly. Dr. Dean has
previously identified two genes, mif23 and mif29, that are specifically
expressed during infection structure formation. Since these genes respond to
environmental signals, he proposes to fuse promoters to selectable markers in
order to obtain mutations in regulatory pathway genes. He has also identified
mutants blocked at various stages of development and propose to search for more.
The affected genes will be genetically mapped and functionally complemented by
DNA transformation. Complementing DNA will be recovered and the genes cloned and
characterized. The identification of these genes is paramount to understanding
and controlling the mechanism(s) regulating cell surface interactions and fungal
infection of plants.