* 9219462
* Coll Resc: Response of Eolian and Associated Depositional   Systems to Climate and Dynamic External Factors--           Toward an Eolian Sequence Stratigraphic Model
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1995
* John Sexton, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1995
* USD 148,788.00

Uncertainty in modeling the response of Earth environments to changing
conditions such as global warming arises from a poor understanding of the
dynamics of these environments. It is established that over the past 20,000
years the Sahara has undergone dramatic swings from more extensive and sand-sea
development than today to being vegetated with common lakes and rivers. While
these swings correspond to Milankovitch cycles, our basis for understanding
these in a process-response model has only recently begun to emerge. The area of
the Sahara extending from the Atlas Mountains onto the Sahara Platform in
Tunisia offers a microcosm of diverse environments, where deposits are housed in
a subsiding trough. Remote sensing is first used to map present environments,
recognize relict features, and locate specific depocenters for detailed field
work. Field work involves the establishment of an unconformity-bounded
stratigraphic framework for eolian, fluvial and lacustrine deposits in the area
through field mapping of soil-geomorphic and stratigraphic relationships, facies
analysis, and geophysical methods. Subsequent lab analysis involves the dating
of the sequences so they can be correlated with climatic events. Because the
response of eolian and associated depositional systems to climatic and other
factors is the basis for sequence stratigraphy, the results are expected to help
formulate a general process-response eolian sequence model that will have
predictive capabilities with respect to changing external controls.