* 9219915
* Crustal Structure of Collisional Orogens:  The Ural         Mountains, Russia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Larry Brown, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 01/31/1995
* USD 157,144.00

9219915 Brown The Ural Mountains of central Russia form a 3,000-km linear
orogenic belt of Paleozoic age and constitute a unique natural laboratory to
address a number of basic issues concerning collisional orogenesis and the
evolution of continental crust. Several features appear to distinguish the Urals
from other Paleozoic orogenic belts such as the Appalachians, Caledonides, and
Variscides. Primary among these are (1) the apparent presence (based on seismic
velocities) of a preserved crustal root below the Urals, (2) the apparent lack
of syn- or post-collisional collapse evidenced in the Urals based on existing
data, (3) the relatively shallow crustal level and generally low metamorphic
grade exposed in the Urals, and (4) the nature and distribution of crustal
reflectivity in the Ural orogen. In particular, the apparent similarity in early
orogenic evolution between the Urals and the Appalachians, and the subsequent
divergence in post-orogenic paths, offer a special opportunity to evaluate the
role of various orogenic processes in the development of lower crustal
structure. For example, if the prominent lower crustal layering observed beneath
the Appalachian interior relates to post-orogenic extension, will it be absent
beneath the Urals? Do the Urals preserve an intermediate stage in orogenic
development between the more mature collapsed orogens like the Appalachians and
more recent compressional belts like the Alps and Himalayas? The Principal
Investigators will initiate a collaborative research program with Russian
scientists at the Bazhenov Geophysical Expedition in Scheelite (near
Ekaterinburg, formerly Sverdlovsk), Russia, for a comprehensive study of the
nature and origin of the crustal structure of the Urals based on their extensive
existing geophysical database. This collaboration constitutes the initial phase
of a larger, long-term program to compare and contrast the Urals with other
Paleozoic orogens, eventually leading to the first deep seismic reflection
profile across the Urals. This effort also represents the first collaboration
between US scientists and EUROPROBE, a major new European initiative to
coordinate lithospheric studies in Europe. The US component will focus on a
comparison of Uralian and Appalachian structure, complementing EUROPROBE's
investigation of the Urals versus Variscan evolution. In particular they will
focus on reprocessing and synthesis of Russia reflection (mostly shallow),
refraction and DSS (deep seismic sounding) data, with the aim of mapping the
crustal structure and understanding the Phanerozoic history of the Urals and
nearby regions. In doing this, they will be establishing with their Russian
collaborators a common knowledge of the various existing datasets and their
interpretations. It is important to note that the Bazhenov Expedition is the
center for all geophysical data available on the Urals (including DSS and
reflection data, gravity and magnetic data, heat flow, etc.) and the majority of
these data, are of unrestricted access under the conditions of a joint statement
with scientists from that institute. ***