* 9219282
* P1-Bh: A Maize Regulatory Gene Controlled by DNA Methylation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Karen Cone, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1996
* USD 183,500.00

This project will focus upon the molecular and genetic analysis of Pl-Bh, a gene
which controls the synthesis of purple anthocyanin pigments in the maize plant.
Preliminary analysis indicates that at the nucleotide level, this gene is nearly
identical to the wild- type Pl gene but, unlike that gene, is heavily
methylated. The planned experiments will test the hypothesis that methylation of
the Pl-Bh DNA is responsible for the variegated pattern of expression or the
altered tissue-specificity of this allele or both. The methylation status will
be determined using genomic sequencing methods and will be correlated with the
level of gene expression in lightly pigmented and darkly pigmented cells from
plant and kernel tissues. Possible alterations in chromatin configuration and/or
protein-DNA contacts will be analyzed by DNase footprinting. Both the wild-type
and mutant genes will be introduced into various tissues by microprojectile
bombardment and their expression correlated with phenotypic differences. We will
look for genetic modifiers of the mutant allele and it will be determined if the
modification is a result of alterations in the methylation pattern of the Pl-Bh
allele. %%% DNA methylation plays an important role in the regulation of gene
expression in many eukaryotes, usually by silencing gene expression. In only a
few cases has it been shown to influence the tissue-specificity of expression.
The results of these experiments should serve to enhance our understanding of
this and other epigenetic mechanisms which modulate plant gene expression. $$$