* 9219949
* Biochemical and Genetic Regulation of Haustorial            Development in Striga
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1998
* James Riopel, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 03/31/1998
* USD 333,950.00

Parasitic angiosperms attach to and penetrate their host vascular system by the
development of a highly specialized organ termed a haustorium. The haustorium
serves as a physical bridge that allows the parasite to obtain the water and
nutrients necessary for its survival. The development of this unique structure
is controlled by a series of chemical signals from the host plant that condition
the germination, attachment and penetration stages of growth. Using a
combination of in vivo and in vitro approaches Drs. Timko and Riopel have begun
to examine the biochemical and genetic mechanisms involved in haustorial
induction and development in Striga asiatica (witchweed), a major parasite of
agronomically important grasses. They have standardized methods to synchronize
growth of a large number of individual plant in order to look at sequential
developmental stages (germination, radical extension, pre- attachment haustorial
development, attachment, and host penetration) in axenic culture in 3-4 days.
The overall goal of the present experiments is to define the cellular and
molecular genetic events that constitute the developmental pathway in Striga
leading from haustorial initiation to successful attachment and penetration of a
susceptible host plant species. They propose to complete the characterization of
the putative root and haustorial specific cDNA clones identified in the previous
studies and initiate additional rounds of differential screening to identify
gene products expressed during the attachment and penetration phases of
haustorial development. The goal of these studies is to establish subsets of
clones representing gene products temporally and spatially distinct in their
expression during the pre-attachment, attachment, and penetration stages of
Striga haustorial differentiation. The patterns of gene expression activated
during attachment and differentiation of the penetration peg will be compared in
Striga haustoria developed in contact with host versus non-host tissues. Such
information will assist in the subsequent attempts to define the signal
transduction pathway controlling overall haustorial development. A greater
understanding of the biochemical and cellular factors governing haustorial
differentiation may contribute to future manipulation of host resistance. When
completed these studies will provide substantial new information on a unique
developmental process in plants.