* 9219658
* Do Gill from Symbiont-free Mussels Gain Sufficient Cellular Energy from Sulfide Oxidation to Support Cellular Work?
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1997
* David Kraus, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 07/31/1997
* USD 170,000.00

Hydrogen sulfide, which is naturally produced in marine sediments, is poison to
most living organisms. However, some animals from sulfide-rich environments
avoid this poisoning with sulfide detoxification reactions at the cellular
level, and these oxidation reactions may be a potentially useful source of
energy. The goal of this project is to determine if sulfide inhabitants gain
sufficient cellular energy from sulfide oxidation to support cellular work. The
experimental tissue choice will be ciliated gills from two species of marine
mussels, one from sulfide-rich environments and one from sulfide-free
environments. Gills are hard-working tissues that act as the primary interface
between filter-feeding animals and their environment. In the presence and
absence of sulfide, we will measure several parameters of cellular energy
metabolism, including energy production by the mitochondria and energy
consumption by the gill cilia. This research will begin to address basic
questions concerning the regulatory mechanisms that coordinate cellular energy
consumption with energy production; the molecular and cellular mechanisms that
allow survival in natural stressful habitats; and the invasion of the sulfide
habitat by marine invertebrates that may have led to the eventual development of
the symbiosis between invertebrate hosts and sulfide-oxidizing bacteria. It will
address questions concerning the contribution of sulfide systems to the total
productivity of estuaries.