* 9219200
* Genetic Analysis of an ABC Transport Mechanism for          Secretion of Syringomycin, a Phytotoxin Produced by         Pseudomonas Syringae
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1998
* Neil Quigley, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 270,000.00

9219200 Quigley The research described in this proposal will investigate the
mechanism of secretion of syringomycin by the plant pathogenic bacterium,
Pseudomonas syringae pathovar syringae. Strains of this bacterium cause disease
in a wide range of important crop plant species. Virtually all of the pathogenic
strains of P. s. syringae produce syringae produce syringomycin, which is a
potent phytotoxin related to the polypeptin class of peptide antibiotics. The
syrD gene of P. s. syringae is required for the production of syringomycin, and
its predicted product, SyrD, has strong homology with proteins in the ATP-
binding cassette (ABC) transporter family, and it carries all of the key
sequence and structural features required for function by ABC proteins.
Preliminary experiments have demonstrated that the syrD gene is restricted to
pathovar syringae strains of P. syringae. It is proposed that SyrD gene is
restricted to pathovar syringae strains of P. syringae. It is proposed that SyrD
is an inner membrane protein that functions as the pivotal translator in the
secretion of syringomycin by P.s. syringae. Objectives of this project are: 1)
to determine of SyrD is a membrane protein that functions as an ABC transporter
protein in syringomycin secretion. 2) To determine if the syrD holologs in
strains of P. s syringae that produce analogs of syringomycin encode SyrD
proteins that are functionally interchangeable. 3) to identify and genetically
analyze other protein components of the syringomycin export apparatus. %%% This
research is significant because (i) syringomycin is an important virulence
determinant in diseases caused by P. s syringae (ii) secretion of syringomycin
by an ABC transporter mechanism involving SyrD would represent the first
demonstration of such a system in toxin production by any plant pathogen, and
would establish SyrD as the first known protein for bacterial phytotoxin
secretion, and (iii) the mechanisms of lipopeptide antibiotic sec retion is
largely unknown, reflecting the poor knowledge of the secretion mechanism for
bacterial antibiotics in general. Further analysis of SyrD could provide
important knowledge about the secretion of lipopeptide antibiotics produced by
medically and agriculturally important bacterial pathogens. ***