* 9219845
* Stochastic Transport in Heterogenous Flows and Media
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Sidney Redner, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/1996
* USD 165,000.00

Theoretical research will be conducted in order to gain a better understanding
of fundamental physical laws that govern stochastic transport processes in
heterogeneous media with macroscopically correlated disorder. For composites
with "block" disorder, conventional macroscopic transport equations generally do
not apply, and an attempt will be made to formulate the appropriate composition
laws that permit a macroscopic description of transport in such systems. The
superdiffusive motion of Brownian particles in a randomly stratified flow field
will then be investigated. Steady-state and first-passage characteristics of
this system appear to be controlled by exceptional fluctuations, leading to a
multiplicity of basic time scales in the system. Theoretical and numerical
studies will determine the appropriate macroscopic description. The unusual
transport properties of Brownian particles which are driven by prototypical
random flow fields will also be explored. Finally, the first-passage
characteristics in source-sink flow will be studied, where the interplay between
spatially varying convection and molecular diffusion are anticipated to yield
unusual first-passage properties. The studies will be extended to fractured
media, where fast transport in fracture competes in a subtle way with slow
transport modes. This project is coordinated with an identical one at the
Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences, which supports Professor Joel
Koplik of the City University of New York who is collaborating with Professor
Redner. %%% Analytical and numerical research will be conducted on random
transport in heterogeneous media and flows. In particular, the movement of a
passive particle in porous media will be studied under the influence of various
types of random disorder. Examples include fluid flow in stratified geological
media and the propagation of fracture in rocks and other heterogeneous
materials. The research addresses fundamental issues in statistical physics and,
at the same time, has many real applications. The research is coordinated with
an identical grant at the Department of Energy which supports Professor Koplik
at the City University of New York.