* 9219953
* Modeling the Hydrologic Budget, the Heat                    Budget, and the Circulation of Crater Lake, Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/1993,04/30/1996
* Robert Collier, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 04/30/1996
* USD 167,426.00

This proposal requests support for a postdoctoral investigator to assist in
implementing state-of-the-art models of Crater Lake which couple the observed
atmospheric forcing with the heat budget, lake circulation, and the hydrologic
budget. Crater Lake, the deepest lake in the United States, is a closed-basin
caldera lake, located at an elevation of 1882 meters in the Cascade mountains of
south- central Oregon. Ongoing Limnological studies funded by the National Park
Service will be expanded by a new six-year study of climatic control on the
hydrologic budget, the heat budget, and on the circulation of the lake. This
program, will be funded by the Park Service as part of the new "Integrated
Studies of National Park Ecosystems" and will be tied in with other elements of
the Olympic Peninsula Biogeographic Area. As part of this project, we have
deployed a permanent thermistor mooring covering the full water column. This
continuous data set is also supported by CTD (conductivity, temperature, depth)
data collected whenever the lake is accessible ( 3 months/year). Meteorological
data is also being collected on the lake from a buoy and from instrumentation
elsewhere within the Park. Precipitation data are collected from several
locations and lake level is continuously monitored from a USGS gauging station.
The primary effort will be the application of various one dimensional vertical
models of mixing and heat fluxes in the system using the meteorological data
sets to determine surficial fluxes and the thermistor data set for model
parameterization and validation. Long-term goals for the modelling effort
include the eventual development of a biological model of primary and secondary
production for this ultra-oligotrophic system which must include a proper
description of lake physics. The post-doctoral investigator will work closely
with R. Collier (OSU Oceanography) and with G. Larson (NPS and OSU Forestry) to
integrate the model(s) with on-going data collection and experimental design.