* 9219127
* RUI: Crystallization and Differentiation in a Sheet-like Magma Chamber: An Integrated Study of the Graveyard Point Sill, Eastern Oregon
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1994
* Craig White, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 10/31/1994
* USD 27,000.00

9304102 White This is a collaborative project between Cornell and Brown
Universities. We propose to study magma genesis and evolution in St. Lucia, St.
Vincent, and Grenada through a multi-disciplinary approach that will include
field work, petrographic study, major element, trace element, Sr, Nd, Pb and O
isotope determination, and K-Ar dating. Petrographic study will include both
micro probe and laser-ablation- inductively-coupled-plasma-mass-spectrometry
studies. The immediate objectives of this study are to: (1) determine the
contribution of arc crust to the evolution of mantle- derived magmas in Grenada
and St. Lucia, (2) use the most magnesian of these magmas, some of which are
only slightly evolved since production in the mantle wedge, to investigate
degree of melting and source enrichment, and (3) determine how magma composition
has changed through time on these islands. Achieving these objectives allows us
to address several broader objectives. These are: enhanced understanding of (1)
magma generation and evolution processes in island arcs, (2) tectonic evolution
of the Caribbean region, (3) the conditions necessary for crustal assimilation
to occur or not to occur, (4) mass transport from the subducting slab to island
arc magmas, and (5) mass fluxes of incompatible elements to the deep mantle from
subduction zones. By focusing on a few localities with an improved experimental
knowledge base, and having a wide range of data, we believe we can substantially
improve earlier models. ***