* 9219220
* Molecular Analysis of RNA Polymerase I Transcription Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1997
* Louise Pape, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 03/31/1997
* USD 294,000.00

The most actively transcribed genes in any organism are those coding for the
~37S pre-ribosomal RNAs. In eukaryotes, this is accomplished by RNA polymerase I
and additional factors. How these interact is of fundamental importance. In vivo
analysis of the role of the rDNA transcription factor UBF (upstream binding
factor) in catalysis of rRNA synthesis in the yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe is
proposed. To facilitate these studies the S. pombe UBF gene is being cloned. The
first transcription extract capable of supporting accurate initiation on an S.
pombe rDNA mini-gene is now successfully established, and it is sensitive to the
action of a vertebrate rDNA enhance which specifically interacts with UBF.
Activation of the rDNA promoter in this S-100 extract is also responsive to
regulatory elements in the pombe intergenic spacer (from ~-1800 to ~-850 that
apparently act by stably binding RNA polymerase I transcriptional factors.
Factors interacting with essential rDNA promoter and intergenic regulatory
sequences will be analyzed. Our two experimental aims include: 1.) Analysis of
the activity of the S. pombe RNA polymerase I transcription factor UBF in vivo
and in vitro; 2.) Characterization of the role of regulatory sequences in the S.
pombe rDNA spacer in transcriptional activation of the rDNA promoter and
identification of interacting factors. %%% Every cell in an organism has
millions of ribosomes, the complexes where proteins are synthesized. The
function of these complexes is absolutely required for all cells, since proteins
are key determinants of cellular structure and functions. The ribosomes re
composed of both protein and nucleic acid components. My laboratory is studying
how the essential nucleic acid components of these complexes, called the
ribosomal RNAs, are produced. Our approach incorporates both genetic and
biochemical analysis of requirements for the production of the ribosomal RNAs
and analysis of the means by which a cell regulates this production.