* 9219075
* Characterization of the Type One Protein Phosphatases of    Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* John Walker, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 01/31/1997
* USD 204,000.00

9219075 Walker There are several different types of protein phosphatases in
eukaryotic cells. One class, the type one protein phosphatases (PP1) are thought
to be involved in the control of the cell cycle, protein synthesis, membrane
functions, and probably many other biochemical activities. In most multicellular
organisms there are several different isoforms of PP1. This raises several
intriguing questions about the expression, distribution, function, and
regulation of these genes and their products. This proposal focuses on a
multigene family encoding PP1 in Arabidopsis thaliana. The goal of this research
is to determine the pattern of expression and relative abundance of the PP1
genes and proteins, and analyze the regulatory subunits associated with the
different PP1 isoforms. Analysis of the PP1 genes of higher plants will enhance
our understanding of these important regulatory enzymes in a broader biological
context. %%% Control of cellular growth and differentiation is a complex process
that requires the integration of many different regulatory circuits. A common
mechanism by which cellular processes are regulated is through protein
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. This reversible modification can cause
activation, inactivation, or even a subtle modulation of biochemical function.
Although protein kinases have been studied extensively, it is evident that
protein phosphatases are equally important in controlling the biochemical
circuitry that governs a cell's function. Analysis of the protein phosphatase
genes of higher plants will enhance our understanding of these important
regulatory enzymes in a broader biological context. ***