* 9219186
* Developmental Regulation of T Cell Differentiation and      Function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Rebecca Adkins, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1996
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of the proposed studies is to understand how T cell
differentiation and function are regulated during development. Two different,
but complementary approaches will be taken to investigate this issue thoroughly.
First, the phenotypic and functional properties of peripheral T cells arising in
vivo from defined populations of fetal or adult T cell precursors will be
compared. Chimeric animals will be created in which differentiation occurs (a)
in the adult thymus after intrathymic injection of precursor cells or (b) in the
intact fetal thymus following transplantation under the host kidney capsules.
These experiments will reveal, for the first time, whether the acquisition of
immunocompetence is controlled by developmental changes in the T cell precursor
population. The second approach will be to investigate the mechanisms underlying
functional differences between neonatal and adult T cells. The roles of
cytokines, cell types, and lymphokine gene expression in the differential
lymphokine secretion patterns of neonatal and adult T cells will be examined.
This will provide novel information on the biochemical and molecular events
mediating neonatal immunoincompetence vs adult immunocompetence. Taken together,
these studies will provide valuable new insights into the development of the T
cell lineage. %%% Of central importance to understanding immunity is
understanding how the ability to mount an immune response (immunocompetence)
arises and is maintained during development. There is compelling evidence that
developmental changes in the cells that give rise to the array of adult
T-lymphocytes are important. At present, there is no clear understanding of the
mechanisms controlling T-cell developmental changes. The goals of this project
are to determine whether specific developmental changes in T-cell precursor
populations control the acquisition of immunocompetence and to study the
molecular and biochemical events responsible for functional differences between
neonatal T cells which are not immunocompetent and adult T cells which are. This
research should contribute important new information about the development of
the immune system.