* 9219209
* Infrared Measurements in the Antarctic
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Aaron Goldman, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* John T. Lynch
* 11/30/1996
* USD 225,724.00

This project uses an infrared (IR) interferometer to monitor some of the trace
constituents of the atmosphere above South Pole and McMurdo, Antarctica. The
measurements will be made in two modes: An absorption mode, using the sun as an
infrared source of IR radiation shining through the atmosphere. This technique
will allow very sensitive measurements of a number of trace constituents,
especially during the local springtime, when the antarctic ozone hole is
forming. An emission mode, using radiation emitted by the atmospheric gases
themselves. This technique is much less sensitive than the absorption mode, but
does allow critical measurements during the long, dark polar night, when the
chemistry which sets the stage for the springtime ozone depletion is taking
place. The compounds which will be measured include: hydrogen chloride, nitric
acid, chlorofluorocarbon 11 and 12, nitrous oxide, methane, ozone and chlorine
nitrate. These gases all play a role in the ozone hole and several of them are
also important greenhouse gases. This project is a precursor to the
establishment of an antarctic Network for the Detection of Stratospheric Change
(NDSC) station. When the NDSC station is established, presumably at Dome C, then
Murcray will begin to make similar measurements there. This project is jointly
funded by NSF's Office of Polar Programs and Division of Atmospheric Sciences
and also by NASA's Office of Earth Sciences and Applications.