* 9219951
* CRB: Collaborative Research: Disease as a Threat to the Biodiversity of an Endangered Plant
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Andrea Pickart, Nature Conservancy
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1997
* USD 46,796.00

Maintaining genetic diversity within an endangered species is an important goal
of conservation biology. However, the threat of disease to endangered plants has
been neglected in past studies. Disease may cause plant numbers to decline
and\or the disease may reduce the genetic diversity within a population. An
example is a white rust disease of the Menzies' wallflower, Erysimum menziesii,
an endangered plant restricted to vanishing native dune communities along the
northern California coast. Some populations of the plant suffer from the disease
and, although the wallflower has been the object of extensive research, the
destructive effect of the disease has not been investigated. Both ecological and
genetic studies are required. This research will closely examine the
relationship between the wallflower and its disease to assess if disease has
caused the plant to become endangered or is keeping the plant from recovering.
In addition, the genetic diversity within both the plant and pathogen
populations will be measured for three years and this will provide an indication
if diversity is being maintained during conservation or if there is any change
in the genetic structure. Many aspects of this research are unique. It is a
collaborative effort between The California Nature Conservancy, a conservation
management organization, and Michigan State University, a traditional basic
research institution. This partnership will provide needed cooperative effort
between basic science and applied conservation. By combining genetic studies
with population monitoring, management options specifically for
Menzies'wallflower will be addressed. In addition, this approach will introduce
a generalized strategy to assess the impact of disease on other endangered
plants. The results will provide the basis for future predictive mathematical
models which can be used to evaluate how specific conservation activities would
affect recovery. From this, conservationists will be able to choose between
management options. Included with these applied aspects is the basic study of
plant disease in natural populations. This project will expand the discipline by
introducing a new type of model system, one with different attributes than those
currently under study.