* 9219195
* The 16th Annual Symposium "Plant Response to Celluar        Dehydration During Environmental Stress", January 28-30,    1993, in Riverside, California
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1993
* Elizabeth Bray, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 12/31/1993
* USD 3,500.00

The Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, University of California,
Riverside (UCR) has held a symposium each of the past 15 years on timely topics
in plant physiology. The 16th Annual Symposium, entitled "Plant Response to
Cellular Dehydration During Environmental Stress," will be held January 28-30,
1993, and will be organized by Professors Timothy J. Close and Elizabeth A.
Bray. The objective of the 1993 Symposium is to bring together scientists
working in the area of environmental stress, with the intention that discussion
and presentations will lead to a greater understanding of cellular,
physiological, and genetic aspects of stress adaptation. Speakers, especially
young investigators, from abroad and other institutions in the U.S. will be
invited. Time for discussion and poster presentation is allotted. Presented
papers, as well as poster abstracts, will be published rapidly and
inexpensively. Riverside is an ideal location for this symposium because: (1)
there are a substantial number of faculty here and in Southern California with
research interests in environmental stress; (2) Riverside is easily accessible;
(3) UCR has built a reputation for successful symposia; (4) the close proximity
to the 1993 Gordon Research Conference on Temperature Stress in Plants which
will follow this conference.