* 9219031
* Molecular Analysis of Photoregulated Development
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1997
* Lawrence Yager, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 03/31/1997
* USD 305,000.00

Conidiation (asexual sporulation) in the filamentous fungus, Aspergillus
nidulans, involves the formation of multicellular differentiated structures that
produce pigmented, haploid conidia at precisely scheduled times. It has been
shown that light is necessary for conidiation, but will only elicit development
if irradiation occurs during a critical period of development. Furthermore,
conidiation is induced by red light and suppressed by an immediate shift to far
red light, a property that is characteristic of phytochrome mediated responses
observed in plants. Several different classes of mutants that affect light
dependent conidiation have been identified. Some mutants abolish light
sensitivity, allowing conidiation to occur in the absence of light, while others
affect the ability to conidiate at specific wavelengths. Thus, it appears that
light signals are perceived in A. nidulans by a phytochrome like photoreceptor
that transmits information by an unknown mechanism to genes that control asexual
development. The objective of this proposal is to develop a detailed
understanding of the mechanisms that regulate light mediated conidiation in this
organism. The major aim of this work is to identify and characterize the red
light photoreceptor through the molecular cloning of phytochrome related
sequences. A phytochrome like clone has been isolated and experiments are
proposed to compare the sequences and function of the A. nidulans phytochrome
gene with known phytochrome genes from plants. These experiments include
determining the DNA sequence of both genomic and cDNA clones, deducing the
pattern of transcriptional expression, following the pattern of translational
expression through the use of gene fusions and phytochrome specific antibodies,
and examining the phenotype of gene disruptants. Another aim of this work is to
identify interactions that occur within the photo transduction pathway. Mutants
have been isolated in a cloned gene (acoD) that affect sensitivity to red light.
Experiments are proposed to examine the transcriptional and translational
activity of acoD in different growth and illumination conditions, to identify at
the nucleotide level the mutational defects that cause red light insensitivity,
and to identify gene interactions through the isolation and analysis of
suppressor mutations. These studies will help elucidate the complex regulatory
mechanisms that affect cellular differentiation is this eukaryote.