* 9219420
* Developmental Regulation of Human B-like Globin Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1993,03/31/1997
* Joyce Lloyd, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 03/31/1997
* USD 368,075.00

The ultimate goal of this research is to understand the molecular mechanisms
that account for the switch from human fetal gamma to adult beta-like globin
gene expression, a paradigm for the study of developmental control involving
both gene activation and repression. The specific objectives of this proposal
are to identify regulatory sequences involved in human gamma- to beta- globin
gene switching using transgenic mice, and to isolate the transcription factor
gammaPE. The gamma-globin gene promoter plays an important role in down-
regulating the beta-globin gene in the embryo. Using transgenic mice, the
element responsible for this silencing mechanism will be identified. GammaPE is
a negative regulator of gamma-globin gene expression, and may therefore be
important in down-regulating the gene in the adult. The role of gammaPE will be
tested in transgenic mice by deleting and inserting gammaPE binding sites near
the gamma-globin gene. A cDNA for gammaPE will be obtained by screening
erythroid and brain expression libraries using gammaPE binding sites as a probe,
or gammaPE will be purified from nuclear extracts and subsequently cloned.
Isolation of a gammaPE clone will allow for more detailed examination of the
functional role of gammaPE in future studies. %%% Elucidation of this regulated
switch in gene expression can act as a paradigm for developmental control of
gene expression.