* 9219207
* Interaction of SV40 with MHC Class I Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Leonard Norkin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/1995
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to analyze the role of MHC class I proteins in the
entry of simian virus 40 (SV40) into the cell and its targeting to appropriate
intracellular compartments. MHC class I proteins were recently shown by this
laboratory to be an essential component of the cell surface receptor for SV40.
One major concern is to confirm preliminary findings which suggest that SV40
remains associated with MHC class I proteins during and after its entry in the
cell. The functional significance of this association for virus entry and
transport will be evaluated and the residues on the MHC class I proteins that
might be important in these processes will be identified. Of particular interest
is whether SV40 is transported to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in association
with MHC class I proteins. This is important because MHC class I proteins
acquire antigenic peptide fragments in the ER and because SV40 provides the only
precedent for a targeting pathway from the plasma membrane that can access the
ER. Thus, this study may enable the evaluation of the important but as yet
unsubstantiated possibility that MHC class I proteins recycle to the ER. Whereas
this laboratory has confirmed that SV40 accumulates in the ER prior to
replication in the nucleus, it is not certain that transport to the ER is part
of the pathway leading to productive infection. Nor is it certain whether or not
virus entry leading to infection occurs by receptor-mediated endocytosis via
coated pits. Experiments are proposed to address these issues. In addition, the
rate at which MHC class I proteins are spontaneously internalized into control
cells, the rate at which SV40 enters cells, and the effect of SV40 adsorbed to
the cell surface on the rate of entry of MHC class I proteins will be measured.
This will permit the determination of whether or not SV40 induces the
internalization of the MHC class I proteins to gain entry into the cell, rather
than entering passively in association with them. %%% These studies are likely
to be of general significance for what they might reveal about the natural in
vivo activities of the crucially important MHC class I proteins. These molecules
are best known for the central roles they play in immunity. They are widely
recognized for presenting endogenously synthesized antigenic peptide fragments
for recognition by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), thus playing an essential
role in host cellular defense mechanisms. They also play a central role in the
thymic selection of the T cell repertoire and the establishment of tolerance.
Nevertheless, many important questions about their activities remain unanswered.
The studies proposed here will provide important information about their
recycling into cells and intracellular targeting. They will also provide
important information about the little studied, but potentially significant,
pathway of targeting from the cell surface to the ER.