* 9219356
* Regulation of fatty acid desaturation in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1994
* Christopher Somerville, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 11/30/1994
* USD 85,000.00

The goal of the project is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms which regulate
the degree of unsaturation of membrane and storage lipids. We will address this
question by measuring the effect of variation in developmental stage and
environmental conditions on the expression of several recently isolated genes
encoding fatty acid desaturases from the plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The
existence of regulatory mechanisms which act at the level of direct enzyme
activation or deactivation will be examined by measuring the effects on lipid
composition in transgenic plants which contain higher than normal levels of
desaturase activity due to overexpression of cloned desaturase genes. The
spatial organization of lipid desaturation within cells will be elucidated using
anti-desaturase antibodies to localize the enzymes by immunogold electron
microscopy. Finally, we will attempt to isolate genes for several additional
desaturases by map-based cloning methods based on the availability of a
comprehensive collection of mutants of Arabidopsis. %%% Plant fatty acids
provide about one third of the calories in human diets and are also used for a
wide variety of technical products raging from synthesis of nylon to cosmetics.
In addition, the ability of many plants to withstand exposure to temperature
extremes is thought to be controlled by the fatty acid composition of plant
membranes. The experiments proposed here are designed to provided detailed
information about the factors which regulate plant fatty acid composition. This
information may be useful in permitting genetic modification of the fatty acid
composition of plants so that they produce edible oils with advantageous dietary
qualities, expanded technical uses or enhanced ability to withstand temperature
extremes.