* 9219353
* Structure and Permeability of the Outer Mitochondrial       Membrane
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Carmen Mannella, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/1995
* USD 214,906.00

This project employs tools of Biophysics to answer fundamental questions about
the structure and function of the gated membrane channel, VDAC or mitochondrial
porin, which is formed by a 31-kD protein in the mitochondrial outer membrane.
The main technique used is high-resolution electron microscopy and computer-
based image analysis. The channel spontaneously forms planar crystalline arrays
when the outer mitochondrial membrane of the fungus Neurospora crassa is treated
with phospholipase A2. The image processing technique of correlation averaging
is used to obtain projection images with resolution approaching 10 angstroms
from these two-dimensional crystals embedded in either vitreous ice or the
sugar, aurothioglucose. Three-dimensional structures are obtained by combining
projection data from variously tilted crystals. The phospholipase-induced
crystals are polymorphic, i.e. there are several types, and the occurrence of
certain types correlates with exposure to effectors of the channel's gating
properties. Thus, it is hoped that comparison of the channel structures in the
different crystal polymorphs will shed light on the conformational changes
underlying gating. In order to overcome the 10 angstrom resolution limit, needed
to directly visualize protein secondary structure, attempts to reconstitute the
channel protein into larger, better ordered two-dimensional crystal are to be
undertaken. Also, three-dimensional crysal trails will be initiated using
protein overexpressed in bacteria. If successful, this will open the way for
x-ray crystallographic studies. In the meantime, complementary information about
the folding of the channel polypeptide will be provided by circular dichroism
studies and by immunolabelling of the crystals with Fab fragments of sequence-
specific, anti-peptide antibodies. %%% The cell and its internal compartments
are bounded by membranes composed of lipids and proteins. The lipids form a
bilayer sheath that is impenetrable to polar ions and molecules. Proteins make
it possible for the different compartments to communicate, i.e., exchange
material. For example, some proteins form channels, water-filled passageways
across the membrane bilayer which open and close (or gate) in response to
different stimuli. The basis structure of channels and the molecular
mechanism(s) of their gating are only poorly understood. In this project, we are
studying a channel that occurs on the surface of the intracellular organelle
that is the cell's powerplant, the mitochondrion. This channel is switched by
transmembrane electrical potentials between states with different degrees of
openness, and this gating appears to be controlled by other proteins in the
mitochondrion. Using electron crystallography and other biophysical and
biochemical approaches, we are determining the three-dimensional structure of
the channel in different states, in order to understand how it is formed how it
opens and closes.