* 9219305
* Genetic Studies of infection-related morphogenesis in       Magnaporthe grisea
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* John Hamer, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 293,000.00

This research concerns the morphological and biochemical specialization
demonstrated by the rice blast fungus, Magnaporthe grisea. Asexual spores of M.
grisea attach to plant surfaces, initiate growth through the emergence of a germ
tube, and differentiate an infection structure called an appressorium (1). The
appressorium is a specialized cell capable of generating enormous turgor
pressures that facilitate the direct penetration of the plant epidermis (2).
Large, swollen, infectious hyphae rapidly appear within and between plant cells
(3). Finally, surface borne conidiophores produce numerous asexual spores to
reinitiate the disease cycle. The goal of this research is to understand the
biochemical events that key disease-related morphogenesis in M. grisea. Genetic
and biochemical investigations can identify components in this process that
could elucidate central processes in fungal cell morphogenesis and may provide
strategies for the development of novel disease control measures. Previous
investigations identified a genetic locus termed SMO1 (4). Phenotypic analysis
suggests that the SMO gene product plays a central role in establishing the
polarity of cell growth and morphogenesis in particular disease-related cell
types of M. grisea and thus Smo-mutations reduce pathogenicity towards rice.
Additionally, mutations at this locus occur at a high frequency in certain
genetic backgrounds of M. grisea. The SMO locus has been cloned by a novel
mapped based cloning procedure developed by this laboratory for M. grisea. The
studied have demonstrated that SMO is closely linked to chromosomal duplication.
To advance the understanding of the SMO locus and its relationship to fungal
growth and disease-related morphogenesis, three related experimental strategies
will be used: (1) A fine structure analysis of the SMO locus and smo-minus. (2)
Cytological and biochemical identification of the SMO protein and more refined
characterization of the duplication around the SMO locus. (3) The isolation and
characterization of additional mutations affecting disease-related morphogenesis
in M. grisea. %%% The fungus Magnaporthe grisea is an economically significant
pathogen of rice. The goal of this research is to increase our understanding of
the process by which this fungus undergoes the structural changes necessary to
initiate an infection. The investigator will be studying a gene which he has
already shown to function in the development by the fungus of a specialized
infection structure and will identify and characterize other mutations affecting
morphogenesis related to the infection process.