* 9219387
* Structure and Molecular Mechanism of the Mitochondrial      Tricarboxylate Transport Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Ronald Kaplan, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 07/31/1996
* USD 249,000.00

The long-range objective of this project is to understand, the structure and
function of the mitochondrial tricarboxylate transport protein. This protein
catalyzes a tricarboxylate- H+/dicarboxylate antiport across the mitochondrial
inner membrane, an action which is essential to the energy metabolism of the
liver parenchymal cell. Experiments will be conducted to: 1) isolate,
characterize and sequence the cDNA that encodes the entire rat liver
mitochondrial CTP in order to deduce the complete amino acid sequence of this
carrier; 2) elucidate the topography of the CTP within the mitochondrial inner
membrane via the use of site- specific polyclonal antibodies, in situ
proteolysis, and vectorial labeling; and 3) begin to identify and localize
specific amino acid residues which form the substrate binding site within the
CTP through the use of both active-site directed and group-directed probes in
combination with amino acid sequence analysis of modified domains. The proposed
studies are both necessary and fundamental for an in depth understanding of the
molecular mechanisms that biological systems utilize to transport anions across
membranes and thereby meet metabolic meeds. %%% The aim of this project is to
understand, at the molecular and chemical levels, the structure and function of
the mitochondrial citrate transport protein (CTP). This protein transports
citrate and malate across the mitochondrial inner membrane and is essential to
the energy metabolism of hepatic cells. In order to accomplish this aim we will
conduct experiments to: 1) deduce the complete amino acid sequence of the rat
liver mitochondrial CTP; 2) determine how this transport protein is folded and
orientated within the mitochondrial inner membrane; and 3) begin to identify and
localize specific amino acid residues which are essential to the transport
mechanism and which form the citrate and malate binding site(s). These studies
are fundamental to an in depth understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
biological systems utilize to transport molecules across membranes to meet their
metabolic needs. More generally, these investigations are expected to provide a
significant advance in our knowledge about how transport proteins work.