* 9219670
* Dynamics of Cortical Actin in Fibroblasts
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Julian Heath, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1996
* USD 270,168.00

Moving cells show a pronounced rearward flow of membrane and cytoskeletal
structures from the marginal lamellipodia through the lamellar cortex. The
hypothesis to be explored is that this flow is an essential mechanism of cell
locomotion and that it is driven, in part, by an actomyosin-like contraction of
a more centrally placed lamellar cortex. This will be studied using computer-
enhanced video microscopy in combination with immunocytochemistry, single-cell
electron microscopy, and fluorescence marking to examine the movement and the
three dimensional organization and flow of actin filaments and bundles in
protruding lamellipodia. The mechanisms of the flow of the dorsal cortical
microfilament sheath of the lamella will be examined using specific markers,
photobleaching, and myosin II competitors. The recent discovery that stress
fibers form in concert with cortical flow will be extended to examine the
mechanism of stress fiber elongation and the development of a sarcomeric
organization of cytoskeletal proteins in fibers. The rebuilding of the cortex
and stress fibers after elimination by cytochalasin will be examined. These
studies will advance the field of cell motility by contributing to understanding
of the mechanism of cellular migration and its role in the morphogenesis of
matrix and tissues. %%% Cellular motility is a fundamental and critical property
of virtually all organisms. This project focuses on "ameboid" or "crawling"
motility, in which cells on a solid surface extend projections out in the
direction in which they are moving and appear to "pull themselves up" to those
projections. This form of cellular motility occurs in virtually all animals
(invertebrate and vertebrate), and is critical for morphogenesis during
development, regeneration and tissue remodelling after injury, host defense
mechanisms, and other vital functions, and also occurs in cells of other phyla
(e.g., protozoa, slime molds). The approach to be used is to correlate high
resolution video-enhanced microscopic observations on the motility of living
cells with both ultrastructural observations at the EM level on the same cell
and with immunocytochemical localization of specific proteins also on the same
cell. Very few other laboratories in the world use this difficult but highly
informative approach. These studies will contribute to our understanding of the
molecular organization and mechanism of the machinery of cell motility.