* 9219788
* Carbon Dioxide Generation in the Soil-Vadose Continuum: Substrate Characteristics and Residence Times
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Susan Trumbore, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/1996
* USD 136,000.00

Fixation of atmospheric CO2 by plants and mineralization of the fixed C (CO2
production) by respiring biological communities link the soil and atmospheric C
reservoirs in a dynamic equilibrium. Resent hydrogeological research has shown
that CO2 production also occurs in subsoil vadose zones and that its short-term
and long- term impacts on the terrestrial-atmospheric C balance can be
substantial. Therefore the effort to predict the consequences of perturbations
to the soil C reservoir must now be extended to subsoil vadose zones. This means
that controls on CO2 production in the entire soil-vadose continuum must be
identified the understood. One key control on subsurface CO2 production is the
availability of organic C to support respiration. Here we will study
characteristics and mean residence times (MRT) of this C, and how these
parameters vary in two contrasting geologic settings beneath temperate
grasslands. Determination of the 14C age of the CO2 produced at various depths
will identify modern, pedogenic, and ancient C sources, provide estimates of
depth variation of MRT of the C sources, and thereby also provide estimates of
the time required production in the soil-vadose continuum. We hypothesize that
it if possible to isolate and characterize a fraction of C in soil-vadose
geologic material which can be identified as respiration substrate by its C
isotope signature. Such identification would yield new insight into the types of
organic C serving as respiration substrates and their evolution with depth. It
may also provide methodological basis for construction of substrate MRT-vs-depth
functions using a relatively simple isolation procedure.