* 9219595
* 40Ar/39Ar Dating of Feldspars from the KTB Deep Drill Hole: Insight into Post-Orogenic Thermal Relaxation and AR        Diffusion Systematics During Closure
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Peter Zeitler, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 02/29/1996
* USD 103,191.00

9219595 Zeitler The 40Ar/39Ar dating of feldspar has enormous potential for
helping geologists determine quantitative temperature-time paths over the range
of 150oC to 350oC. Such time-temperature information over such a range of low
temperatures is of great importance to scientists evaluating such issues as the
architecture and evolution of the crust or the origin and evolution of
sedimentary basins and their attendant water and hydrocarbon resources. However,
to this point the technique has only been tested in short-term laboratory
heating experiments and in presumably well-characterized geological contexts.
Now that sophisticated interpretative models have been developed for use in
quantitative thermochronometry, it is important that the 40Ar/39Ar dating of
feldspar be evaluated in a slow-cooling geological environment. The KTB deep
drill hole in Germany offers an ideal natural laboratory with which to examine
the closure of feldspar to diffusive Ar loss during slow cooling, as this hole
already has reached temperatures which overlap the closure interval for
feldspars and is projected to reach ~300oC. In this project, a suite of samples
from deep in the KTB hole will be examined which will permit the principal
investigator to view the process of Ar closure as it is happening, and would be
an invaluable benchmark for virtually all applied studies which use feldspar
thermochronometry. At the same time, the understanding of 40Ar/39Ar systematics
in feldspar is sufficiently good that study of shallow samples from the KTB hole
will permit the principal investigator to monitor in detail the post-orogenic
cooling of the local crust; he will assess the relative roles that thermal
relaxation and denudation have played, and will look for evidence of even a very
mild Tertiary thermal event that might be responsible for the high gradients
seen in the KTB hole. Such information will be highly useful for models of
thermal evolution of the lithosphere du ring and after mountain building. ***