* 9219256
* Biochemical and Molecular Investigations of the Transductionof Blue Light Signals in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Winslow Briggs, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 12/31/1996
* USD 270,000.00

Blue light photoreception plays an important role in the regulation of higher
plant development. Blue light photoreceptors mediate directional growth toward
the light on the one hand (phototropism) and the extremely rapid inhibition of
growth of stem elongation that is a part of the early de-etiolation response of
emerging seedlings on the other. There is strong evidence that these two
processes proceed through separate and independent signal transduction pathways.
The goals of this research are: (1) to isolate, characterize, and obtain
sequence information on a plasma membrane protein that is phosphorylated as a
consequence of blue light irradiation, and that appears to be involved at an
early stage in phototropism, and (2) to isolate, characterize, and obtain
sequence information on a protein cross-reactive with several antibodies
directed against animal intermediate filament proteins, a protein that may be
involved in the rapid inhibition of growth. Arabidopsis thaliana mutants are
available in both pathways, making Arabidopsis the organism of choice for these
studies. It is expected that complete sequence information will be obtained on
these two A. thaliana proteins involved respectively in two different blue
light-induced signal transduction pathways. %%% Blue light is an important
environmental signal in plant growth and development. It stimulates plants to
grow toward light and regulates the elongation of young seedlings as they emerge
from the soil. This research will take advantage of the power of molecular
genetics to study the structure and role of two specific proteins involved in
early stages of the response of plants to blue light. The results will be
important contributions to our understanding of the molecular basis of plant
responses to the environment.