* 9219487
* Using Cosmogenic Isotopes to Determine Rates of Denudation  and Sediment Transport in Large Drainage Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Thomas Dunne, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1995
* USD 98,988.00

This two year project will demonstrate whether measuring cosmogenic isotope
abundances in sediment provides a useful and efficient way to determine basin-
scale denudation rates and sediment fluxes. It has three specific goals: 1)
evaluate the simple model we have developed for interpreting the abundance of
in-situ-produced cosmogenic nuclides in sediments; 2) use isotope abundance to
characterize the variability in sediment production and routing in mesoscale
(1000km2) drainage basins in the Oregon Coast Range; 3) measure isotope
concentrations in sediments carried by some of the world's largest rivers and
compare "cosmogenic" denudation rates with those calculated by other means. At
the conclusion, we will have determined the applicability of our interpretive
model and we will understand better the dynamics of sediment production and
transport in the Coast Range. The study will begin with collection of quartz-
rich sediment samples from hillslopes and stream channels in the western Oregon
Coast Range. We will sample along the drainages, beginning in first-order
tributaries and continuing to the trunk streams. Quartz will be separated from
these samples and the abundance of in situ-produced cosmogenic isotopes (26Al
and 14C) will be measured. Isotope abundances will be interpreted using the
mathematical model that we have developed and will be compared to the rates of
sediment production, transport, and storage which we and others have quantified
through prior field studies in the Coast Range. In addition to Coast Range
samples, we plan to analyze sediment collected by us and by others from rivers
draining a variety of geomorphic and hydrologic provinces. These sample sites
will be selected to represent areas which have significantly different
denudation rates. They will include sites in the Amazon Basin, where we are
currently studying sediment transport by more traditional means, as well as
sites on other large rivers where we have experience or contacts resulting from
the Amazon work