* 9219519
* The Relationship of Climate to the Stable Isotopic Composi- tion of Hackberry (Celtis) Endocarps: a Potential Means of  Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction in the Great Plains
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Ronald Amundson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1996
* USD 116,318.00

The long-term goal of the proposed integrated research is to exploit the
peculiar composition of hackberry (Celtis) endocarps for an isotopic approach to
paleoenvironmental reconstructions. This project will quantify how the stable C
and O isotopic composition of organic and inorganic components in the endocarps
reflect environmental conditions and how genetic variability affects these
relationships. Endocarps of Celtis fruit mainly consist of aragonite, but also
contain smaller amounts of organic C. The high mineral content may be one reason
why Celtis endocarps are a common, and well-preserved, plant remnant in Cenozoic
sediments of the Great Plains. We propose to conduct experiments to determine
the effect of individual environmental parameters (light intensity, water
potential, temperature, humidity) on the delta C 13 and delta O 18 values of
various plant components and on the isotopic composition of organic matter and
carbonate in Celtis endocarps. The present relationship of endocarp isotope
ratios to regional climate will be examined by collecting Celtis fruit, tissue,
and climate data, from many locations in the United States. We will establish
predictive relationships between climate and stable isotope values by sampling a
subset of Celtis trees from a USDA experiment involving more than 120 sources of
germplasm. These experiments at 12 sites in the United States span the entire
north-south temperature range as well as the east-west rainfall and atmospheric
water deficit ranges. The effects of diagenesis on the isotope ratios, and its
implications for the use of Celtis in Cenozoic paleoclimatic studies, will be
examined via short-term experiments. Should these studies prove encouraging, we
will then submit a proposal to begin a second phase of the project in which we
will collect, and isotopically analyze, endocarps from Holocene to Oligocene
sediments of the Great Plains.