* 9219891
* Studies of the Relationship between the Climatic Tempera-   tures and the D/H and 13C/12C Ratios in Trees, with PossibleApplications for Retrieval of the Earth's Past Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1996
* Samuel Epstein, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 04/30/1996
* USD 249,919.00

This award supports a project designed to establish the relationship between
environmental temperature and the Deuterium/Hydrogen (D/H) ratio in
unexchangeable hydrogen in cellulose extracted from trees from locations
covering a wide range of climatic conditions. The project will ascertain to what
degree factors other than temperature affect the Deuterium/Hydrogen (D/H) ratio.
Among these might be humidity, growth history, the nature of the root system and
its relationship to the source water used by the trees, and generally the
relationship between the D/H ratio in cellulose and the hydrology of the area.
The collecting sites are located in Oregon, California, and Manitoba, Canada.
The resolution of these factors will allow the retrieval of climatic information
from many trees from different locations. The Deuterium/Hydrogen records
currently indicate unexpectedly that the rate of global warming is greater in
the 19th century than in the 20th century. This is contrary to what is expected
if global warming were directly related to the increase in atmospheric C02. The
confirmation of this result is critical to our understanding of the role that
C02 plays in affecting the earth's climate.