* 9219712
* Molecular Analysis of PRP Insolubilization and Wound-inducedExpression
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1994
* Mary Tierney, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 03/31/1994
* USD 100,000.00

The plant cell wall is an important cellular structure that has numerous
biological and physical roles during plant growth. This structure is dynamic and
changes as a consequence of growth, cellular differentiation and interactions
with the environment. The long term goals of the proposed research are to
determine the function of proline-rich cell wall proteins (PRPs) during plant
growth and development and to identify the factors responsible for their
controlled expresion. PRPs are expressed in specific cell types and are induced
by wounding in a specific plant tissues. In addition, these proteins become
cross-linked within the cell wall, a process which appears to be stimulated by
physical damage. However, the sequences required for the transcriptional
regulation of these genes or the amino acids important for their
insolubilization within the cell wall are poorly understood. The specific goals
of this award to identify specific regions within the SbPRP1 and SbPRP2
promoters which are required for the wound-inducible expression of these genes
in soybean and to identify amino acids which play a critical role in the
insolubilization of these proteins within the cell wall. The use of promoter/GUS
in stably transformed plants will allow PIs to distinguish between sequences
which regulate the expression of these genes during development and in response
to physical damage. In addition, Dr. Tierney will be able to investigate which
cell types within wounded tissue are capable of responding to the wound- induced
signals which ultimately result in SbPRP1 and 2 expression. She will also
investigate the specific amino acids which are important for the insolubilzation
of these proteins within the cell wall. The use of "synthetic" PRPs will make it
possible to identify amino acids capable of forming cross-links within the cell
wall, the types of interactions involved, and whether these amino acids are
important for insolubilization of these proteins in all cell types. These
studies will also describe the substrates for key enzymes involved in cell wall
matrix formation and will serve as a starting point for the identification of
these proteins.