* 9219140
* Electronic Properties in Quantized Space Charge Layers in   Group IV Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1994
* Phillip Stiles, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/1994
* USD 50,000.00

A one year program of determing the electronic properties of macroscopic and
mesoscopic systems composed of the group IV elements will be carried out. Having
determined the properties of Si in such configurations, and having done some
preliminary work of Ge MOSFETs as well, concentration will first be on
investigations of the Ge:Si alloys in the Ge rich end of the phase diagram and
then proceed to further studies of the Ge surface. If time allows the SiC system
will be studied, which is unique in having many different stacking orders and
band-gaps. A physical construct that will aid the testing of surface conduction
with no lithography needed on the surface of the sample is being developed; it
will all be on the probe. The properties in a MOSFET, quantum well or pristine
surface configuration will be tested. %%% Advanced materials (that is those
materials which have not been studied before or previously known materials that
are studied in new configurations and hence their behavior is governed by this
configuration), their properties the phenomena that occur in them will be
studied. One often learns to understand these two important aspects by comparing
two similar events or materials and determining what causes the difference. This
study compares and contrasts many similar materials that have been the
foundation of modern electronics or will be in the future. Alloys and elemental
forms of carbon (diamond), silicon, and germanium will be looked at with
standard tools and a new one invented that allow a quick determination of the
surface conductance properties.