* 9219495
* Muscle Development in Squid:  An Integrated Analysis of     Muscle Fiber Specialization
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1997
* William Kier, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 02/28/1997
* USD 298,000.00

The development and differentiation of two muscle fiber types in the squid
Sepioteuthis lessoniana will be studied. First, transmission electron microscopy
will be used to document the differentiation of the cross-striated muscle cells
of the tentacles and the obliquely striated muscle cells of the arms. Second,
the differentiation of these two muscle cell types will be correlated with
behavioral changes that occur during development and growth using high speed
video recording of prey capture. Third, immunocytochemical techniques will be
used to document the pattern and timing of expression of alpha-actinin and
paramyosin, proteins important in determining the dimensions and organization of
the muscle cell filaments. This integrated approach to muscle fiber
differentiation will provide the most comprehensive account of cephalopod muscle
development to date. It will afford a unique opportunity to study the transition
between two muscle striation types and will examine the significance of the
structural characteristics of muscle cells specialized for a particular
function. In addition, it will examine the mechanisms controlling the assembly
of two distinct muscle cells types during development and will, therefore,
provide fundamental insight into the mechanisms of muscle cell growth and
development. Because the study will integrate analyses at several levels of
organization, the physiological significance of the diversity of structural and
biochemical components of muscle can be explored precisely.