* 9219848
* Dissertation Research: Systematic Cultural Change in the    U. S. Prehistoric Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1992,04/30/1994
* NONE NONE, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/1994
* USD 7,358.00

Under the direction of Dr. Margaret Nelson, Mr Michael Diehl will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will study materials at a number of U.S.
museums which house archaeological collections from the Mogollon region of New
Mexico. The goal of the work is to examine the emergence of inequality within
social groups over time. Dr. Diehl will focus on the Early and Late Pithouse
periods because over this time period clear changes in subsistence and
settlement strategy are documented in the archaeological record. Pithouse
peoples started as highly moble hunters and collectors and over time appear to
have settled in larger groupings. Sites were occupied for longer periods of time
and dependence on agriculture appears to have increased. In many parts of the
world similar changes are correlated with the emergence of social inequality
among domestic household units. It is unclear whether a this phenomenon occurred
among Pithouse peoples and Mr. Diehl will examine this question. More
importantly, he will try to discern the underlying mechanisms which underlay the
changes which took place and try to determine precise cause and effect
relationships. To accomplish this, he will examine excavation documents,
botanical remains, ceramics and "luxury" items from a series of sites which span
this time period. In this way he can reconstruct changes in subsistence,
settlement and social differentiation. This research is important for several
reasons. Social inequality is both a fact of life and a cause of problems which
face many societies today. Anthropologists wish to understand how this
phenomenon originally arose and this research will address the issue. It will
also assist in the training of a promising young scientist.