* 9219586
* Phenylpropanoid Metabolism:  The Lignan Branch
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Norman Lewis, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 08/31/1996
* USD 256,000.00

Lignans and neolignans are an ever-increasingly important class of compounds
ubiquitous throughout the plant kingdom, whose rather remarkable plant defense,
phytoalexin, cell-division promoting and pharmaceutical properties are only now
beginning to be fully recognized. Although they are most often found
enantiomerically pure, the mechanisms by which their achiral precursors undergo
stereoselective coupling, and their subsequent postcoupling enantiospecific
transformations, have eluded definition for several decades. This proposal
addresses the essential unknown biochemistry of major class of phenylpropanoid
metabolites, the lack of knowledge of which has placed an enormous constraint on
our ability to study this area of metabolism at the gene level. The prognosis
is, however, excellent: recent studies in this laboratory resulted in the
discovery of a highly unusual, novel coupling enzyme which directly and
sterioselective couples achiral precursors: it is not a typical H2O2-dependent
peroxidase. Thus, one can systematically determine its mechanism of action and
to define the scope of the transformations that can be engendered by this
enzyme. In a similar vein, the enantiospecificity of post- coupling
transformations can be systematically examined. Consequently, this study will
bring order to this apparently chaotic branch of phenylpropanoid metabolism in
terms of elucidating biochemical pathways involved. Following purification of
the enzymes of interest to apparent homogeneity, the application of
immunocytochemical methodologies will permit us to determine the subcellular
location and tissue specificity of lignan formation, and whether metabolite
channeling into lignan and lignin pathways occurs. %%% Plants are well known for
their ability to produce novel chemical compounds which can be utilized in both
medical and industrial use by humans. Often chemical synthesis of these
compounds is impractical due the detailed chemistry of some of the compounds.
However, by first purifying the enzymes in the plant essential steps in the
biochemical pathway are understood and often an essential step in the chemical
synthesis can be overcome. Furthermore, this leads to isolation of the genes
responsible for the enzyme production and the capability to express the compound
in other plants. The class of compounds called lignans are novel biochemicals
which can be use an novel biomaterials. This research will study the enzymes and
the reactions necessary for their synthesis.