* 9219742
* Functions of Hormones and Circadian Rhythms in the          Regulation of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1993,10/31/1995
* James Truman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 10/31/1995
* USD 227,360.00

To be adaptive, an animal's behavior must change depending on the organism's
physiological or developmental state. Dr. Truman's research is directed towards
understanding both external (e.g. circadian rhythms) factors and internal (e.g.
steroid and peptide hormones) factors that influence the central nervous system
to regulate behavior. Using a relatively simple invertebrate model system, he is
unraveling the mechanisms by which ecdysteroids, a class of steroid hormones,
affect the release of eclosion hormone, a neuropeptide, to orchestrate changes
in behavior. Dr. Truman has identified four neurons that are responsible for all
of the eclosion hormone found in the central nervous system. He will now focus
on the cellular properties of these neurons. Using state of the art
electrophysiological and anatomical techniques, Dr Truman will define the
mechanisms that control the release of this peptide, and then determine how it
acts on the central nervous system to evoke the stereotyped behavior changes. In
addition, he will employ a different invertebrate model system to examine the
importance of circadian control in controlling behavior. The results from this
research will provide novel insights into the relationship between the
neuroendocrine system and behavior. These data serve as the foundation for the
development and application of practical procedures in controlling agricultural
and medical insect pests.