* 9220759
* Coordination of Leaf Physiology and Morphology with         Variations in Resources Available to Two Neotropical Tree   Species
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Stephen Mulkey, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 08/31/1996
* USD 193,504.00

We propose to examine the hypothesis that plant resources are allocated to
maximize carbon gain and productivity under the constraints imposed by the
seasonality of moisture and irradiance. Lifespan, mass per area, nitrogen
concentration, area per plant mass, area-based construction costs, and
assimilation capacity of leaves will be examined as determinants of productivity
(relative growth rate) during the dry season and wet season in Panama. These
features have been hypothesized to be mutually supporting, interdependent, and
casually interrelated. Variation in leaf features will be documented over light
gradients within the canopies of mature evergreen tropical species, and among
seedlings of these species in an experimental common garden with a factorial
design of contrasting levels of light and water. These species encompass
considerable variation in leaf longevity, while producing new leaves in seasons
of contrasting water and light availability. As such they allow the examination
of specific predictions about how functional characters vary in response to
variation in the opportunity for carbon gain. Studies will be conducted at the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI) using a construction crane for
access to the canopy of a tropical dry forest. Garden treatments and canopy
trees will be followed for three years. These will be the first comprehensive
data for within-canopy physiological variation, and the first comparison of
seedlings and canopy trees for leaf longevity and function in tropical species.
These studies will demonstrate the potential for selection to produce
coordinated responses among leaf characters to short-term and long-term
variation in resources. If functional relationships among these features prove
to be tightly coordinated, such physiological syndromes will provide an
empirical link between leaf and whole-plant processes of growth and
reproduction. The canopies of tropical trees provide some of the steepest
resource gradients known with respect to light, humidity, leaf water, and
possibly nutrient, and thus are a model system to assess the relationships among
functional characteristics. Because of the great concern over tropical
deforestation, there is a pressing need to understand physiological syndromes
associated with species capable of rapid regeneration.