* 9220590
* Theoretical and Experimental Studies of Liquid-X Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Stuart Rice, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Lesser Blum
* 06/30/1996
* USD 993,200.00

Professor Stuart A. Rice is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to continue his studies involving liquid-liquid,
and liquid-vapor interfaces. Rice will use a combination of theory and
experiment to perform studies of: 1) the molecular packing and properties of
several phases of liquid supported monolayers; 2) the influence of a monolayer
on the structure of the adjacent region of the supporting liquid; 3) the
influence of the monolayer on the distribution of solutes in the adjacent region
of the supporting liquid; and 4) the structural consequences of segregation of
the components in a liquid-vapor interface of a metallic mixture. Experimental
studies will involve the use of grazing incidence X-ray diffraction and Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy. Simulations will involve the use of Molecular
Dynamics and Monte Carlo techniques as well as Car-Parinello theory. %%% Very
little is known about the sturcture of the interface between two immiscible
phases. Many chemical and biological phenomena depend on the nature of this
interface. For example, the interface between long chain amphiphiles and water
is a model for biological membranes which occur in the cell wall. Professor Rice
is using a combination of theoretical and experimental methods which have only
recently become available to explore the detailed structure of these phase
boundaries and the factors which influence this structure.