* 9220573
* A Novel Mechanism of Ribosomal Protein Modulation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Margaret Johnson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1994
* USD 40,000.00

The tobacco, human and two Arabidopsis genes for a highly conserved eukaryotic
ribosomal protein (CEP52) contain introns. In each gene, one intron contains
open reading frame which would allow the production of an altered form of the
CEp52 protein (ALT52) from unspliced message. Based on immunoblots probed with
CEP52 specific antiserum, it is proposed that translation of unspliced mRNA
occurs. A putative ALT52 is expressed at high levels in rat tissues, but the
protein is not ribosomally associated. ALT52 synthesis appears to be tissue
specific and inversely related to the level of CEP52 present. Since CEP52 levels
correspond to the amount of ribosomes present in rat tissues, the production of
ALT52 may function to limit ribosomes production. These preliminary results
suggests that CEP52 splicing may be a novel regulatory mechanism involved in
controlling the levels of cytoplasmic ribosomes. The investigators will
investigate these observations by characterizing the rat proteins that react
with the CEP52 antibody and by sequencing a rat CEP52 genomic clone to determine
if the gene contains introns as do the other characterized CEP52 genes.
Additional antibodies will be generated to examine the possible production of
ALT52 in the plant Arabidopsis. %%% Cellular ribosome levels are controlled by
the need for the proteins that they synthesize. Rapidly growing cells, whether
normal or cancerous, require elevated amounts of ribosomes compared to cells
that are not as metabolically active. Despite significant advances, gaps remain
in our understanding of how the assembly of two ribosomes from more that 80
proteins and four nucleic acids is coordinated and regulated. Two ribosomal
proteins discovered in 1989 may have important roles in the regulation of
ribosome assembly, since, an insufficient amount of either protein results in
the decreased production of functional ribosomes. Recent studies suggest that
one of these proteins may be regulated by editing the RNA copy of the genetic
information once it is transcribed from DNA. This editing process occurs for
many proteins, however, this case is unusual in that both the edited and
unedited form of the RNA could be used to produce a protein. The proteins would
be identical in some parts of their structure, but would significantly differ in
size and probably function Preliminary evidence indicates that two forms of this
protein are produced. The large version that would be produced from the unedited
RNA is not found on ribosomes, and it is produced in the largest amounts by
tissues that have few ribosomes. These studies will determine if the detected
proteins are produced as the result of RNA editing of a common RNA precursor and
if the editing process represents a previously unknown regulatory mechanism that
controls ribosome levels.