* 9220080
* Cellular and Molecular Characterization of Auxin Receptors
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Alan Jones, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/1996
* USD 289,978.00

Auxins are a class of growth hormone found in plants that induce cells to
elongate. They act rapidly through the mediation of a single receptor or
multiple receptors to cause changes in cell wall properties and gene expression.
There are now several candidate auxin receptors in plants; however, their roles
in growth and development have not yet been determined. These putative receptors
are therefore designated "auxin-binding proteins" (ABP's). This project focuses
on the characterization of two such ABP's, designated ABP1 and 65-kDa ABP. ABP1
is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) protein that contains an ER-retention sequence;
yet, this laboratory has demonstrated that a significant amount of this protein
escapes the ER retention mechanism and uniquely migrates to the plasma membrane
/ cell wall space. This cell wall localization is consistent with its postulated
site of action. The 65-kDa subunit ABP, recently identified in this laboratory
using anti- idiotypic antibodies, is a nuclear localized protein. Preliminary
data suggest that it binds DNA. The hypothesis is put forward that this putative
receptors is involved in auxin-regulated gene transcription. %%% It has been
known for many years that plant growth and development is regulated by plant
hormones, principally auxins (e.g., indole acetic acid, or IAA) and cytokines.
However, despite a great deal of effort, it is not yet understood how plant
hormones exert their effects at a molecular level. Auxin-binding proteins, such
as ABP1 and the 65-kDa ABP which are the subject of this project, have been
described, but it has not yet been established for any of these that they are
functional "auxin receptors," let alone mechanisms of action. This laboratory
has made some very interesting and novel findings, such as the auxin-dependent
subcellular localization of ABP1 and the nuclear localization and DNA binding
characteristics of 65-kDa ABP, which may lead to breakthroughs in this area. An
understanding of how plant cell growth and development is normally controlled or
modulated by plant hormones is critical to this nation's agricultural
biotechnology efforts.