* 9220683
* Phylogenetic Analysis of Reproductive Isolation in Cyprinid Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1997
* Thomas Dowling, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 194,931.00

Biodiversity is generated by the process of speciation and maintained by
factors preventing interbreeding of distinct species (i.e. reproductive
isolation). Reproductive isolation is most readily studied in situations like
that involving the minnow species, Luxilus cornutus and Luxilus chrysocephalus,
which interbreed extensively in the eastern United States. Dr. Thomas Dowling of
Arizona State University has been studying genetic interactions between these
two hybridizing species, and he has identified geographic variation in the
effectiveness of factors maintaining reproductive discontinuity. This study
expands upon Dr. Dowling's previous research by examining eastern locations
where the two species co-occur and adjacent areas to the west and south,
providing complete characterization of geographic variation in reproductive
isolation. Sequence variation of the mitochondrial DNA control region is being
used to infer phylogenetic relationships of cornutus and chrysocephalus
populations and identify the importance of pre- and post-Pleistocene effects in
structuring of genetic variation within these species. Comparisons of these
relationships with the pattern of reproductive isolation will allow for tests of
the role of ancestry, dispersal, and geological history in geographic variation
of reproductive isolation. Likewise, population phylogenies will allow for
examination of the role of hydrographic history and dispersal on the
distribution of genetic variation within each of these species, providing a test
of hypotheses concerning the origin of species diversity in the Central
Highlands region, one of the most diverse faunas in North America.