* 9220169
* Analysis of the B Cell Receptor Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Allen Rosenspire, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 11/30/1995
* USD 160,000.00

The long term objective of this research is to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms by which membrane immunoglobulin generates proliferative or
inhibitory signals to the interior of the B lymphocyte in response to antigen
binding at the surface. Since the membrane immunoglobulin receptor shares many
characteristics with tyrosine kinase dependent growth factor receptors, an
understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in B lymphocytes will benefit
the greater community of cell biologists by contributing to an understanding of
proliferative control in a wide variety of cell types. In particular,
preliminary evidence which suggests that membrane immunoglobulin heavy chains
are linked to a diverse group of proteins, some of which are src family tyrosine
kinases, while others appear to be cytoskeletal constituents will be pursued.
Biochemical and immunological methodologies will be employed to explore the
molecular topology of membrane immunoglobulin and membrane immunoglobulin-
associated proteins. A particular focus of the project will be the possibility
that the function of membrane immunoglobulin may be controlled by structural
associations which are dependent upon receptor clustering. %%% Most types of
living cells respond to external signal molecules such as hormones or growth
factors by undergoing a cascade of biochemical changes that result in various
physiological changes. Growth factors, for example, are signals that trigger a
chain of biochemical events leading to cell division. The steps in such cascades
of events are generally referred to as "signal transduction". This project will
study the early events in signal transduction following binding of a signal
molecule to its specific receptor protein in a cell membrane. The specific goal
is to identify and characterize molecules in the cell membrane or in the cell's
interior (for example, protein molecules that constitute the cell's internal
skeleton) that bind to and/or chemically modify the receptor and each other
after the receptor binds its signal molecule. Identifying the cellular
components that interact with this receptor in response to a signal should
contribute substantially to our understanding of the mechanisms of signal
transduction in cells.