* 9220287
* U.S.-Bulgaria Research on Iterative Methods for Large-Scale Discretization Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Tony Chan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 07/31/1995
* USD 19,450.00

This US-Bulgaria Joint Cooperative Research on Iterative Methods for Large-
Scale Discretization Problems is between Dr. Tony F.- C. Chan and Dr. Barry F.
Smith of the University of California, Los Angeles, and Dr. Panayot Vassilevski,
Dr. Svetozar D. Margenov, and Dr. Oleg P. Iliev of the Center of Informatics &
Computer Technology. The research topics will include computational study
(performance and analysis) of efficient iterative methods, based on domain
decomposition, multi-level, and on ILU techniques for solving discretized
differential equations. Such a collaboration will benefit both sides which have
different experience on various aspects of multi-level, domain decomposition and
general preconditioning methods. The research will focus on anisotropic,
nonsymmetric, indefinite and/or almost indefinite problems obtained when
discretizing elliptic equations with strong anisotropy, convection-diffusion
type problems, elasticity equations including the incompressible limit, and
Navier-Stokes equations, for example in stream-function vorticity formulation.
Advances in deriving efficient solution methods for problems such as Navier-
Stokes equations should be applicable to a large class of important processes
in, say, ecology, weather prediction, oil and gas recovery, design of new
constructive elements and materials, and in fluid dynamics. This research in
mathematics fulfills the program objective of advancing science by enabling
leading experts in the United States and Bulgaria to combine complementary
talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence.