* 9220322
* New Technologies for the Blind:  Improving Accessibility    to Science
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1994
* John Gardner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 157,241.00

At present, blind people have limited access to scientific literature and few
means beyond "working it out in one's head" to do math. New raised-print
technology permits printing scientific equations, figures, and diagrams that can
be read tactilely. Development and testing of an equation-printing method that
retains the intuitive and conceptual advantages of the standard spatial
representation of math equation is under development. Research to date has
worked with equations comprised of braille numbers and letters and with tactile
representations of the math symbols that replace the often ambiguous braille
math symbols. Math equations are now presented in a spatial format as they are
for sighted people, unlike that used with braille. Fractions are printed as
numerator over denominator. Subscripts and superscripts are printed in the
proper sub- or superscripted positions. Limits of sums and integrals are printed
in their normal positions. The symbols are represented by compact tactile
patterns that can be read more easily than the Braille math symbols. The process
is referred to as the "Dots+" method. Research is being done to determine
whether representation of common math symbols can be done with an enhanced
6-symbol cell with three distinguishable symbols, or if it will be necessary to
use an 8-symbol cell with two symbols. Work is also being done to use the
enhanced Braille cell to represent alphabetic charters, greek, italic, bold,
script, etc. Non-overprinted attributes (for example, vector signs, dots,
carets, tildes, and other such things over a character) are being printed
normally with some enhancement for readability. The printing technology needed
for producing such dot+ equations exists, but an actual machine does not. The
project has been promised a beta-test version of a desk-top plotter capable of
making any of the required shapes. During the project, the Director is working
with two undergraduate computer science students, one of whom is blind. In
addition, he is researching international activities in aspects of blind
technology. The research being done should result in the ability to write
equations for blind people that retain all the intuitive and conceptual
advantages of visual equations.