* 9220231
* Counterion Accumulation Around Finite Nucleic Acid          Structures
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Paul Hagerman, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1995
* USD 200,000.00

For highly charged nucleic acid polymers, the extent and distribution of
associated counterions can have a profound influence on the conformation of the
macromolecule, and can play a principal role in directing the binding of
proteins and small ligands. However, except for linear nucleic acids, very
little is known regarding the nature of counterion accumulation. In order to
address this issue, the current proposal outlines a combined
computational/experimental approach to determine the extent of counterion
association in the vicinity of various nucleic acid structures, including
branched DNA and RNA helices. The computational approach (aim 1) will utilize a
grand canonical ensemble Monte Carlo approach for the determination of ion
accumulation. The principal experimental approach (aim 2), equilibrium dialysis,
will measure the same quality. Finally, the technique of steady-state
electrophoresis (SSE) will be employed (aim 3) to examine the relationship
between thermodynamic ion binding and the effective charge of a nucleic acid
undergoing electrophoresis. %%% Small ions in the vicinity of DNA or RNA
molecules have a profound influence on the structures of those highly-charged
macromolecules. Moreover, it is clear that such ions can participate in
directing the binding of a wide variety of gene regulatory proteins to both DNA
and RNA. Thus, the characterization of the interactions of small ions with
higher-order nucleic acid structures is of great importance in understanding the
broader issue of the regulation of gene expression. To this end, the goal of the
proposed research is to characterize the net accumulation of small ions in the
vicinity of simple branched nucleic acid structures, the latter being used as a
paradigm for higher-order nucleic acid structure. The proposed work couples a
theoretical analysis of small ion- macromolecule interactions with an
experimental determination of the net accumulation of the small ions around the
branch. The experimental work will employ a combination of dialysis and
electrophoretic methods, which, when combined with the computational work,
should provide the first quantitative view of the association of small ions
around a higher-order nucleic acid structure -- a necessary antecedent for
detailed studies of the salt-dependence of protein-nucleic acid interaction.