* 9220913
* Soil Respiration in Prairie Ecosystems Exposed to Ambient   and Elevated CO2
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Jay Ham, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 47,500.00

Burning of fossil fuel, deforestation, and other activities of modern
civilization are increasing the level of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the air.
Unfortunately, CO2 is one of the gases that may cause global warming in the
future. Additionally, CO2 affects how plants grow, and how groups of plants
interact in ecosystems. Therefore, it is important for scientists to understand
the factors that influence the production and movement of CO2 in the earth and
atmosphere. This knowledge will help people and their governments prevent
undesirable environmental changes. Some of the CO2 in the air comes from the
soil. Plant roots and soil microorganisms produce CO2 gas during an important
biological process called "soil respiration". The CO2 gas then percolates up out
of the soil into the atmosphere. Scientists in Kansas will use special
instruments to measure soil respiration from a tallgrass prairie. Big tent-like
chambers are used to fumigate the air above the prairie with CO2 in order to
artificially create a high CO2 environment. By measuring soil respiration inside
the CO2 tents, the scientists will be able to predict if more or less CO2 will
come form the soil in the future. This information will also help other
scientists who are studying global warming and other environmental problems.