* 9220108
* RUI:  Induction of Cell Division by Protein Kinase C
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Bradley Stith, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 02/28/1997
* USD 312,778.00

9220108 Stith A new pathway for the induction of meiotic cell division was
suggested when a phorbol ester was found to induce meiosis in Xenopus oocytes.
It is known that phorbols act through protein kinase C, but the pathway to cell
division beyond protein kinase C is not known. Protein kinase C is also believed
to be involved in the proliferative pathway of ras p21, insulin, insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and some other growth factors. Since phorbols, ras p21,
insulin and IGF-1 initiate meiotic cell division in Xenopus laevis oocytes, we
will examine whether PKC acts through regulation of one or more of four
different cell cycle regulatory proteins. With both in vivo and in vitro
studies, the phosphorylation, amount and activity of ras p21, mos, cyclin, and
p34cdc2 will be examined as a function of protein kinase C activity. It may be
found that only one isozymic form of PKC is central to the regulation of
proliferation and that PKC induces cell division through regulation of specific
protein(s). This research should elucidate heretofore uncharacterized steps in
the pathway to cell division. %%% Certain plant products, phorbol esters, induce
cell division in animal cells. These chemicals activate an enzyme known as
protein kinase C (PKC). The function of protein kinase C is to transfer
phosphate groups onto other proteins. Much evidence suggests that growth
hormones such as insulin, insulin-like growth factor 1 and epidermal growth
factor induce cell division by activating protein kinase C. The steps beyond
activation of protein kinase C which lead to cell division are not known. A
separate line of research over the past five years has been the search for genes
and proteins important to cell division. Some of the newly discovered proteins
are called mos, cyclin, p34cdc2 and ras p21. The goals of this research are: (a)
to determine whether protein kinase C can transfer phosphate to these proteins
in a test tube or in living cells, (b) if i t does, to locate the site of
phosphate addition to these proteins, and (c) determine whether these important
cell division proteins are turned on or off by the addition of phosphate. The
results of this research should define new steps in the sequence of events that
leads to induction of cell division by growth factors. Since this research will
be carried out at an undergraduate institution with the participation of
students, it will also contribute to training a future generation of scientists.
***