* 9220097
* Morphological and Physiological Analysis of the Motor Units of the Major Flight Muscles in the Pigeon (Columba livia)   and the Starling (Sturnus vulgaris)
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1996
* George Goslow, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* John A. Phillips
* 09/30/1996
* USD 214,117.00

My students and I are engaged in studies of the vertebrate neuromuscular and
musculoskeletal systems with an emphasis on function and evolution. We examine
limb kinematics, muscle design and spinal cord organization using a variety of
techniques including high-speed photography and electromyography. The particular
focus of this study is functional analysis of the Avian shoulder. The project is
designed to yield basic morphological and physiological data requisite for the
eventual modeling and testing of the neural control of wing movements in birds.
Evidence exists from studies of muscle is ordered according to specific synaptic
properties of the motoneuron which relate to size. Theoretical considerations,
however, have resulted in alternative hypotheses for the ordering of motor unit
within birds. To help clarify this important issue, we are studying the
physiological profiles of isolated flight muscle motor units as well as their
peripheral and central anatomical organization in two species with contrasting
flight styles. This study is designed to address fundamental questions
concerning the evolution of neuromuscular organization across the major
vertebrate groups. Studies of birds will also provide data useful for evaluating
current interpretations (based primarily on studies of the fossil bird
Archaeopteryx) of the evolutionary origin of wings from the shoulder of early
Mesozoic terrestrial archosaurs. Until we fully understand the musculoskeletal
and neuromuscular basis of flight in a extant species, our understanding of the
fundamental issue of the evolution of flight among tetrapods will be hampered.