* 9220886
* Why are Planktonic N2 Fixing Heterocystous Cyanobacteria    Rare in N-limited Large Water Bodies?:  An Experimental     Approach to an Ecological Paradox
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1993,11/30/1997
* Hans Paerl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 11/30/1997
* USD 214,956.00

9220886 Paerl The ability to fix atmospheric N2 in oxygenated N-limited surfaces
waters should cyanobacteria (HC). Despite their periodic dominance in small
freshwater impoundments however. HC are often conspicuously absent in chronic
N-limited large lakes, estuaries and coastal waters; yet these waters generally
exhibit N:P loading and concentration ratios favorable for HC N2 fixers.
Excessive turbulence may prevent the establishment and dominance of
heterocystous bloom forming taxi in wind and tide-exposed largewater bodies. The
project will examine this ecological paradox by experimentally evaluating the
relative roles large-scale vertical mixing and small-scale shear play in
conrolling structural and consortial integrity, growth and bloom formation in
natural and cultured HC populations. N-limited estuarine (Neuse River, NC),
large lake (Tahoe, CA-NV) and coastal (Boque Sound, NC), support benthic but not
planktonic N2 will serve as experimental field sites. We will utilize concentric
cylndrical Couette vessels for evaluating the structural and growth impacts of
small-scale shear regimes (representative of turbulent surface waters) on common
HC species. %%% This work will elucidate environmental factors controlling N2
fixation and N-limitation on regional and global scales. Planktonic
cyanobacteria contribute to primary production, entrophication, nitrogen
availability and flux. This work facilities predictive modeling of HC blooms and
resultant regional and global C and N budgets and fluxes.