* 9220258
* RUI:  Predicting Photosynthetic Fluxes from Spectral        Reflectance of Leaves and Canopies
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1993,04/30/1998
* John Gamon, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 04/30/1998
* USD 373,749.00

This research will test the hypothesis that photosynthetic efficiency and
capacity can be predicted from "physiological reflectance indices" derived from
spectral reflectance of vegetation. This hypothesis assumes that leaves and
canopies follow ecophysiological "rules" of light energy distribution resulting
in consistent relationships between PAR distribution and photosynthetic fluxes.
Experimental studies employing concurrent measurements of spectral reflectance,
leaf gas exchange and fluorescence on evergreen species will develop a
mechanistic understanding of relationships between photosynthetic regulation and
spectral reflectance. These experiments will be used to derive a leaf-level
model incorporating "physiological reflectance indices" linking spectral
reflectance to photosynthetic fluxes. Experimental comparisons of leaf and
canopy reflectance will provide algorithms for predicting photosynthetic
efficiency and capacity from canopy spectral reflectance. %%% This work enables
a young and very promising ecosystem scientist utilizing minority students at an
undergraduate institution. Although the most understanding of physiological
function at the leaf and canopy levels, the conclusions may benefit future
studies of vegetation-atmosphere interactions involving remote sensing at the
landscape level.