* 9220908
* Vibration Rotation Studies of Condensed Phase Dynamical     Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Herbert Strauss, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 07/31/1996
* USD 545,900.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. H. Strauss of the University of California will investigate the vibration-
rotation spectra of small molecules in order to study the dynamical interactions
in the condensed phase. In this work the methods of infrared and Raman
spectroscopy, neutron spectrscopy, time-dependent vibrational excitation, and
theoretical analysis will be used to explore the dynamics of a number of liquid
and solid systems. The emphasis is on chemical systems that illustrate important
general methods or elucidate important intermolecular interactions. Infrared
"holeburning" is used to study the ability of infrared radiation to cause
changes in the molecular conformation and structure in solids at low
temperature. Raman spectral data of hydrogen gas dissolved in water or ice will
be combined with theoretical calculations to determine the nature of the
interactions in these systems. The nearly free rotation of deuterated ammonium
ions embedded in ammonium salts will be studied to ascertain the cause of
observed different rate processes of reactions and to determine the effect of
the inhomogeneous environment on them. The iodine-benzene complex interaction
will be investigated by Raman spectroscopy in order to understand the dynamics
of the ground and excited states. %%% These investigations serve to improve our
understanding of molecular interactions in the condensed phase. These
interactions have a profound effect on the reaction dynamics and kinetics in
liquid and solid systems. The work on molecular hydrogen dissolved in ice will
provide important data on the behavior of a quantum mechanical rotator embedded
in a classical bath and will assist in the development of theoretical models for
this process. Such knowledge will be of use in understanding the properties of
cold planets and moons which are believed to contain the hydrogen/ice system in
their surface layers.