* 9220176
* Rapid Isolation of Plant Hypersensitive Response Genes Usinga Viral Expression Vector
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Curtis Holt, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1995
* USD 200,000.00

One form of resistance that plants employ against viral disease is the
development of necrosis at the site of initial infection. This hypersensitive
response (HR) limits the virus to the infection site and prevents it from
spreading throughout the plant. Although many of the metabolic changes
associated with HR are known, the nature and function of the genes that control
the response remain a mystery. A novel strategy for the isolation of host genes
that control a HR against tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) has been conceived. A full-
length, infectious cDNA clone of TMV has been modified to permit the
introduction of foreign open reading frames in place of the viral coat protein
gene. Foreign genes inserted into this viral vector are expressed in planta with
protein levels ranging from approximately 0.1% to 1% of the total extractable
protein. The isolation of HR-specific genes using the TMV-based expression
vector will involve the "shotgun" cloning of pooled cDNAs derived from HR-
positive host plants into the universal cloning sites of the vector. In vitro
transcription reactions will be performed, and the transcribed RNAs will be
inoculated directly onto appropriate host plants that lack the HR- controlling
genes ("systemic hosts"). The inoculated leaves will be monitored for the
appearance of necrotic infection sites or other evidence of HR. Individual
viruses eliciting a HR will be propagated and viral RNA will be extracted. The
segment of the viral RNA representing the cDNA inserted into the cloning site of
the TMV vector will be amplified by PCR techniques using primers that flank the
inserted gene. The genes will be sequenced and will be used as probes for the
analysis of RNA expression in plant tissues before and during viral infection.
Antibody preparations generated in rabbits immunized with proteins produced in
E. coli will also allow the analysis of protein expression patterns. %%% The
successful development of this technique would allow very important plant
resistance genes to be cloned and characterized after many failures to do so by
other productive research workers.