* 9220530
* Search for Gravitational Radiation Using Ultralow           Temperature Techniques
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Peter Michelson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 06/30/1996
* USD 1,311,175.00

Resonant-mass detectors of gravitational radiation have been developed that are
reliably operating at liquid helium temperature (4.2K) with sensitivities h ~
6x10-19, where h is the dimensionless strain amplitude of the waves. At this
sensitivity level we do not expect to detect gravitational wave signals from
anything but the rarest astrophysical events. For the past several years the
Stanford group has been designing and constructing an ultralow temperature
(50mK) detector. It is expected to have an initial sensitivity of at least
h=10-19 and eventually less than 10-20, sufficient to detect gravitational
radiation from plausible but rare astrophysical events that could occur in our
galaxy or its immediate vicinity. Success in this endeavour could bring direct
confirmation of an important prediction of Einstein's General Theory of
Relativity and also open an entirely new window on our universe that will yield
information not available from optical, radio, infrared, x-ray, or gamma-ray
astronomy. The key elements of the research program during the next three years
are > reliable operation of the ultralow temperature (50mk) detector now nearing
completion, > operation of this detector in coincidence with other gravitational
wave detectors and correlate the output with other electromagnetic (e.g., gamma-
ray burst) and neutrino burst detectors, > continuing research to advance the
state-of-the-art in superconductive modulated-inductance transducers and SQUIDs.