* 9220663
* Adaptive Control of Unavoidable Hazardous Releases
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Nikolaos Katopodes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* J. Eleonora Sabadell
* 12/31/1996
* USD 162,990.00

The purpose of this project is to develop a computational procedure for the
adaptive control of hazardous releases, either of water or toxic substances. In
particular, the control strategy is aimed at deliberate releases from man-made
storage or process facilities that are deemed unavoidable because alternative
actions may lead to more severe catastrophic results. The procedure consists of
combining two-dimensional transient models that simulate the dynamics of the
release and its subsequent fate in the environment and an adaptive control
scheme, which monitors the current state of the released matter and the ambient
conditions. Real-time feedback is sent to the control mechanism, which in turn
develops an optimum release strategy that minimizes a predetermined performance
index. The simulation models that are employed for the direct solution of the
release spreading have been repeatedly verified for their accuracy and
reliability and standard optimization techniques have shown that control of
water and toxic releases is possible. The novelty of the proposed research lies
in an alternative formulation of the control problem that avoids iterative
simulations of the direct problem, which, due to lengthy computations, hinder
the real-time implementation of the procedure. In contrast, by solution of the
adjoint equation for a variety of evolution problems described by an enlarging
and deforming domain, it is possible to optimize a given performance index
without repeated simulations. The result is an efficient and practical procedure
for unavoidable hazardous releases that can minimize their environmental impact.