* 9220775
* Adaptations to Counter Diffusional Constraints in Muscle    of Channichthyid Icefishes
* O/D,OPP
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Bruce Sidell, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 07/31/1997
* USD 435,481.00

Antarctic fish species have evolved over 40 million years at nearly constant
body temperatures of about 0 C. Exposure to chronic cold has required
adaptations to overcome thermal sensitivities of cellular processes and to
permit retention of characteristics that would be lethal at warmer body
temperatures. Such features will be addressed in this project which focuses on a
hemoglobinless icefish family. Although it is well established that these
icefishes lack hemoglobin, the presence/absence of the intracellular respiratory
pigment, myoglobin has not been resolved as a familial characteristic.
Preliminary evidence is presented that suggests myoglobin is expressed
exclusively in one tissue of a single icefish species. Validity of this
conclusion will be tested using immunological methods to establish definitively
whether myoglobin is expressed in oxidative muscles of channichthyid species. It
will also be determined whether point mutations in the protein encoding sequence
of the myoglobin gene account for lack of the protein's expression mRNA in
tissues that do/do not express myoglobin. Characteristics in protein structure
that are necessary for function of the intracellular fatty acid binding protein
at cold cell temperatures will be examined; this protein enhances transcellular
movement of metabolically important fatty acids and serves a cytoprotectant
function. Coordinated ultrastructural and biochemical measurements of icefish
glycolytic muscle will identify adaptations that have occurred in the tissues of
icefish. These experiments will test the proposed paradigm that adaptations to
overcome diffusional limitations are fundamental to ensure life at cold cellular
temperatures. The studies will add insight into adaptive responses of muscle in
higher vertebrates and increase understanding of the metabolism of antarctic
fishes, a group important to the trophic structure of the Southern Ocean.