* 9220417
* Biogenesis of Natural Rubber in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1997
* Ralph Backhaus, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Shiladitya DasSarma
* 08/31/1997
* USD 240,000.00

World economies depend on the availability of natural rubber for industrial
purposes. Despite its economic importance surprisingly little is known about
rubber biogenesis in higher plants. Rubber is produced in numerous species but
mechanisms of its synthesis are poorly understood. The enzyme rubber transferase
(RuT) (E.C. 2.5.1.20), a prenyltransferase, causes the unique cis-polymerization
of isoprene responsible for rubber accumulation in plants. Our studies will
protein (RPP), the most abundant protein of guayule rubber particles. The
function of RPP in rubber biogenesis will be addressed because its abundance
suggests that it plays an important role either in biosynthesis stabilization,
solubilization or trafficking of rubber particles. Prevailing evidence
suggesting that RPP is guayule RuT must be confirmed with newly available
molecular probes. A cDNA clone for RPP, recently identified in the lab, will be
used to elucidate its role in rubber biogenesis. Full-length RPP clones will be
examined for the effect of their expression in various heterologous and
homologous systems. Biochemical analysis and enzymatic assays will compare RPP
expression with putative RuT and prenyl transferase activity in those systems.
Partial clones of RPP expressed as fusion proteins in E. Coli will be used to
generate de-glycosylated RPP Suitable for antibody production. Antisera prepared
against recombinant RPP will be used several fold; first, to measure inhibition
of prenyltransferase activity in in vitro assays; second, to detect for the
presence of RPP- liked proteins in other rubber-producing species and finally,
for immunocytochemical studies in guayule and in transgenic plants. If RPP
proves to be RuT, then engineering of rubber synthesis may be possible in other
systems. %%% The production of rubber results from chemical processing of the
sap from the rubber tree which cannot be grown in the USA. However another plant
native to the USA, guayule, produces rubber but it is difficult to extract the
compound easily from the plant. Rubber is an interesting chemical biomaterial
and finding and characterizing the enzyme responsible for its synthesis is the
research which is funded here. The isolation of the rubber particle protein in
the plant and its purification will lead to molecular biological studies
fundamental to producing rubber and related compounds in greater yields and in
other plants.