* 9220621
* Interacting Mechanisms in the Competitive Displacement      of a Parthenogenitic Gecko by a Sexual Species of Gecko
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1997
* Ted Case, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 03/31/1997
* USD 305,000.00

This research concerns the role of aggression, reproductive mode and clonal
diversity in the observed competitive displacements among geckos in the tropical
Pacific. The PI has documented a wide-scale biogeographic pattern in which a
house gecko, Hemidactyplus frenatus, upon introduction to islands in the
Pacific, replaces other species as the common urban gecko. Two of the species
(H.garnotti and Lepidodactylus lugubris) being replaced reproduce
parthenogenetically. There is a strong negative numerical effect of H.frenatus
on L. lugubris both locally and on a broad geographic scale throughout the
Pacific, and also a strong agonistic asymmetry between H.frenatus and L.
lugubris. This research will assess factors that enable an invading species to
cause a decline in native species. The experimental design will test the
hypothesis that the agonistic dominance of H. frenatus over L.lugubris is the
primary mechanism of competition, but will also enable quantification of
exploitative mechanisms. With the use of 20 abandoned aircraft revetments
constructed during World War II (located on the grounds of N.A.S. Barbers Point
on Oahu), the PI can manipulate components of agonistic interaction and prey
distribution on a large scale with many replicate treatments. %%% The results
will be applied to the preservation and management of native communities, with
the goal of protecting these communities from invading exotic species.