* 9220634
* Evolutionary Dynamics of Prey Morphology and Vulnerability
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Ken Spitze, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1996
* USD 130,859.00

Many species of organisms can adopt different outward characteristics in
different environmental situations. This phenomenon is called phenotypic
plasticity. Such plasticity has been found in many aquatic organisms where the
different environments that elicit the alternate characteristics involve the
presence or absence of particular potential predators. While plasticity in such
cases is assumed to provide some advantage to the organism, in many cases this
cause-effect relationship is difficult to demonstrate. The characteristics
adopted in the presence of the predators may result in lower vulnerability to
predation, or may simply reflect developmental changes that afford the
individual no particular advantage. %%% This proposed research involves
phenotypic plasticity in the freshwater crustacean Daphnia in response to the
presence of predaceous larvae of the insect Chaoborus. The research will result
in useful information about the evolutionary importance of phenotypic
plasticity. In particular, they will help clarify the extent to which plasticity
is advantageous, rather than simply reflecting random changes with respect to
the environment. Such information will be important in evaluating how organisms
can adopt to a changing environment, such as might result from global
warming.***//