* 9220755
* Evolution in Dryopteris:  The Role of Hybrids in Polyploid  Speciation
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Charles Werth, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

Hybridization between different species is an accident of nature that may in
some instances have a very important outcome: the origin of new species. Hybrids
are typically unable to reproduce through ordinary sexual means because they
contain incompatible chromosomes that do not pair during meiosis, the reduction
division that produces the haploid cells that ultimately produce eggs and
sperms. However, a second accident, chromosome doubling (polyploidy) may restore
fertility by providing each chromosome with an exact duplicate with which it can
pair. These two processes, hybridization and polyploidy, have combined in this
way to produce a vast number of new plant species, termed allopolyploids.
Allopolyploids include some of our most important crops, among them wheat,
cotton, coffee, peanut, and tobacco. Nonetheless, surprisingly little is known
about the precise cellular mechanisms that operate to produce allopolyploids, or
about the circumstances that prevail in nature when successful allopolyploids
become established. The present proposal is designed to bolster our knowledge of
the origin of allopolyploids through detailed studies of natural hybrids between
species of Dryopteris, a genus of ferns common in eastern North America.
Dryopteris is an ideal model system for the following reasons: (1) as a fern,
the products of meiosis in Dryopteris are spores that can be grown directly into
plants rather than the pollen grains or embryo sacs of flowering plants which
are much less amenable to further study; (2) Dryopteris plants are large and
produce numerous spores, offering an enhanced opportunity to observe relatively
rare events; (3) numerous hybrids are produce in nature, some of them very
frequently, allowing for the variation between processes that pertain to
individual kinds of hybrids to be evaluated. This study will consist of two
phases, a laboratory phase and a field phase. In the laboratory, the production
of spores with doubled chromosomes will be followed. Such spores are believed to
be distinguishable as large spherical ("giant") spores that stand out from the
remainder of the shriveled spores ordinarily produced by the hybrid. The genetic
constitution and growth potential of these "giant" spores will be evaluated by
growing them into juvenile ferns (gametophytes) and examining these using
molecular and microscopic techniques. Attempts will also be made to produce
adult ferns (sporophytes) from the gametophytes by both sexual and asexual
means. In the field, clusters of hybrids will be studied to determine whether
they are actually reproducing through polyploid spores, i.e. whether the hybrids
are all first generation, or include some later generations. Molecular
fingerprinting techniques will be used that can distinguish between these two
possibilities. The results from these combined field and laboratory studies will
provide important new information on the means by which hybrids can give rise to
allopolyploid species.