* 9220150
* Effects of Ozone-Related Increased UV-B Fluences on         Photosynthesis, Photoadaptation and Viability of            Phytoplankton in Antarctic Waters
* O/D,OPP
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1996
* Osmund Holm-Hansen, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 03/31/1996
* USD 268,505.00

Decreased concentrations of ozone in the stratosphere over Antarctica have
resulted in increased levels of ultraviolet radiation in the UV-B portion of the
spectrum incident at the earth's surface beneath the 'ozone hole'. There is now
world-wide concern that this enhanced flux of UV radiation may cause serious
harm to the marine ecosystem in the Southern Ocean. This project, which includes
field and laboratory studies, will help to determine the effects of enhanced
levels of UV-B radiation on phytoplankton, and to relate such effects to
overlying ozone concentrations. UV levels determined from the NSF-Operated UV-
Spectroradiometer at Palmer Station will be directly applicable to the
interpretation of observed biological effects. Primary attention will be given
to the effects of UV-B radiation on photosynthetic rates, on damage to DNA with
resulting loss of cell viability, and on the rates and extent to which
phytoplankton can minimize cellular UV damage by production of specialized
protective pigments. Differential sensitivity to UV-B of dominant phytoplankton
species or groups will also be determined, as such differences might have
important consequences on the structure of the food web in antarctic waters. As
the project's activity will cover the period from September through December,
the resulting data set should encompass the period of maximal development of the
ozone hole, as well as the time of the summer solstice. This project is
important because it will elaborate previous findings and address in detail the
extent and the nature of ultraviolet damage to phytoplankton, as well as
evaluate the kinds of defenses cells can muster against it.