* 9220187
* Conference: Molecular Evolution of Physiological Processes; to be held in September 1993 at the Marine Biological       Laboratory in Woods Hole, MA
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1993
* Douglas Fambrough, Society of General Physiologists
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 12/31/1993
* USD 6,000.00

A symposium on Molecular Evolution of Physiological Processes will be held in
September, 1993 at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole,
Massachusetts, under the auspices of the Society of General Physiologists. This
Symposium will bring together scientists who study cytoskeletal and membrane
functions with scientists whose research is focused upon molecular evolution or
on mechanisms that generate genetic diversity. Four lecture sessions will set
the intellectual framework of the symposium: (1) approaches to analyzing nucleic
acid and protein sequences and applications to phylogenetic problems; (2)
recently appreciated genetic mechanisms that may underlie the evolution of
increasingly complex biological systems; (3) proteins of the actin/myosin
cytoskeleton: the variety of isoforms and the correlated functions these play in
cell structure and behavior; and (4) structure, function and evolution of plasma
membrane proteins. Sessions 3 and 4 emphasize that molecular-level studies of
physiological processes are very profitably informed by ideas developed in the
fields of molecular evolution and genetics, and that conserved structural motifs
characterize superfamilies of proteins that may function through homologous
mechanisms. There will also be poster sessions and open discussion/workshops on
key topics. Keynote addresses will highlight perspectives from immunology and
integrative biology. %%% A symposium on Molecular Evolution of Physiological
Processes will be held in September, 1993 at the Marine Biological Laboratory in
Woods Hole, Massachusetts, under the auspices of the Society of General
Physiologists. This Symposium will bring together scientists who study
cytoskeletal and membrane functions with scientists whose research is focused
upon molecular evolution or on mechanisms that generate genetic diversity. A
major emphasis of the conference is that molecular-level studies of
physiological processes can be illuminated by ideas developed in the fields of
molecular evolution and genetics.