* 9220774
* Molecular Analysis of a Nucelar Mutation Affecting          Chloroplast Development
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Robert Martienssen, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1995
* USD 150,000.00

High chlorophyll flourescent (hcf) mutants of higher plants represent a class
of nuclear genes required for the development of photosynthetically active
chloroplasts. Their products may include nuclear-encoded components of the
photosynthetic apparatus, as well as enzymes and regulatory genes required for
co-factor biosynthesis and plastid gene expression. Some hcf mutants have
pleiotropic effects on membrane protein assembly and thylakoid organization.
hcf106 is an example of such a mutation in maize: The Hcf106 gene has been
cloned by transposon tagging, and the gene product shown to be an integral
chloroplast membrane protein. It has a single transmembrane domain, a potential
nucleotide binding site, but no other homology to known proteins. Thylakoid
membranes from mutant chloroplasts have lost their characteristic lateral
heterogeneity, and fail to accumulate a subset of thylakoid membrane proteins.
Analysis of derivative alleles, hypoploids and double mutants will be used to
genetically define the hcf106 lesion. Immunolocalization by suborganellar
fractionation and immuno- electron microscopy will be used to investigate the
possible roles of this protein in thylakoid assembly. %%% Photosynthesis is the
basis of life on the planet Earth and a complete understanding of the process as
well as chloroplast biogenesis is one of the most important goals of biological
research.