* 9220142
* Impairment of Root GS Activity in Alfalfa by Antesense RNA  Technology and Its Effect on NO3-Assimilation, Nodulation   and N2-Fixation
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Champa Sengupta-Gopalan, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans J. Bohnert
* 09/30/1996
* USD 253,733.00

This project is aimed at testing the hypotheses that impairing glutamine
synthetase (GS) activity in roots of nitrate fed and N2- fixing alfalfa plants
perform better than normal plants. The working hypothesis for the NO3-fed, root
GS impaired plants is that the NO3-taken up by the root instead of being
distributed between the root and leaves for assimilation is now exclusively
assimilated in the leaves. Being energetically more efficient to assimilate
NO3-in the photosynthetic tissue, the result is more efficient usage of
nitrogen. In the case of the nodulated alfalfa plants, it is postulated that all
the photosynthate normally distributed between the roots and the nodules is now
directed primarily to the nodules. The increased flow of photosynthate to the
nodules provides more energy substrate for the bacteroides to fix N2 and more
C-skeleton for assimilating the fixed N2, resulting in increased N2-fixation
rates and ammonia assimilation. The experimental approach to impair root GS
activity is to use the antisense RNA technology. To specifically target the root
GS, antisense gene constructs consisting of either the constitutive 35S promoter
and a root GS specific sequence or a root specific/enhanced promoter and a GS
coding sequence in antisense orientation have been introduced into alfalfa via
Agrobacterium tumefaciens mediated transformation of leaf discs. To ensure that
GS activity in nodules is not impaired, root GS impaired alfalfa transformants
will be transformed with GS gene sense contructs behind the leghemoglobin gene
promoter or the nodule-specific GS gene promoter. Since the effects of increased
GS activity is not known, alfalfa plants have also been transformed with GS
sense constructs under the control of constitutive and root specific/enhanced
promoters. Both molecular and biochemical analysis of the different tissues will
be performed to test for changes in expression of genes encoding key enzymes in
N- and C- metabolism. Besides allowing us to understand why root GS impaired
plants perform better, this analyses will allow us to determine if changes in
N-metabolism has any effect on C-metabolism. Availability of root GS impaired
plants will provide us with the necessary tools to test our hypothesis with and
eventually allow us to manipulate plants for better usage of N and C.