* 9220099
* Protein Isoprenylation in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1996
* Dring Crowell, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 09/30/1996
* USD 244,000.00

Compounds derived from mevalonic acid are required for growth of plant and
animal cells. In plants, the mevalonic acid pathway participates in the
synthesis of cytokinins, abscisic acid, gibberellins, ubiquinones,
plastoquinones, dolichols, sterols, carotenoids, chlorophylls, and numerous
other isoprenoids. However, it is not clear whether these small isoprenoids
fully account for the mevalonic acid growth requirement of plant cells. In
mammalian and yeast cells, it has been shown that products of mevalonic acid are
covalently bound to G-proteins, low molecular weight ras-like GTP-binding
proteins and nuclear lamins. Covalent attachment of isoprenoids to these
proteins is required for their assembly into membranes and, hence, for their
role in signal transduction and cell growth control. Given the recent discovery
of G-proteins and ras-like GTP-binding proteins in plants, it was predicted that
plants also contain isoprenylated proteins. Preliminary data shown in this
proposal indicate that plants contain isoprenylated, membrane-associated
proteins similar in mass to ras-like GTP-binding proteins and nuclear lamins.
The goals of this project are to determine the structure of the isoprenoid
modification of these proteins and to identify the proteins. This work will lead
to and understanding of the role of protein isoprenylation in plant cell growth,
phytohormone action, signal transduction, and membrane biogenesis. %%%
Isoprenoids belong to a specialized class of lipid molecules. In animal cells,
many proteins have been shown to be linked to isoprenoids. These proteins
participate in cell division and other cellular processes. Current evidence
suggests that the isoprenoid modification is essential for the biological
activity of these proteins. This proposal presents the first evidence that plant
cells also contain isoprenylated proteins. The goals of this project are to
determine the chemical nature of the isoprenoids that are linked to plant
proteins and to identify the respective proteins. This work will lead to an
understanding of how the isoprenoid modification of proteins affects plant
growth and development.