* 9220803
* U.S.-Czechoslovak Joint Fund Research on Energetic ParticlesInside and Outside the Magnetosphere
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1993,01/15/1996
* Karel Kudela, Slovak Academy of Sciences Inst of Experimental
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/15/1996
* USD 0.00

This U.S.-Czechoslovakia Joint Fund Research on "Energetic Particles Inside and
Outside the Magnetosphere" is between Dr. Karel Kudela of the Institute of
Experimental Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, and Drs. David Sibeck and
A.T.Y. Lui of the Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University. The
Czechoslovak Institute of Experimental Physics Ä±IEP! will prepare measurements
of energetic particles in space on the high apogee satellites of the Prognoz
type in the frame of international space physics projects. IEP has measurements
from Prognoz-8 and 10 satellites and it is preparing the devices and the program
of measurements for the satellites Interball and Relict-2. The Johns Hopkins
University participants, very experienced in the study of the magnetosphere,
will provide the energetic particle data from the existing satellites IMP, CCE,
IRM and the GEOTAIL project now in preparation. The researchers will (1) compare
IMP-8 and CCE particle data with those of Prognoz-10 (for 1992 and partly 1993);
and (2) compare measurements of energetic particles in GEOTAIL and on Interball
(1993 and 1994). The results should contribute to understanding dynamic
processes in the magnetosphere of the Earth and beyond. This research in
experimental physics fulfills the program objective of advancing science by
enabling leading experts in the United States and Czechoslovakia to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.