* 9220870
* Systematics of Iguanian Lizards (Squamata, Reptilia):       Integration of Molecular and Morphological Evidence
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1999
* Tom Titus, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/1999
* USD 325,000.00

This is a five year study of the systematics of Iguanian lizards. Both
morphological and molecular characters will be used to address the relationships
within the Tropiduridae, Polychrotidae, Chamaeleonidae, and basal agamines.
Three mitochondrial genes (16S rRNA, cytochrome c oxidase subunit I, and
cytochrome c oxidase subunit III) will be sequenced in a effort to investigate
more recent divergences. Relationships involving older lineage divergences will
be determined using nucleotide sequences from nuclear single-copy genes.
Detailed comparative morphological studies will be conducted on the same taxa
used in the molecular study, and the intrinsic qualities and information of each
kind of data will be evaluated using several analytical approaches. %%% Iguanian
lizards represent a biologically diverse group of vertebrates, with the New
World families (occurring primarily in South America) being considerably more
diverse than their Old World counterparts (represented by taxa in Madagascar).
The results from this multidisciplinary approach to understanding the diversity
of this group of vertebrates will provide a framework for understanding
molecular and morphological change in a related group of taxa located in
different regions of the World. The overall pattern of variation obtained from
this study can also provide a basis for understanding the ecology, physiology,
and behavior of this important component of the World's biota.