* 9220823
* Anion Exchange Mechanisms in Bacteria
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Peter Maloney, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 08/31/1996
* USD 186,000.00

This project concerns OxlT, a novel transport protein in Oxalobacter formigenes,
a gram-negative anaerobic bacterium. OxlT catalyzes the exchange of external
divalent oxalate for internal monovalent formate. This electrogenic exchange,
along with proton consumption during intracellular decarboxylation, constitutes
an indirect proton pump that generates a proton-motive force as the cell
extracts "metabolic energy" from oxalate. It appears that this pattern is
replicated by other reactions in other cells, and that indirect proton pumps may
be common in microbiology. To understand this event at the molecular level, we
propose to study OxlT, the antiport protein. Presently, we have methods to
purify and reconstitute OxlT, and we have raised anti-OxlT polyclonal antibodies
that will aid us in cloning the oxlT gene. With purified protein and a cloned
gene, we will raise peptide-specific antibodies and construct gene fusions to
aid in the determination of transport protein structure. Site-directed
mutagenesis will be used to further characterize the structure/function
properties of the enzyme together with biochemical and biophysical methods to
determine the minimal functional unit (monomeric or dimeric), .- helical content
and the binding properties of the protein. %%% We have shown that the
microorganism, Oxalobacter formigenes, has a novel mechanism to harvest energy
from its environment. This cell uses a specific membrane protein, termed OxlT,
to bring divalent oxalate molecules into the cell in exchange for monovalent
formate, which is simultaneously pumped out of the cell. The formate, which is
required to complete the exchange cycle is generated by degradation of oxalate
after the molecule is brought into the cell. The asymmetric exchange of
negatively charged ions results in the formation of a membrane potential across
the cell membrane, that the cell can then use to make additional energy and
grow. At the heart of this new mechanism of energy formation is the membrane
protein, OxlT. We will use the tools of molecular biology (cloning,
mutagenesis), immunology (specific antibodies). biochemistry (purification and
reconstitution) and biophysics (spectroscopy) to study the structural and
functional properties of the enzyme to help us understand how such an unusual
membrane "pump" protein, such as this one, operates to provide extra energy for
the cells.