* 9220369
* Dynamics of Polyesters and Constrained Polymeric            Hydrocarbons
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Wayne Mattice, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 241,200.00

Fast local motions will be studied by molecular dynamics simulations. The
results will be incorporated into the dynamic rotational isomeric state
formalism in order to extend the time scale and the size of the systems
examined. Two types of systems will be studied. The first type consists of
polymeric hydrocarbons severely constrained by channels. Here the project will
focus on the influence of torsional oscillations on the orientation
autocorrelation functions, and the creation, lifetimes, migration, and
destruction of conformational defects arising from independent, or correlated,
conformational transitions. The second type of system consists of polyesters
with a variety of spacers between aromatic units, and aromatic units that have
fluorescence lifetimes shorter than, or longer than, the time scales of the
molecular dynamics simulations. Fluorescence measurements will be performed for
the polyesters under conditions where the internal dynamics is important. The
overall objective is to increases the time scales, and the sizes of systems,
susceptible to attack by atom-based studies of the internal dynamics. Polyesters
are important industrial materials, and this research seeks to relate the
motions of the molecules to the observed properties. Both computer modeling and
critical experiments will be part of the investigation.