* 9220652
* Genetics of Speciation in Nasonia
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* John Werren, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1996
* USD 240,000.00

A fundamental question in biology is "How do new species arises?" This project
will investigate the genetic basis of reproductive isolation in two species in
the parasitic wasp genus Nasonia. Nasonia is a genetically tractable system with
two important features, (a) symbiotic bacteria (Wolbachia) cause partial
reproductive incompatibility between the species and (b) genetic
incompatibilities also occur between nuclear and cytoplasmic components, some of
which show simple inheritance patterns. The role of bacterial symbionts in
causing reproductive incompatibility is one of interest because bacteria could
represent a mechanism for rapid speciation in insects. This research is designed
to assess the potential role of bacteria in promoting and/or maintaining
reproductive isolation between the species. The distribution and degree of
incompatibility within and between species will be quantified. Experiments will
determine the probability of interspecies hybridization in the presence or
absence of the bacteria. Using molecular markers, Dr. Werren will also determine
whether few or many genes are involved in the genetic and cytoplasmic
incompatibility between the two species. Results of these studies will help
reveal the genetic mechanisms by which species diverge from each other and
whether novel interactions, such as bacterial-insect associations, could play a
role in speciation. Findings could have practical implications to conservation
biology and preservation of biological diversity.***