* 9220168
* RNA Processing Pathways in Eukaryotic Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Christopher Greer, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1996
* USD 270,000.00

Accurate and efficient processing of primary transcription products is
absolutely required for normal gene expression in eukaryotic cells. Integration
and coordination among the individual reactions which constitute a functional
RNA processing pathway are the subjects of this research. Splicing and transport
of tRNA transcripts in yeast and in Xenopus have been chosen as experimental
models based on the availability of a large number of tRNA genes for analysis
detailed information regarding both tRNA structure and mechanisms for tRNA
processing, and the development of a range of assay systems for measuring
splicing and transport reactions. Quantitative microinjection of synthetic RNA
substrates into oocyte nuclei is used to measure both splicing and transport.
Experiments are proposed in two areas. The first is a systematic mutational
analysis of tRNA gene mutations affecting IVS + and IVS- tRNA transport. The
second is an analysis of the distinct yeast- like and vertebrate tRNA splicing
pathways and their function in oocytes. Injection of splicing intermediates and
coinjection of yeast tRNA ligase will be used in this second experimental area.
Long term goals include analyses of potential regulation through the use of
alternate processing pathways and mechanisms for coupling of the splicing and
transport steps. %%% Precursor transfer RNA molecules undergo shortening before
they become mature molecules that can function in ribosomal protein synthesis.
They must also be transported out of the nucleus of eukaryotic cells. These
important steps in the gene expression of functional tRNAs is the subject of
this research.