* 9220260
* Coupling Between ATP Hydrolysis and H+ Transport by ATPases in the Plasma Membrane and Tonoplast of Plant Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Roger Spanswick, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1996
* USD 147,500.00

99220260 Spanswick This research is the continuation of a program designed with
the long term objective of understanding transport in plant cells in terms of a
chemiosmotic scheme for the transport of ions across plant cell membranes. The
specific problem addressed in this proposal is that raised by the observation
that the coupling between ATP hydrolysis and proton transport by ATPases from
both the plasma membrane and the tonoplast appears to be variable depending, for
example, upon the concentration of anions present in the membrane vesicle
suspension. Hypotheses involving intrinsic u coupling between transport and
ATPase activity ("slip") or electrically driven passive proton fluxes ("leak")
will be tested by a variety of methods to account for the apparent discrepancy
between anion stimulation of ATPase-mediated proton fluxes and of ATPase
activity. %%% A proper distribution of salts between the inside and outside of a
cell and the inside and outside of individual cellular compartments is critical
for the normal function of all cells. The long term goal of this research is to
understand the transport mechanisms for ions such as protons, potassium, and
sodium (the components of salts) across the membranes of plant cells to maintain
their normal distributions. This requires understanding the properties of the
individual ion transport systems. A useful overall hypothesis for the mechanism
of ion transport is based on a scheme in which the primary active transport
systems are enzymes that transport protons (hydrogen ions) across cell membranes
against an electrochemical gradient, using energy from hydrolysis of the energy-
rich molecule, ATP. According to this scheme, other ions are transported by way
of secondary systems that derive their energy from the electrochemical gradient
of protons. (Transport of calcium ions across the plasma membrane is an
exception.) The specific goal of this project is to study in some detail the
relation between ATP hydro lysis and proton transport across the plant cell
outer membrane and the membrane of an intracellular compartment, the tonoplast.
The results of this research should provide a fundamental piece of the puzzle
that in the long run will result in a complete understanding of how plants
maintain their salt balance. ***