* 9220431
* Precious Metal Mineralization in an Oceanic-Type Layered    Gabbro:  Kap Edvard Holm Complex, East Greenland
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Dennis Bird, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/1996
* USD 154,720.00

Recent discoveries of gold and platinum group (PGE) mineralization in Eocene
layered gabbros of East Greenland demonstrate that physical and chemical
processes associated with the transition from continental to oceanic rifting can
concentrate precious metals in the Earth's crust. One of these gabbros, the Kap
Edvard Holm Complex, exhibits an unusual combination of features related to
stratiform precious metal mineralization. An understanding of these processes
requires detailed field, petrologic, isotopic, and chemical analyses, combined
with theoretical analysis of the thermodynamic and transport characteristics of
magma- hydrothermal systems. The long-term plans for this research program
involve using these techniques to provide new insights into the nature of
processes controlling: 1) precious metal concentration during gabbro
crystallization; and 2) precious metal transport and deposition in gabbro-
hosted hydrothermal systems. A specific objective of the research will be
evaluation of various hypotheses that may explain the unusually high ratio of
precious metal to sulfide that is characteristic of this deposit. Investigation
of the processes responsible for mineralization in the East Greenland gabbros is
potentially of great importance to understanding the global distribution of
precious metals and to formulating future mineral exploration strategies.