* 9220568
* Mounds at Moundville: Development of Public Architecture at a Large Missippian Ceremonial Center
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1995
* Vernon Knight, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1995
* USD 210,564.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Vernon Knight will
continue his archaeological research at the site of Moundville. Located near the
Black Warrior River in Alabama this site marks one of the highest cultural
achievements of pre- Columbian Native Americans. It consists of a large number
of mounds arranged in roughly symmetrical order, many containing tens of
thousands of cubic meters of fill. Archaeological evidence indicates that these
structures, which were likely built over extended periods of time contained
religious structures at their tops and also served as burial chambers. Several
have yielded large series of skeletons and burial goods. Of central importance
is not the structures themselves but the nature of the social organization which
made them possible. To construct such massive earthworks requires a social and
political organization which can mobilize a large amount of labor for long
periods of time. Dr. Knight's research should provide insight into this
underlying social structure. Building on past work at the site Dr. Knight will
conduct two seasons of excavation. Using standard archaeological techniques he
will cut trenches into a number of mounds. The materials collected will allow
him to date the construction (or multiple construction episodes) of each. On
this basis estimates of person power over time can also be made. Dr. Knight will
attempt to determine the functions of each structure and how these also may have
changed over time. This research is important for several reasons. It will
provide data of interest to many scientists. It will increase our understanding
of how, at a technologically simple level, complex societies develop and are
maintained. It will also assist in the training of graduate students.