* 9220482
* Mechanisms Underlying the Development of an Animal/BacterialMutualistic Association
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1997
* Edward Ruby, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 03/31/1997
* USD 370,000.00

The symbiosis that develops between the sepiolid squid, Euprymna scolopes, and
the marine luminous bacterium, Vibrio fischeri, has proven to be an effective
model system with which to examine the development of an animal/bacterial
mutualism. The initiation and maintenance of a bacterial infection in the
juveniile squid that subsequently results in the complex light-emitting organ of
the mature squid provides a rare opportunity to discover the significance of
interspecies interactions in the control of organ morphogenesis, immunological
response, bacterial/host recognition, and the consequences of other
developmentally regulated signal processes. It exhibits strain level
specificity, presents the accessibility of molecular genetics, includes a raped
and complex program of developmental events in the host and symbiont, and allows
comparisons between axenic and symbiotic juvenile tissue differentiation. This
proposal will focus specifically upon: 1) the temporal characteristics of
symbiosis induced morphogenesis; 2) the cellular basis for morphological change
of the light organ; 3) the expression and symbiotic roles of indicator proteins;
4) the identification of specificity determinants and colonziation factors; 5)
bacterial stress response as signal for symbiotic differentiation; and 6) the
temporal and spatial patterns of symbiont gene expression within the developing
light organ.