* 9220416
* Novel Correlation Effects in Condensed Matter Physics
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Sudip Chakravarty, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1996
* USD 180,000.00

In condensed matter systems there are a large number of degrees of freedom which
interact strongly with each other. Many phemonena, however, can be understood on
the basis of a small number of degrees of freedom interacting on a single scale
not significantly larger than the atomic length scale. A self-consistent one-
particle theory can adequately describe these phenomena. In contrast, there are
many instances in which it is impossible to guess the qualitative behavior of
the system from a theory based on a few degrees of freedom. The aim of the
present proposal is to examine correlation effects in these strongly interacting
systems. In particular, theoretical research will be conducted on novel
correlations in quantum antiferromagnets, on magnetic correlations in high
temperature cuprate superconductors, and on electronic correlation effects in
newly discovered superconductors made by doping fullerine molecular solids with
alkali atoms. %%% The theoretical research will focus on the physics of various
materials which cannot be understood using conventional models and techniques.
These materials include the copper-based high temperature superconductors,
magnetic materials and the newly discovered superconducting materials based on
the new form of carbon, Buckminsterfullerine. New theoretical techniques will be
developed to understand these complex systems.