* 9220273
* Classification of the Supraspecific Taxa of Feather Mites   (Acarina, Astigmata) of the World Avifauna
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Warren Atyeo, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* B. Jane Harrington
* 08/31/1995
* USD 42,472.00

Feather mites are obligate commensals on or in the feathers of birds and are
known to occur on every avian family except the penguins, totids, and ratites of
South America and Australia. The more than 2,000 species (estimated to represent
10% of the total fauna) are assigned to 379 named and approximately 64 new
genera arranged in 32 families and three superfamilies. Among these taxa there
are many examples of convergent evolution of form, apparent coevoloution of
hosts and commensals, and specializations for different microhabitats on and in
feathers. At the present time, it is still practically impossible for non-
specialists to make valid determinations even though there are many papers on
feather mites. The reasons for this are simple - there are no reliable keys to
families, few inclusive keys to genera and species within families, and no
guides to the vast literature. In collaboration chiefly with Dr. J. Gaud (Nice,
France), the leading authority of feather mites, we will rectify the lamentable
situation concerning identification. We plan to produce an illustrated
publication for the identification of the aforementioned supraspecific taxa. The
first step is to complete illustrations of species to represent the 379 genera.
These should be completed in one year. The combined 75 years of experience of
Dr. J. Gaud and the principal investigator make us uniquely qualified to
undertake this major project. When completed, the publication will open the
field of feather mite systematics where so much basic research is needed,
especially phylogenetic, biological and ontogenetic studies, and host-commensal
relationships.