* 9220082
* Synthesis of Photolabile Signalling Molecules
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Jeffery Walker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 06/30/1997
* USD 240,000.00

The overall objective of this project is to develop photosensitive compounds
that can be converted to important biological molecules by irradiation with
light. Analysis of cellular processes is greatly facilitated by the ability to
photo-release a specific biological molecule rapidly and uniformly within a
cell. Diffusional delays are overcome, permitting time-resolved measurements,
and the potential exists for good spatial resolution. The emphasis will be to
develop photo-release technology for biological molecules hypothesized to play a
role in cell signalling. This research will involve the synthesis, photochemical
characterization, and biological characterization of photolabile derivatives of
inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphates, diacylglycerols, and peptide inhibitors of
calmodulin. A long-term goal is to elucidate the roles of these molecules in
signal transduction cascades that control muscle contraction, although the
techniques should be applicable to a wide variety of cell types. Chemical
methods will also be developed for incorporation of phosphate compounds into
intact cells. Used in combination, the photoactivation technique and methods for
incorporation of charged compounds into intact cells will permit controlled
perturbation of intracellular processes in living cells. The research will
provide new insights into structure-function relationships in bio- molecules,
the photochemistry of nitro-aromatic and related compounds, and ultimately, the
dynamics of intracellular processes that participate in cellular signalling. %%%
The overall goal of this project is to develop photosensitive compounds that can
be converted to important biological molecules by irradiation with light.
Analysis of cellular processes is greatly facilitated by the ability to photo-
release a specific biological molecule rapidly and uniformly within a cell. The
emphasis will be to develop photo-release technology for biological molecules
hypothesized to play a role in cell signalling. A longer- term goal is to
elucidate the roles of these molecules in signal transduction cascades that
control muscle contraction, although the techniques should be applicable to a
wide variety of cell types. This research will provide new insights into
structure-function relationships in bio-molecules, the ultimately, into the
dynamics of intracellular processes that participate in cellular signalling.