* 9220146
* Test Morphogenesis in Giant Antarctic Foraminifera
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1998
* Samuel Bowser, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/1998
* USD 342,012.00

Some types of foraminiferan protozoa produce shells composed of mineral grains
tightly bound by a chemically-resistant, biological cement. During shell
development, these single celled animals collect mineral grains from the
sediment and secrete cement in the proper amount and location to sculpt
architecturally elegant structures. The high abundance of certain giant species
at an antarctic collection site makes the foraminiferan community there uniquely
suited for studying specific aspects of such shell construction, and for
addressing related questions concerning the evolution of the group. Studies on
the development of these structures will focus on a giant one-celled species
that allows the study of the secretion of cement in a cold-adapted marine
organism without the complications of cell to cell and cell to tissue
interactions common to multicellular animals. Studies using time-lapse
videomicroscopy, light- and electron-microscopic cell chemistry and gel
electrophoresis will provide information on this kind of test construction at
the cellular and biochemical levels of analysis. Materials testing combined with
structural modelling will characterize the mechanical properties of the cement.
From a practical standpoint, this environmentally-safe cement binds
immunoglobulins and has useful material properties that may have applied
biotechnological or biomedical applications. Finally, molecular genetic analyses
of selected species, will provide a much-needed framework for determining the
evolution of this important protozoan group. This highly interdisciplinary
project is made possible by new advances in biotechnology, and has both basic
and applied implications for a variety of fields, including medicine, molecular
pharmacology, protozoan development and evolution, paleontology, engineering,
and marine products chemistry to name a few.