* 9220367
* Chemistry of Luminescent Porous Silicon
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1996
* Michael Sailor, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/1996
* USD 351,220.00

The goal of this work is to understand the origin of luminescence in porous
silicon, and to explore the relationship between luminescence and surface
chemistry of this material. The first goal will be achieved by testing the three
current hypotheses explaining photoluminescence in porous silicon. The second
goal will be achieved by observing the changes that occur in emission intensity,
wavelength, and lifetimes on exposure of the materials to various chemical
reagents such as Lewis acids or bases, electron, hole, or energy transfer
agents, and polar or polarizable species. The mechanism of luminescence
quenching of porous silicon by gas phase species will be studied. The silicon
surface chemistry will by developed by tuning the quenching response for
specific adsorbates. The unique ability of porous silicon to change its
fluorescence color and intensity in the presence of chemical adsorbates opens up
a range of possible application for gas, liquid, and biological sensors. In
addition, an understanding of the fundamental photophysics of porous silicon
under these conditions may lead to the development of full-color flat panel
electroluminescence displays. these potential development can build on well-
established silicon processing technology. The key contribution of the proposed
work is that it will define the chemical and photochemical reactivity patterns
of luminescent porous silicon, providing the design rules for the development of
such applications.