* 9220061
* 3D Thermal Convection in an Infinite Prandtl Number Fluid   with Application to Mantle Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* E Parmentier, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/1998
* USD 165,000.00

9220061 Parmentier The studies will explore the physics of high Rayleigh number,
3D thermal convection in an infinite Prandtl number fluid based on numerical
experiments. Numerical experiments completed thus far for a volumetrically
heated fluid cooled from above show that fluid below the thermal boundary layer
at the top boundary is substantially non-adiabatic, contrary to the usual
assumptions about the structure of thermal convection at high Ra. The structure
of the flow consists of nearly axisymmetric plumes that are fed by the cold
boundary layer. Linear structures, that would presumably represent subduction
zones in the convecting mantle, appear only infrequently. The PI will carry out
further numerical experiments that include heating from below as well as
volumetric heating. The principal innovation is a multigrid iterative solver for
buoyant viscous flow that is an order of magnitude or more faster than the FFT
methods that have frequently been used in 3D convection problems. The PI will
extend development of multigrid solvers to buoyant fiscous flow with variable
viscosity. This will be carried out by solving equations formulated in primitive
variable (pressures and velocity components) rather than in vector
streamfunction and vorticity or some other potential function formulation. The
first application of this new methodology will be to understand how temperature
and depth dependent viscosity modify results of the constant viscosity, high
Rayleigh number numerical experiments. ***