* 9220183
* Structure/Function Relationships in Tropomyosin
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Terese Tansey, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 10/31/1996
* USD 154,000.00

Tropomyosin is a protein which plays a critical role in regulating muscle
contraction. Like all proteins, tropomyosin is composed of a linear sequence of
amino acid sub-units. Although we know that the function of a protein depends on
the chemical properties of its amino acids, very little is known about how the
specific amino acids in tropomyosin help to regulate muscle contraction. The
long-term goal of this research program is a more detailed understanding of the
relationship between the amino acid composition of tropomyosin and the role of
the protein in muscle cells. Animals have several kinds of muscle, with unique
properties. What imparts this uniqueness? The intriguing observation has been
made that different muscles contain different versions of the contractile
proteins, where each version, known as an isoform, has a unique amino acid
sequence. Tropomyosin is one of the contractile proteins with a muscle-specific
distribution of isoforms. The short-term objective of this project is to
determine whether different tropomyosin isoforms endow muscles with distinctive
contractile properties. We are focusing on an isoform of tropomyosin found in
the indirect flight muscle of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. Indirect
flight muscle has special properties that allow it to move the wings rapidly
during flight. The project will employ a mutant strain of Drosophila that is
unable to fly because it does not produce enough of the flight muscle
tropomyosin isoform. To determine whether the flight muscle isoform is essential
for flight muscle function, flight muscle of the mutant strain will be
supplemented with two non-flight muscle tropomyosins. Muscle structure and
function will be analyzed. If tropomyosin isoforms are functionally
interchangeable, the mutants will regain the ability to fly; if the flight
muscle isoforms provides unique and essential contractile properties, the flies
will remain flightless. Should we obtain the latter results, those segments of
the flight muscle protein critical for flight muscle function will be
identified. Before we can understand completely how the muscle cell works at the
molecular level, the part played by each of the component proteins must be
elucidated in as much detail as possible. The present study will expand our
knowledge of tropomyosin's role.