* 9220394
* Plant Protein Farnesyltransferase:  Molecular and FunctionalAnalyses
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Carole Cramer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1996
* USD 205,167.00

Protein farnesyltransferase (FTase) is a heterodimeric enzyme that post-
translationally modifies proteins by attaching an isoprenyl moiety to a
C-terminal cysteine. This modification, identified in yeast and animals, is
required for membrane association and in vivo activities of many regulatory
proteins involved in cell cycle control and differentiation. The major focus of
the proposed project is to elucidate the role(s) of FTase and protein
prenylation in mediating plant developmental processes. In recent experiments, a
cDNA clone encoding a pea FTase beta subunit has been cloned and characterized,
protein prenylation has been demonstrated in plant cells, and FTase transcript
levels have been analyzed in apical buds of pea seedlings and suspension-
cultured tomato cells. In both experimental systems, a rapid, transient increase
in FTase mRNA was detected preceding the onset of active cell division. These
results are consistent with the hypothesis that FTase mediates the activity of
critical components of the signal transduction pathways controlling cell
division in plants, analogous to its key role in cell cycle control in fungal
and mammalian systems. To test this hypothesis, a cDNA for the FTase alpha
subunit will be cloned from pea and biochemical and physiological properties of
pea FTase will be delineated using both in vitro assays and in vivo plant cells
transiently expressing protein prenylation substrates. Detailed analyses of the
temporal and spatial patterns of pea Ftase gene expression will be performed to
provide clues as to its functional significance in plant development. Plant
cells and stably transformed plants, inhibited in Ftase expression by antisense
RNAs or competitive peptide inhibitor, will be monitored for phenotypic,
cellular, and molecular changes to directly assess the role of FTase in
regulating plant cell division and differentiation. %%% It has recently been
discovered that certain proteins are modified, under some physiological
conditions, by covalent attachment of isoprenyl groups to a specific C-terminal
amino acid. Isoprenyl groups are a type of organic molecule that tends to be
more soluble in fats or oils than in water. This modification, then, has the
effect of allowing proteins that would otherwise remain dissolved in the watery
cytoplasm of a cell to attach to cellular membranes. which are composed of fatty
materials. It is now becoming clear that the association of particular proteins
with membranes is a critical event in a chain of biochemical events that
regulate cell division, membrane fusion, and a variety of other cell biological
processes. This important regulatory mechanism has been described and is
actively being studied in mammalian cells and in yeast, but until now nothing
has been known of its possible existence or role in higher plants. This is the
subject of this research. These investigators have identified the gene for one
part of the enzyme that carries out addition of isoprenyl groups to proteins in
peas and will use techniques of molecular biology to characterize the enzyme
further and to study its possible function in plants.