* 9220802
* US-France Cooperative Research (INRIA):  Simulation and     Control of Constrained Mechanical Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Stephen Campbell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1998
* USD 18,250.00

9220802 Campbell This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research
between Stephen L. Campbell of North Carolina State University and Francois
Deleecque of INRIA (French National Institute for Research in Computer Science
and Applied Mathematics), Rocquencourt, France. Ramine Nikoukhah, Jean Pierre
Quadrat, also from INRIA Rocquencourt, will participate in the project. The
objective of their research is to develop optimal control algorithms for
constrained mechanical systems, numerical methods and solutions for differential
equations, and a computer environment employing symbolic, graphic and numerical
software. Differential-algebraic equations (DAEs), which the investigators will
utilize in their research, are found to be extremely useful for expressing and
modeling optimal control of mechnical systems. DAEs have advantages over
ordinary differential equations in that one can easily vary design parameters in
an implicit model, a particular system structure can be better exploited, and
less mathematical expertise is required on the part of the designer. The
proposed research in numerical solution of DAEs is important for work in
singular systems, which appear, for example, in circuits and power systems.
Research results may include new and more efficient algorithms and design
procedures that are applicable to a wide variety of engineering systems. The
project takes advantage of the complementary background of the U.S. and French
investigators in many different areas, including control and mechanics,
numerical solutions of DAES, and computer software. ***