* 9220434
* Theoretical Population Genetics of Genome Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* J. Bruce Walsh, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1996
* USD 90,000.00

Initiatives such as the human genome project and similar projects for other
model genetic systems are generating vast amounts of information on the detailed
genetic organization of a variety of organisms. The search for general
organizing principles and new biological processes using these data requires a
starting framework for a theory of genome structure. This project continues Dr.
Walsh's long-term research goal of a comprehensive population-genetic theory of
genome evolution, based on an understanding of how molecular forces within the
cell shape the genome and, conversely, how one can make inferences on the nature
of these forces from genomic sequence and structural information. Three related
problems will be examined. The first is to examine how intracellular selection,
drift, and gene conversion influence the within-cell substitution dynamics of
organelle genes. All eukaryotes carry at least two separate genomes (the nuclear
genome plus one or two organelle --- mitochondrial and chloroplast --- genomes).
Organelle genomes are very widely used as genetic markers in problems as diverse
as understanding human origins, tracing the genetic input from different native
plants into high-yield domesticated crops, and conservation biology. The theory
proposed to be developed here will provide a better understanding of how these
genetic markers behave. Second, models for the conditions under which a recently
duplicated gene evolves a new function (as opposed to becoming an inactive
pseudogene) will be examined. There has been essentially no modeling of just how
frequent (or infrequent) the evolution of new function is expected to be.
Finally, models of the evolution of genome size, treating size as a
quantitative- genetic character will be developed. While there is a developing
theory of the behavior of an individual gene family, there is currently no
general theory about how genome size as a whole evolves. //