* 9220849
* ABR:  Phenotypic Plasticity in the Life History of the      Sailfin Molly, Poecilia latipinna (Pisces:  Poeciliidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Joseph Travis, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1997
* USD 221,875.00

This study will examine the environmentally-induced flexibility in the life
history of the sailfin molly. It is obvious that almost any animal's life
history is malleable by environmental effects such as temperature or food level.
However, two aspects of that malleability are not well understood. First, there
is increasing evidence that the pattern of environmental sensitivity varies
among different populations of the same species. Second, it is unclear whether
natural selection has molded those different patterns of sensitivity and, if it
has, how it has done so. These two basic questions will be addressed by this
research. There are several ways in which the lessons from this study may be
applied to other problems. First, conservation biology is focusing increasingly
on how to restore viable populations of a species to an area from which it has
been extirpated. This work will help document how "interchangeable" are
individuals from different populations of the same species and thereby whether
it is ever advisable to draw colonists from a population elsewhere in the
species' range. Second, one of the major aspects of life history of this fish is
its accrual and use of fat stores. This work will examine the genetic and
environmental control of fat accrual and may lead to the use of fish models
instead of mice as a less expensive system for studying some aspects of the
control of fat metabolism.//