* 9220242
* Lineage-specific Cell Communication During Sea Urchin       Development
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Eric Davidson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 09/30/1996
* USD 245,000.00

In the sea urchin embryo there are five territories of invariant lineage - the
prospective aboral ectoderm, the prospective oral ectoderm the vegetal plate,
the skeletogenic mesenchyme and the small micromeres. In addition to a unique
pattern of gene expression, these territories are defined by individual cell
lineage histories and generation of distinct cell types. The lineages forming
these territories are completely segregated from each other by the 6th cleavage
and spatially restricted gene expression begins one or two divisions later. In
all the territories except the skeletogenic mesenchyme, the founder cells that
are the progenitors of each territory achieve unique patterns of gene expression
by means of intracellular interactions with other cells. The following studies
are designed to determine the lineage and fate of founder cells for specific
cell types within territories; to investigate the specific functional
significance of interactions with neighboring cells in establishing certain of
the territories; and to test the role of major signal transduction systems in
the specification of territories and cell types. The proposed experiments fall
into the following categories: 1. Vegetal plate and neuronal lineage tracing
with caged flourescein- dextran. 2. Cell lineage and cell interaction studied by
means of cell ablation. 3. Molecular characterization of abnormal phenotypes
derived from introduction of a foreign serotonin ligand- receptor system. 4.
Developmental consequences of ectopic stimulation of the PI signal transduction
system in specific blastomeres of known lineage (using the serotonin receptor).
5. The effects of elevated levels of second messengers in whole embryos and
individual blastomeres. 6. Developmental effects of the expression of foreign
receptor kinases in whole embryos and individual cells.