* 9220049
* Eolian Dispersal Patterns of Zircon and its Subsurface      Geochemistry in Continental Weathering Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1993,12/31/1996
* George Brimhall, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1996
* USD 210,779.00

Having confirmed the eclectic nature and presence of eolian additions in a
classical lateritic regolith in Australia, we request renewal of this funding
for continued study off continental weathering systems. We seek to make more new
applications of unique microbeam capabilities of the SHRIMP (sensitive high-
resolution ion microprobe) to surface process studies centering on the
provenance, surficial transport and in situ weathering behavior of zircon, a
chemically resistant and datable pathfinder mineral of unparalleled utility. We
wish to define ancient eolian dispersal patterns and mineralogical gradients of
dust-size weathering product and insoluble detrital accessory minerals across
the tectonically-stable Yilgarn craton of Western Australia. Our study will
focus on sampling a sequence of uneroded laterites in an easterly transect
leading away from the principal source region which we infer to have contributed
foreign zircon to the Jarrahdale bauxite near Perth Australia by paleo-eolian
processes. In the 700 Ma Leeuwin Block of the Pinjarra Orogen source region, we
wish to study the accessory mineral suite (zircon, rutile, monazite and
ilmenite) in bedrock granite, granulite and anorthosite exposures and date the
zircons. Also, by dating eolian zircons in contemporary dust samples collected
from rain gauge arrays, we can ascertain if source regions have shifted
significantly. Finally, we wish to study the mineralogical and isotopic
processes of in situ weathering of parent material zircon and to pursue direct
SHRIMP dating of authigenic anatase. We wish to test their use in characterizing
and timing the advance of the weathering front and biomechanical admixing rate
of detritus into the subsurface thereby augmenting the array of geochronological
methods available for surficial process studies.