* 9220382
* Investigation of the Transport Properties in Thin Strained  GexSil-x Layers, with Applications to Heterojunction BipolarTransistor
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1994,04/30/1998
* Arnost Neugroschel, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/1998
* USD 339,375.00

9220382 Neugroschel The Si/Ge1-x/Si heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT) is
one of the most promising devices for manufacturing Si-based ultrafast VLSI and
ULSI circuits. The GexSi1-x layer, used for the base of the transistor, can be
grown by slightly modifying the Si technology and taking advantage of the
complete miscibility of Ge and Si to tailor the profiles of the energy gap for
optimum performance. The proposed work will concentrate on the investigation of
the fundamental electronic properties of the composite GexSi1-x strained thin
layers grown on silicon substrate. The properties to be investigated are the
transport parameters important primarily to the performance of the
Si/GexSi1-x/Si HBT, but useful also for other applications. These include the
minority-carrier mobility (or diffusivity) and lifetime, energy gap, GexSi1-x
junction. The investigation will be made as a function of growth conditions, the
layer thickness and compostion (Ge content x), strain and strain relaxation (via
annealing), dopant impurity concentration and temperature. It is expected that
the proposed research will significantly enhance the present understanding of
the bulk and interface properties of the Si/GexSi1-x heterostructures, and will
allow optimization of device to reach higher performance not attainable using
the current empirical approach.