* 9220788
* U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund Research: Convection Induced by     Chemical Waves
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1993,01/15/1996
* George Bazsa, Kossuth Lajos Science University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/15/1996
* USD 0.00

This US-Hungary Joint Fund research on "Convection Induced by Chemical Waves"
will be conducted by Dr. George Bazsa of Kossuth Science University in
cooperation with Dr. John A. Pojman of the University of Southern Mississippi.
Autocatalytic reactions (in which the products increase the rate of their own
production) can propagate in unstirred solutions. The reactions can alter the
density of the solution by releasing heat (decrease the density) and by changing
the composition of the solution (either increase or decrease the density). Under
the influence of gravity the resulting density gradients can result in fluid
motion, or natural convection. The effect of convection on the rate of front
propagation in the iron-nitric acid system has been shown to exhibit puzzling
dependence on the orientation of the tube and the initial concentrations. The
mechanism of the convection is still not clear. Besides raising basic questions
about the interactions of chemistry and hydrodynamics, this work may aid in
understanding chemically induced convection in other areas such as directional
solidification and wet chemical etching. This study will measure the
concentration gradients and thermal gradients in traveling fronts using video
imaging technology in order to test mechanisms proposed for the convection which
has been observed, and often, only inferred from measurements of propagation.
Chemically induced convection systems offer insight into natural convection in
small containers. The orientation dependence of fluid flow with respect to the
gravitational vector is especially relevant to materials processing in space,
where there is reduced gravity but greater difficulty in controlling the
orientation of the container with respect to the gravitational vector. This
research in chemistry fulfills the program objective of advancing science by
enabling leading experts in the United States and Hungary to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.