* 9220572
* Identification and Characterization of the Sobevirus        Coat Protein-Binding Site
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1992,10/31/1994
* David Hacker, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 10/31/1994
* USD 35,000.00

The high resolution structures of several positive-sense RNA viruses, both rod-
shaped and iscosahedral, have now been determined, and the molecular events in
the assembly of rod- shaped RNA viruses have been characterized in great detail
through the study of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). By comparison, relatively
little is known about the protein: RNA and protein: protein interactions which
direct the assembly of the icosahedral RNA viruses. The experiments proposed
here are designed to determine the RNA sequence and structure of the southern
bean mosaic virus SBMV coat protein-binding site, and to characterize the rp-
complex. The results will provide a detailed picture of the specific interaction
between RNA and protein in the initiation event of icosahedral virus assembly,
and they will also be relevant to the study of RNA: protein interactions in
general. In addition, the proposed experiments will directly test the models for
icosahedral virus assembly and will allow comparisons to be made between SBMV
assembly and the assembly of another small RNA virus, turnip crinkle virus
(TVC), with the PI has worked as a postdoctoral fellow. %%% Viral assembly is a
key component in virus-host interactions. This project will contribute toward
our understanding the host range and symptom severity of this group of plant
virus and the economically important plant disease they cause. //