* 9220518
* Evolution and Distribution of Trichomycete Gut Fungi in Arthropods
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Robert Lichtwardt, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John R. Gold
* 08/31/1996
* USD 120,000.00

Trichomycetes are commensalistic fungi that live obligately in the guts of
various insects, crustaceans, and millipedes. The variety of host and habitats,
the worldwide occurrence of all families, and the intercontinental distribution
of some genera of these fungi indicate that the relationship with arthropods is
very ancient. Dr. Robert Lichtwardt of the University of Kansas seeks to
understand how and when trichomycetes evolved and became geographically
distributed with their arthropod hosts. Data from Australia and New Zealand
suggest that some fungal taxa may have had common ancestors on Gondwana at least
70-80 million years ago. Evidence to support the Gondwanan origin of austral
trichomycetes will be sought in southern South America. Studies of other gut
fungi in marine, terrestrial, and freshwater arthropods may provide evidence of
how long certain species have been radiating with their hosts, and the roles of
dispersal and vicariance in allopatric distributions. Phylogenetic analysis of
trichomycete genera will assist in understanding their evolution and
biogeography, and isozyme phenotypes of cultured isolates from different
geographical regions of the world will provide some information on species
variability. Harpellales, whose species grow only in larval stages of aquatic
insects, will be studied to see whether or not their propagules can disperse
phoretically with adults.