* 9220665
* Experimental Studies of Population and Community Dynamics   in Protist Food Webs
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Peter Morin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1995
* USD 123,968.00

Laboratory experiments using Protists will test two alternate ideas about the
limits to food chain length: dynamic fragility of longer chains versus
interactions between productivity and the efficiency of energy transfer between
trophic levels. A second series of experiments will test the contributions of
environmental variation and storage effects to the maintenance of high ciliate
diversity in ephemeral rain pools and their laboratory counterparts. A third set
of experiments will explore the role of coevolution in producing observed
temporal patterns of population dynamics, and will examine whether the presence
or absence of sexual reproduction affects rates of coevolution. Other
experiments will continue our ongoing investigations of the effects of omnivores
and species richness on web dynamics. These experiments assemble replicated food
webs of protozoans that differ in the number of trophic levels, productivity,
omnivory, or species richness, and then evaluate the persistence and temporal
variability in the abundance of each species in unmanipulated control
communities and similar communities and similar communities subjected to small
perturbations in nutrient levels. %%% This research will test food web theory
which predicts relations between the structure of food webs and the dynamics of
their component populations. Such information is valuable for understanding and
predicting human impacts on complex aquatic communities.