* 9220520
* Concerted Evolution of a Retrotransposon Within a Geographic Population
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1998
* Holly Wichman, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1998
* USD 280,000.00

Mobile genetics sequences, or transposable elements, are ubiquitous features of
mammalian genomes. They cause mutations by inactivation of genes, by changing
the regulation of gene expressions, and by acting as sites for recombination
which leads to chromosomal rearrangement. To understand the ways in which
transposable elements affect the organisms, we need a more accurate assessment
of transposition rates, and an understanding of the mechanisms by which elements
within the genome interact. In this regard, it has been observed that elements
compared from within a single species are generally more similar to each other
than elements from two related species. This phenomenon, known as concerted
evolution, suggests that elements are rapidly homogenized by some force(s)
acting within a species. Concerted evolution is a common feature of transposable
elements families, but is usually observed at the species level or above. This
project examines a unique example of concerted evolution of transposable
elements at the population level. Concerted evolution has been shown to occur in
hundreds of copies of the mys retrotransposon in a single geographic population
of the white- footed mouse, Peromyscus leucopus, near Orono, Maine. Although
concerted evolution of mammalian transposable elements is generally believed to
result from transposition by one or a few "molecular drivers", data from this
population suggest that biased gene conversion may be the mechanism operating
here. Furthermore, this gene conversion appears to effect only part of the mys
element. The specific objectives of this project are: i) to determine the
proportion of mys elements in the Maine population which have undergone
concerted evolution; ii) to test the hypothesis that concerted evolution of mys
within this population is due to biased gene conversion; and iii) to formulate
hypotheses to explain the apparently limited region of the element undergoing
gene conversion. Methods employed will include radioanalytic imaging of genomic
Southern blots and DNA sequence comparisons of elements from the population of
interest and orthologous elements from control populations. This study will be
one of the first to examine the population biology of a mammalian transposable
element. Concerted evolution in this population may well provide insight in to
some previously unrecognized process by which transposable elements interact
within the genome and influence the genetic basis of population adaptation to
changing conditions.//