* 9220254
* RUI: Function of Lipoxygenase in the Arabidopsis Pathogen   Defense Response
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Teresa Peterman, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Erik T. Nilsen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

Lipoxygenases are of biological interest because the primary products of the
reaction, fatty acid hydroperoxidase, are typically metabolized into molecules
of known or suspected regulatory activity which may function in the response to
stress. The goal of the proposed research is to understand the function of
lipoxygenase in the Arabidopsis defense response to pathogenic Pseudomonads. The
proposed experiments test the working hypothesis that lipoxygenase, rapidly
induced upon attack by an avirulent pathogen, is required for disease
resistance, and functions in the synthesis of jasmonic acid which serves to
regulate the host defense response. The pathogen defense response will be tested
intransgenic plants which either over-produce the lipoxygenase cDNA or in
antisense plants with reduced levels of lipoxygenase activity. These experiments
will provide evidence that the rapid induction of lipoxygenase upon pathogen
attack is an important component of an effective host defense response. The
spatial patterns of lipoxygenase mRNA, protein accumulation and gene expression
will be determined in response to pathogen attack by in situ hybridization,
immunocytochemistry and analysis of lipoxygenase promoter/GUS fusions,
respectively. Finally, the kinetics of both lipoxygenase induction and jasmonate
production inresponse to pathogen attack will be measured to determine the
relationship of these two species in signalling. Completion of these experiments
will lead to important insights into the role of lipoxygenase in pathogen
defense.