* 9220373
* Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on the Photosynthesis of   Phytoplankton in the Antarctic Marginal Ice Zone
* O/D,OPP
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1996
* John Cullen, Chesapeake Research Consortium Inc
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 01/31/1996
* USD 155,456.00

Increases in middle ultraviolet radiation associated with the Antarctic ozone
hole have been shown to inhibit the photosynthesis of phytoplankton, and results
have been extrapolated to estimate the effect of ozone depletion on primary
productivity in the marginal ice zone. This research will refine the assessment
by specifying detailed wavelength-dependent biological weighting functions for
the inhibition of photosynthesis by ultraviolet radiation, and by considering
the mitigating effects of vertical mixing. Biological weighting functions of
phytoplankton in the marginal ice zone will be measured under controlled
conditions and applied in a new model of photosynthesis to predict primary
productivity in situ, as well as under altered ultraviolet irradiance. These
predictions will be compared with observations on samples from the water column
and with measurements during incubations of several hours under different
irradiance regimes. Results of these comparisons will be used to test the model
and to quantify the potential artifact of long incubations. Assumptions about
the kinetics of photoinhibition and recovery, critical to modeling the effects
of vertical mixing, will be examined with time-course experiments. Results will
be incorporated into a model of photosynthesis and photoinhibition in the water
column that will be used to predict the influence of ozone depletion on marine
primary production, particularly in the marginal zone.