* 9220048
* Global Change: Geologic Records Inferred from Cosmic Ray    Produced Neon at the Surface of the Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1993
* Kurt Marti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1993
* USD 63,566.00

In the last few years, several cosmic-ray-produced radionuclides (10Be, 14C,
26Al, 36Cl), as well as stable 3He, 21Ne and 22Ne have been discovered in
terrestrial surface materials. Some of these nuclides are already employed as
tracers in studies of geophysical and geological phenomena and open up a new
field of study and are expected to provide essential data on rates of change in
global change research. Such studies require an accurate knowledge of of the
production rates, present and past, which are not currently available. We are
using a direct method for the determination of some of present production rates,
by exposing relevant targets at mountain altitudes. Production rates averaged
over the last solar cycles can be obtained by comparing production rates with
neutron monitor data. We are currently evaluating the relevant production ratio
P21/P26 of the cosmic-ray-produced nuclides 21Ne and 26Al by isotopic
measurements of Ne in quartz samples. Our preliminary experimental data do not
agree well with theoretical predictions. Average production rates over
104-105years can be obtained from measurements of samples of known age.
Measurements of the 3He/21Ne ratio show that 3He is often incompletely retained
in quartzites. Therefore, 21Ne production rates and 21Ne/10Be and 21Ne/26Al
ratios provide essential information, which is required to evaluate erosion
rates and to define geological processes (uplift, variations in ice cover etc).