* 9220005
* Rock Friction Constitutive Experiments as Related to Theory of Earthquake Instability
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* John Weeks, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/1995
* USD 80,817.00

9220005 Tullis This work is a laboratory experimental study of the frictional
behavior of rocks with significance both for understanding fundamental
frictional processes and for learning how to apply the laboratory results to
faults in the Earth's crust that produce earthquakes. The focus is on two
important problems. The first is to understand the processes responsible for the
observed behavior, so that constitutive equations can be based on known
processes. This is important for extrapolating laboratory results over large
time and distance scales to earthquakes. The second problem is to understand the
reason for differences in large displacement experiments between velocity
weakening behavior of friction samples using initially bare surfaces and
velocity strengthening behavior of samples using simulated gouge. Understanding
the correlations between frictional behavior and structures in these samples
will help ascertain what behavior may be associated with structures observed in
natural faults. Experiments will be conducted using a unique high pressure
rotary shear apparatus well suited for this purpose. Experiments will be done on
rock types of geological importance with known flow and fracture properties.
Pore fluid chemistry, sliding rate and temperature will be varied to determine
how frictional behavior depends on these variables and to help identify
operative processes. ***