* 9220635
* A Multidisciplinary Synthesis of the Chukchi Sea            Ecosystem: Physical Processes
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Knut Aagaard, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Myers
* 06/30/1995
* USD 149,810.00

This collaborative effort will make use of an extensive and unique data set
collected over several years from the Chukchi Sea. Investigators from three
institutions will study the interactions of physical, chemical, and biological
processes of the Chukchi Sea ecosystem to define its present and perhaps future
trophic status through a series of data and simulation analyses. The physical
processes associated with biological and chemical processes in the Chukchi Sea
will be assessed using data from a series of 13 current meter moorings in
1990-1991 and seven bilateral U.S.-U.S.S.R. cruises during 1988-1991. Work will
be undertaken to analyze the buoyancy and current fields from the year-long time
series data together with the wind field; to examine the role of physical
processes, with a particular emphasis on the variability of the shelf
circulation over the year, the role of the wind in forcing the shelf
circulation, and the variable fluxes of heat, salt, and other dissolved
substances through the system. The source water concentrations of nutrients will
be combined with buoyancy flux estimates to calculate nutrient flux estimates.
Nutrient budgets for the Chukchi Sea shelf will then be constructed and compared
to subsurface oxygen inventories and primary production estimates. The work
supports the goals and research priorities of the Arctic System Science (ARCSS)
program of the Global Geosciences Initiative.