* 9220065
* Sources of Cenozoic Volcanism in McMurdo Sound: An          Isotopic Study
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Mark Kurz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/1997
* USD 122,438.00

The existence of basaltic volcanism in McMurdo Sound has been attributed to a
mantle hotspot, or alternatively, to structurally controlled eruptions related
to continental rifting and extension in the Ross Sea. The goals of this award
are to: 1) characterize the mantle source beneath the region and understand its
origin, and 2) determine the relationship between the volcanism and the proposed
hotspot and/or extension-related tectonic origin. Existing isotopic data suggest
that these basalts have unique radiogenic lead and non-radiogenic strontium
isotopic compositions that are compatible with derivation from a hypothetical
class of mantle called HIMU (meaning high uranium to lead ratio). This type of
mantle could be produced by one or more of the following processes; recycling of
oceanic crust into the mantle, metasomatic addition of uranium, metasomatic
removal of rubidium, or lead loss to the core. Helium isotopes have not yet been
used extensively to study HIMU mantle. However, helium isotopes will be useful
for characterizing HIMU mantle sources of basalts and identifying the processes
involved in its production because helium isotopes can help distinguish between
undepleted mantle and mantle that has been involved in mid-ocean ridge or
subduction processes. Thus, helium isotopic data from the McMurdo Sound region
will help to understand the nature and origin of HIMU mantle sources in
Antarctica and elsewhere in the world. In addition, new helium isotopic data
from this area, coupled with strontium, neodymium, and lead isotopes, will help
determine whether the McMurdo Sound basalts are associated with a hot mantle
plume, involving undepleted mantle, or whether they are associated with
extension related magmatism that would not require involvement of a mantle
plume. Isotopic ages of the volcanic rocks which would be produced in the course
of this work will also help document the temporal and tectonic controls on
volcanism.