* 9220863
* Effects of 3-trophic-level Interactions on Sex Ratios of an Herbivore and Parasite
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Wayne Getz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1994
* USD 17,499.00

The most important group of organisms able to control potential insect pest
populations are parasitic wasps that parasitize the eggs, larvae, or pupae of
their host. These parasitic wasps are the mainstay of classical biological
control which has enormous potential to impact agriculture and reduce the use of
pesticides worldwide. Parasitic wasps have a vast array of life histories and a
unique ability to control the sex ratio of their progeny. Sex ratio biasing has
a critical impact on the demography of wasp populations and their ability to
compare with other wasp species and regulate host populations. This study
involves developing a model of a parasitic wasp Diadegma insulare on diamondback
moth which is a pest in cruciferous crops (cabbage, cauliflower,etc.) world
wide. The study focuses on the influence of the quality of plants on the quality
of diamondback moth larvae and how the quality of these larvae influences the
demography of Diadegma, especially in terms of sex ratio biasing. The challenge
of the study is to obtain a realistic model that integrates genetic and
environmental components associated with sex ratio biasing in a 3- trophic level
ecological interaction, and to use the model to help interpret data obtained
from field and laboratory experiments. The knowledge gained could help in
promoting biological control of diamondback moth.//