* 9220961
* NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center:        Center for Corrosion in Multiphase Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1999
* William Jepson, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 08/31/1999
* USD 370,000.00

Corrosion conditions affect a wide range of industries. In oil industry, the
main cause of pipeline fractures is corrosion. Generally speaking, it is not
economic to separate the oil and gas and transport them in different pipelines.
In the oil industry, the oil and gas, together with carbon dioxide and brine
which are used in enhanced oil recovery methods, are flowed together in one
large diameter pipeline. These multiphase flows have very different
characteristics than single phase flows. Planning activities at Ohio University
and the University of Illinois have developed an industry based research Center
program in investigating the corrosion in multiphase systems. The formation of
this Center is based on the early work supported by some oil/gas and animal farm
building industries . The proposed Center program is to develop an integration
of industry, Ohio University, and the University of Illinois based on the NSF
I/UCRC model. The initial research agenda of Ohio University/University of
Illinois's Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Corrosion in
Multiphase System will address the following topics: 1) Corrosion in Oil and Gas
Pipelines, 2) Corrosion in Animal and Plant Confinement Facilities, and 3)
Bacterial/Microbial Corrosion. Currently, there are fifteen company sponsors for
the Center (ten companies in the research group at Ohio University and five
companies in the research group at the University of Illinois) committing
approximately $365,000/year. The Principal Investigator/Center Director and his
colleagues at Ohio University and the University of Illinois have the knowledge
and facilities to run this Center. The Program Manager recommends Ohio
University and the University of Illinois be awarded $100,000 for the first year
of a five-year continuing award. The continueing award for the University of
Illinois will be based on the significant growth of the industrial support in
the end of the first year. Near the end of the first year the Program Director
will review the progress of the Center on a number of criteria, including the
following: 1) the extent to which the university- industry interaction is
developing; 2) the extent to which the support base is developing; 3) the extent
to which a robust research program is developing. If the review is satisfactory,
the Program Director will recommend support for the next period of this
continuing award.