* 9220955
* US-Czechoslovakia Joint Fund Research on Semantics of       English and Czech
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1992,12/15/1995
* Eva Hajicova, Charles University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/15/1995
* USD 0.00

This U.S.-Czechoslovakia Joint Fund award is for research on "Semantics of
English and Czech" by Dr. Eva Hajicova of the Institute for Formal & Applied
Linguistics, Charles University, Prague, in cooperation with Dr. Barbara H.
Partee of the University of Massachusetts-Amherst. The researchers will focus on
theoretical and descriptive issues in the comparative semantics of English and
Czech, particularly the relation between formal semantic structure and
informational structure. The collaboration builds on prior work by Hajicova and
her colleagues in Prague on topic-focus articulation and functional sentence
perspective, and by Partee and her colleagues in the U.S. on cross-linguistic
semantics of quantification and related issues in formal semantics. One central
issue to be investigated is the extent to which theoretical differences between
the approaches to semantics developed in the two countries may partially reflect
differences in those aspects of meaning and information structure that are
grammaticized in English and Czech. Results would have important consequences
for semantic theory and semantic typology, as well as practical benefits for
both traditional and computational applications in the domains of translation,
pedagogy, and information retrieval. This research in linguistics fulfills the
program objective of advancing science by enabling leading experts in the United
States and Czechoslovakia to combine complementary talents and pool research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.