* 9220773
* US-France Cooperative Research (INRIA):  Algorithms for     Large-Scale Constrained Optimization
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Jorge Nocedal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/1997
* USD 21,388.00

This three-year award supports ongoing U.S-France collaboration in computer
science between Jorge Nocedal of Northwestern University and Jean Charles
Gilbert of INRIA (The French National Institute for Research in Computer Science
and Applied Mathematics). The investigators worked previously on algorithms for
unconstrained optimization as applied to assimilation problems in meteorology.
They propose to extend their research to solving large-scale constrained
optimization problems involving a large number of variables. The objective is to
develop faster and more flexible algorithms and software than is currently
available. The investigators selected an important nonlinear problem with an
arbitrarily large number of variables - the optimization of the trajectory of a
space shuttle as it re-enters the atmosphere. They will apply sequential
quadratic programming methods to this problem. The proposal takes advantage of
complementary expertise. The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration
extensive experience in the development of software for large scale
optimization. This is complemented by the French investigator's expertise in
solutions of optimal control problems and recent studies of control of the space
shuttle. The project may lead to practical applications, but will advance the
use of algorithms and software which may useful in engineering and scientific
problems with large numbers of variables.