* 9220593
* Genetics of Reaction Norms of Arabidopsis
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Carl Schlichting, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1995
* USD 106,872.00

Plants' responses to changes in their environments may be crucial for survival
and reproduction, particularly under stressful conditions. The term 'reaction
norm' refers to the responses of an organism (actual and potential) to
environmental variation. The nature of these responses to the environment is
under genetic control, and there are several ways that control can be
manifested. The form of the genetic control is important because it will
determine whether selection, either in the wild or in agriculture, can alter the
ways that plants respond to changes in environmental factors such as light,
water, nutrients or herbivores. The experiments being undertaken will reveal the
genetic components of response to a gradient in soil nutrients, using a model
plant system, Arabidopsis thaliana. In addition, we will impose a regime of
artificial selection on Arabidopsis populations to determine the ability of
these plants to alter their reaction norms, that is, to change their abilities
to respond to changes in the level of nutrients. The results of these two sets
of experiments will provide a better understanding of the genetic determination
of reaction norms, and of how selection may operate to change reaction norms.
Such an understanding may become increasingly important as we try to evaluate
the impact of global environmental change on both wild and agricultural plant
species.