* 9221845
* Phonetics and Morpho-phonology of Abkhaz
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,08/31/1997
* R. Lorenza Trigo, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 08/31/1997
* USD 177,170.00

9221845 Trigo Abkhaz, a Northwest Caucasian language spoken in Turkey and the
Georgians S.S.R. is typologically anomalous in that it exhibits an
extraordinarily complex consonantal inventory. Morphologically, it is an
ergative language in which virtually the entire syntactic structure of the
clause is capitulated in the verbal complex. It contains several grammatical
subsystems that interact with each other in ways that are relevant to theories
of sound patterning (morpho-phonology) and sound realization (phonetics). The
grammar of Abkhaz has been well described, but descriptive and theoretical work
on the above topics has been superficial and of limited access. Moreover,
present demographics and political conditions in Georgia and Turkey pose a
significant threat to the language of the Abkhaz. The Principal Investigator
will work with her consultant of the last two years and with two additional
speakers to transcribe, analyze, gloss, and translate new and existing data. In
addition, the PI will record and analyze the acoustic properties of the various
sounds of the language. The PI will also investigate specific linguistic
hypotheses about the grammar of Abkhaz based on the analyzed corpus of data.
This will culminate in a volume describing the sound system and morpho-phonology
of Abkhaz. ***