* 9221504
* Molecular Phylogeny of the Spermophilina (Sciuridae: Rodentia)
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Richard Harrison, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 04/30/1997
* USD 230,000.00

Biodiversity studies address questions about the origin and maintenance of
taxonomic, functional, and genetic diversity within appropriately chosen groups
of animals and plants. This project focuses on the evolutionary history of a
diverse group of mammals, the ground squirrels (genus Spermophilus, 42 species)
and the prairie dogs (genus Cynomys, 4 species). Because they are active in the
daytime, tend to live in groups , and are of considerable economic importance,
these animals have been the subject of numerous behavioral and life-history
studies and have been central to the development of kinship theory and optimal
foraging theory for mammals. To place this knowledge in phylogenetic
perspective, the investigators will collaborate with Mexican and Russian
colleagues in collecting materials of all known species, for molecular analyses
of DNA. A phylogeny or genealogical tree will be constructed based upon
mutational differences among the species. %%% A phylogeny of this group of
mammals will serve as a framework for testing theories about the origin and
maintenance of sociality in mammals and of other behavioral and life-history
traits. It will also facilitate measurement of genetic variation within
particular lineages. A phylogenetic framework will make possible an evaluation
of historical (heritable) factors and current ecological adaptations in molding
behavior, life history, and social organization in mammals.