* 9221854
* Intracortical Connections Underlying Cortical Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Charles Gilbert, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1997
* USD 323,922.00

9221854 Gilbert A nerve cell in the sensory cortex of the brain is activated by
stimuli that lie within a certain spatial area, called the "receptive field" of
the cell. Evidence from work on the sense of touch on the body surface
(somatosensory system) has shown that these receptive fields in adults are
surprisingly dynamic in location and size, rather than having fixed
characteristics for a given cell. Active sensory experience is important for
defining the receptive field; a loss of sensation from the peripheral area
reduces the size of receptive fields of cortical cells for that area, and
persistent stimulation leads to an increase. Recent efforts have been to
establish how connections in the neuronal pathway are modified when these
plastic changes occur. This study is a novel application that parallels
somatosensory approach, but uses the visual cortex to exploit known details of
the visual pathway and intracortical connections. Here, changes in receptive
fields in the visual system are studied when part of the visual field is made
invisible (a scotoma). Anatomy and pharmacology will be used to examine
connections to and within the cortex, to differentiate the contributions of such
connections in the cortical dynamics. These studies will help elucidate the
mechanisms of integrating information across space, and of cortical memory; the
emphasis is on visual processing, but the results will have impact beyond visual
neuroscience to sensory neuroscience in general, and to cognitive neuroscience.
***