* 9221307
* Structure and Biochemistry of Biologically Important RNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Craig Kundrot, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

This proposal seeks to capitalize on the recent developments in RNA biochemistry
to prepare purified RNA from a diverse range of systems in quantities sufficient
for crystallographic studies. It focuses on three RNAs that span a broad range
of sizes and structural motifs: dodecamer with non-canonical UU base pairs, a 30
nucleotide autolytic RNA, and a 160 nucleotide domain of the Tetrahymena intron.
These RNAs will be examined with X-ray crystallography and several biochemical
methods. Thermal denaturation, kinetic, and chemical protection studies will be
used to refine understanding of the crystallographic structure. By integrating
structural and biochemical results, Dr. Kundrot expects to obtain a better
understanding of these RNA structures and how they function. %%% It has become
increasingly apparent in the last decade that RNAs play many roles in a cell
that are important in human health and biotechnology. The structures RNAs adopt
are of manifest importance because they play central roles in the regulation of
gene expression ranging from protein recognition sites to self- splicing active
sites. The three-dimensional structure of RNA molecules must be determined if we
are to understand how RNA can adopt stable folds and perform functions such as
catalysis. Dr. Kundrot proposes to determine the structure of three RNA
molecules: a self-cleaving RNA, an RNA with unusual base pairs, and a RNA
folding domain that is more than twice as large as the largest RNA structure
known today. These structures will provide with new insights into how RNA
functions in cells and these insights will help in the development of drugs to
improve human health and will open up new areas in biotechnology.