* 9221682
* Presidential Young Investigator:  Synthesis and Reactivity  of Vanadium(II) Coordination Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1995
* William Armstrong, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 02/28/1995
* USD 42,267.00

This Presidential Young Investigator Award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organometallic Chemistry Program supports research in biologically relevant
inorganic chemistry. The emphasis of the project is the elucidation of the role
of metal ions in important biological transformations. Of particular interest is
the participation of transition metal ions in the terminal steps of the
reduction of dioxygen by cytochrome oxidase and the evolution of oxygen by the
photosynthetic apparatus. Small molecule analogs of the metal centers of these
and other metalloproteins, especially manganese-containing proteins, will be
synthesized and characterized. The general strategy involves the design and
synthesis of organic ligands, preparation and purification of their complexes
with transition metals, and thorough characterization of such systems by a
variety of structural, magnetic, and spectroscopic techniques. In addition to
the systems mentioned above, others of interest include the magnetically-coupled
siroheme and diron-sulfur cluster in sulfite reductase, and the participaton of
nickel in hydrogenase and methanogenesis activity. Finally, the role of low
valent vanadium in catalyzing the conversion of dinitrogen to ammonia and
hydrazine will be explored. Comparison of the spectroscopic and chemical
properties of the model compounds is expected to yield valuable insight into the
detailed workings of the modeled biological systems.