* 9221091
* Cyclic Changes in the Chemical Defense of the Eastern North American Population of the Monarch Butterfly
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1997
* Lincoln Brower, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 05/31/1997
* USD 200,000.00

A dramatic seasonal increase in toxicity of monarch butterflies appears crucial
to their spring and summer recolonization of North America. Monarchs larvae feed
on milkweed plants and sequester poisonous cardenolides from them. These
chemicals protect the butterflies from predation because they are bitter and
cause birds to vomit. Monarch butterflies migrate each fall to Mexico, then
reinvade eastern North America the following spring. Since cardenolides change
during the annual migration cycle, monarchs feeding on different milkweed
species lose their deterrent qualities at different rates. Fall migrants feed on
a weakly emetic milkweed; subsequent cardenolide loss leads to a partial
breakdown of their chemical defense in Mexico, where orioles and grosbeaks eat
millions of butterflies each winter. However, monarchs that survive and migrate
back to the USA lay their eggs on extremely poisonous southern milkweeds,
producing a new generation of apparently toxic butterflies that complete the
spring migration northward to Canada. Bioassays using birds and chemical assays
of the cardenolides will document the postulated increase in toxicity of the
spring generation. The results should provide definitive evidence that the
milkweed-based chemical defense of the monarch is a predictably dynamic
phenomenon inextricably entwined with its annual migration cycle. %%% Logging of
the fir forests in central Mexico is destroying the overwintering habitat of the
monarch butterfly. Because of this, the monarch's migration in Eastern North
America has been designated an endangered biological phenomenon, a new category
of biodiversity conservation. This research program will document the biology of
the spring remigration before the predicted collapse of the monarch population
over the next 10-15 years. It is also relevant to conservation of milkweed
habitat in eastern North America for the maintence of monarch population in
spring & summer.