* 9221779
* Natural Sample Spaces and Judgment Under Uncertainty
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1995
* Russell Fazio, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/1995
* USD 94,590.00

ABSTRACT Judging the probability of uncertain events is essential for effective
decision making. Yet people make many systemic errors in their intuitive
judgments. These errors impede important decisions that people make on a daily
basis, such as medical diagnosis, political and legal policy-making, and
planning for the future. The specific aims of the research are to evaluate and
explore the implications of a conceptual framework developed by Gavanski and Hui
(1992) for understanding the mental processes that underlie judgements of
probability. Gavanski and Hui have argued that, contrary to previous theories,
people are not necessarily bad statisticians, in that their judgment strategies
are not fundamentally incompatible with statistical principles. However, they
are sometimes bad samplers, in that they may access inappropriate sets of
information from memory for making their judgments. Both accurate and inaccurate
judgments can be understood according to what sets of information people access.
This research will (a) test some basic assumptions underlying the framework, (b)
apply the framework to understanding the processes by which cognitive
organization (i.e., the categorization of information in memory) influence
people's ability to judge various probabilities, (c) evaluate novel predictions
of the framework for conditions under which people will make either accurate or
inaccurate judgments, and (d) use the framework to account for and clarify the
processes underlying some established judgment phenomena. The long term
objective of the research is to provide an understanding of how people judge
probability and when and why they make judgment errors. In addition, the
research will lead to the identification of tasks particularly likely to evoke
judgment errors and to the development of techniques for improving people's
judgments and decisions.