* 9221723
* Completing the Curatorial Upgrading of a Major Echinoderm   Collection, LACM
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Gordon Hendler, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1996
* USD 149,948.00

Since 1985 the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County (LACM) echinoderm
holdings increased 1900%, from 2000% to over 40000 lots, chiefly through the
incorporation of the Allan Hancock Foundation Collection and other "orphaned"
material. LACM now houses the largest echinoderm collection in the western
United States and the third largest in the country; its coverage is
cosmopolitan, with the unexcelled representation of the eastern Pacific and
Caribbean faunas. A previous NSF grant, now nearing completion, supported the
transfer of the collection to the permanent, environmentally controlled
collection space furnished by the museum, and a curatorial upgrade, of part of
the collection. Additional efforts are necessary to complete the upgrade and
reorganize the collection. This project will (1) purchase and install museum
cases and shelves, and move specimens from inadequate storage equipment to new
units, and (2) complete and urgently needed transfer of specimens to
satisfactory containers and preservatives. These improvements will ensure the
collections availability for scientific research. %%% Collections such as those
of the LACM are invaluable resources not only for the performance of primary
research but also for other diverse activities. Exhibit and educational
activities based upon the collections underwrite the scientific literacy of the
general population. As well the collections are important to the documentation
and assessment of the impacts of development projects.//