* 9221528
* Investigation of Convective Cloud Processes as Part of the  North Dakota Tracer Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1997
* Mark Hjelmfelt, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 07/31/1997
* USD 281,500.00

The North Dakota Tracer Experiment planned for the summer of 1993 will focus on
continued study of transport, dispersion, ice initiation, and hail embryo
development processes in active convective clouds and storms. The scientific
goal will be to increase understanding of these processes in natural and seeded
clouds, and their relation to the subsequent development of precipitation
(including hail). The primary experimental techniques will employ tracer
materials released from aircraft, including gaseous SF6, radar chaff, and
fluorescent beads (for hailstone-embryo studies). The 1993 project will
emphasize pulsed releases (typical duration 30 s) of the tracer materials to
facilitate studying the time evolution of transport and dispersion processes and
of the hydrometeors. Releases will be made in feeder clouds whenever
opportunities arise, to study transport between feeder and main cell, and in
other cloud types as available. The South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
T-28 and University of North Dakota Citation will sample the clouds for SF6 as
well as for kinematic and microphysical characteristics. C-band Doppler radar
will provide one Doppler surveillance of the origin of precipitation, and
determine whether the storms have feeder cell characteristics. One mobile CLASS
system will provide timely soundings of the local environment.