* 9221667
* Mechanism of Growth Hormone Action
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1998
* Christin Carter-Su, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 353,000.00

9221667 Schwartz Dr. Schwartz is just beginning to learn about molecular
mechanisms by which growth hormone (GH), a major regulator of normal growth,
exerts its varied biological effects. It is now clear that GH regulates the
expression of several genes. During the previous granting period, this
laboratory established that GH rapidly stimulates two proto-oncogenes (growth-
related genes) c-fos and c-jun in 3T3-F442A cells. The products of these genes
play a key role in the regulatory region of the c-fos with differentiation of
these cells to fat cells. Her recent studies of the c-fos gene have been very
exciting in that they enabled her to identify two regulatory regions which
appear to be sensitive to GH: the serum response element (SRE) and the SIF
element. Analysis of these regulatory regions provide an essential key to
understanding the earliest events in the mechanism of GH action. She is thus in
an excellent position to make substantial progress in this direction, since
c-fos is one of the best characterized genes and the regulation of c-fos is an
area of active investigation. Importantly, regulatory factors which bind to both
the SRE and the SIF element have been identified. Here, using c-fos as a model
to understand mechanisms by which expression are modulated by GH. Analysis of
these regulatory factors in turn directs this project to signaling mechanisms.
Analysis of effects of GH on the multiple factors which regulate c-fos will
provide fundamental new information regarding mechanisms by which GH regulates
genes and on the signaling pathways involved. ***