* 9221707
* U.S.- New Zealand Cooperative Research: Effects of Larval   Recruitment, Hydrography, and Predation on the Subtidal     Zonation of Suspension Feeders in Fiordland, New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Jon Witman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 07/31/1994
* USD 19,154.00

This award will provide travel support for a six-month visit by Dr. Jon Witman
of the Marine Science Center, Northeastern University to New Zealand. The fjords
of southwestern New Zealand represent a unique and scientifically important
marine environment which contains fragile communities dominated by many rare and
unusual species. Present understanding of the environmental processes that
support the biological communities in the fjords is very limited and is
hindering the ability to manage the area. The University of Otago's Department
of Marine Science has made a long-term commitment to participation in, and
facilitating marine research in the fjords. Prof. Philip Mladenov from Otago
University will serve as the New Zealand collaborator. The subtidal rock walls
of the fjords provide an excellent opportunity to investigate the relative roles
of physical and biotic processes in maintaining community structure due to the
conspicuous zonation of sessile invertebrates and the highly stratified fjord
water column. Two primary zones have been identified, a shallow mussel-serpulid
polychaete zone and a deep suspension feeding zone. Specifically, this
collaborative research project will investigate if the limits of these zones are
determined by larval supply and/or sea star predation.