* 9221589
* Superconductor-Based Electron Transfer Studies Below the    Critical Temperature
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1996
* John McDevitt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/1996
* USD 288,907.00

This research is focussed on the induction of superconductivity into organic
conductors via the proximity effect through the use of hybrid organic
conductor/high temperature superconductor structures. Using chemical and
electrochemical techniques, a number of structures suitable for the study of
superconducting proximity effect are fabricated. One major goal of this work is
to study electron transfer phenomena which occur at or near
superconductor/molecular phase interfaces. Measurements are conducted above and
below the superconducting transition temperature to search for superconducting
quantum electron transfer phenomena. Cuprate superconductors are used for the
majority of the studies because measurements below transition temperature can be
completed readily. The second goal of this research is to fabricate proximity
devices based on high temperature superconductor thin films coated with
molecular conductors. The modulation of the superconducting transition
temperature of the underling cuprate material then is examined. Also, the
influence of polymer layer on the transition temperature of the superconductor
film is explored. In recent studies, we have demonstrated the first molecular
switch for controlling superconductivity. The ultimate goal of the proposed
research is to develop new types of organic conductor/ superconductor circuits,
devices and sensors. Through the study of a variety of molecular conductor/high
temperature superconductor structures, information will be acquired that may
help to elucidate the nature of superconductivity in the ceramic superconductors
and shed light on the conduction mechanism in the polymers. The use of
conductive polymers also should provide alternative strategies for making
electrical contacts to high-temperature superconductors. By incorporating an
organic conductor into such systems, some of the degradation at these interfaces
may be eliminated.