* 9221668
* Measurement and Scaling of Carbon Budgets for Contrasting   Boreal Forest Sites
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Stith Gower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John R. Gold
* 10/31/1996
* USD 125,396.00

The objective of this study is to compare process related to CO2 storage (ie
photosynthesis and accumulation of soil C and CO2 release (ie. plant respiration
and decomposition) for evergreen and deciduous forests in two contrasting boreal
climates and is part of a large international study (BOREAS) to examine
terrestrial atmosphere interactions in boreal ecosystems in Prince Albert
National Park, Saskatchewan and nelson House, Manitoba, Canada. Data collected
during the study will increase our understanding of the influence of major
biotic and abiotic factors on carbon cycling in boreal forests. A concurrent
activity will be to develop computer simulation models that we will use to
examine the influence of different climate change scenarios on the growth of
boreal forests. %%% The global carbon cycle recently has been the focus of much
research in an attempt to explain the rising atmospheric CO2 concentration; CO2
is of interest because it is a major greenhouse gas. Forests can be a net sink
(ie. store CO2), a source (ie. release CO2) or in equilibrium (ie. no net
change) depending upon stand age, stand vigor and climate. Boreal forest
comprise approximately 25% of the total forested area in the world and contain
greater than 40% of the total world soil carbon; therefore, this forest biome is
likely to have an important role in the global carbon cycle. Moreover, the role
of boreal forests in the global carbon cycle may change more in the future than
any other biome because general circulation models that are used to predict
future climate suggests that the boreal biome will experience the greatest
change in climate.