* 9221027
* Temporal Predictability in Daphnia pulex
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Samuel Scheiner, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1995
* USD 110,000.00

Organisms live in environments that vary in complex ways in space and time.
Although this statement is obvious, our understanding of how complex
environments affect evolutionary processes is still rudimentary. This study will
be one of the first to investigate the evolutionary response to environmental
changes over time. The experimental organism is a small pond dwelling
crustacean, the water flea Daphnia pulex.. The experiment will contrast
evolutionary responses to three types of temporal variability: constant,
variable and predictable, variable and unpredictable. The benefits of this study
are two-fold. First, this study will greatly extend our fundamental
understanding of the evolutionary processes. It will be one of the first forays
into an area of evolution that has been long recognized as important, but until
now has not been studied. The results have the potential for being a significant
next step in the merging of the fields of evolutionary biology and developmental
biology. Second, the results of this study will be useful in the development of
crop strains. A crucial goal in agricultural genetics is the breeding of strains
that will do well over a wide range of growing conditions. This goal is
especially critical for farmers in underdeveloped or developing nations where
control of growing conditions is poor. By understanding the constraints on how
organisms can adapt to variable environments, we can better meet this goal.