* 9221003
* The Effects of Soil Temperature and Nitrate on Fine Root    Construction and Maintenance Costs in Northern Hardwood     Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Ronald Hendrick, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 327,998.00

More than half of all carbon fixed in the leaves of forest trees during
photosynthesis is allocated to the production of fine roots, but the effects of
pollution and climate change on the production and longevity of these roots is
unknown. We will study the relationship between soil temperature and soil
nitrate (a common pollutant in the Great Lakes region) and the production and
death of fine roots in sugar maple forests in order to better predict what might
happen in pollution increases and/or the climate warms. Our study sites are
separated by several hundred kilometers from north to south, and there is a
built-in temperature gradient that spans the possible range of temperature
increases that may occur due to global warming. In addition, we are going to
apply large amounts of nitrate to see what effect this particular pollutant has
on the roots. Using small cameras first developed for use during arthroscopic
surgery, we will observe the birth, growth and death of roots from small
observation tubes permanently installed in the soil. Using this approach, we can
compare root activity between colder and warmer forests, and between forests
subject to high and low inputs of nitrate. We will also measure rates of root
respiration. Because metabolic activity in living cells speeds up as
temperatures increase, root respiration rates should be higher in warmer soils.
This means that the trees growing on warmer soils must expend more energy to
maintain enough living roots to take up water and nutrients. we think that
nitrate will also increase root respiration rates, because the nitrate must be
converted to ammonium (requiring more energy) before plants can use it as a
source of nitrogen for growth. The results form this change and increased
pollutant deposition on forest ecosystems.