* 9221841
* Zeolite Encaged Transition Metal-Proton Adducts Catalytic,  Selectivity and Dispersion Stability
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Wolfgang Sachtler, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 08/31/1996
* USD 246,023.00

9221841 Wolfgang Sachtler This is a systematic study of metal-proton adducts in
zeolites, including the role of these adducts in modifying the catalytic
characteristics of metal and in anchoring metal clusters to the zeolite. One
issue addressed is whether the enhanced catalytic activity of transition metals
in proton-containing zeolites is due to the electron deficiency of the metal
particles or to the chemical participation of adduct protons in the catalytic
reaction. The emphasis in this effort is on rhodium clusters although additional
work on palladium and platinum is also included. The rates of hydrocarbon
conversion reactions on metals and metal- proton adducts are compared with the
electron deficiency of the metals as determined by photoelectron spectroscopy.
Other characterization techniques used include X-ray absorption methods (using
synchrotron radiation), electron microscopy, infrared spectroscopy, nuclear
magnetic resonance, temperature-programmed mass spectrometric methods, and
isotopic exchange. The effects of alcohols and amines on metal sintering in
zeolites is also study. Zeolites studied include Y, L, and ZSM-5. The catalyst
systems under study here are important in petroleum refining and in the
production of monomers for the fiber and plastics industries. The effects
uncovered here could dramatically influence the performance or lifetimes of
these systems.