* 9221375
* Long-term Processes Affecting the Hemlock-hardwoods Mosaic  at Sylvania, Michigan
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1997
* Margaret Davis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 09/30/1997
* USD 520,000.00

Long-term forest dynamics in the hemlock-hardwood forest mosaic of the USFS
Sylvania Wilderness Area, northern Michigan, will be studies using fossil pollen
in small forest hollows. Histories of individual forest stands, recorded in the
sediment, will identify successional communities in the fire-dominated forest
ecosystem before hemlock invasion 3000 years ago, making it possible to see
whether disturbances made some areas particularly invasible, thus influencing
hemlock entry and the locations of hemlock patches that have occupied those
sites ever since. By dating hemlock arrival at a series of sites in extreme
environments, near bogs or lakes or on coarse soils, we will test the
alternative hypothesis that differences in the physical environment were
responsible for the locations of hemlock patches. Fine-scale analyses of
sediment and time-series analyses of the resulting data will explore changes in
successional pathways as the disturbance regime changed from fire to wind 3000
years ago. Modeling will be used to investigate the dynamic changes that have
occurred in the positions of boundaries between stands in the forest mosaic. The
results will be useful for demonstrating the response of forest communities to
climate, including changes in disturbance regimes which may accompany Global
Warming. Understanding the origin of the mosaic pattern of forest communities on
the landscape may help forest mangers to preserve this aspect of the
biodiversity of old-growth forest stands.