* 9221094
* Effect of Environmental Stress and Inbreeding on Multilocus Heterozygosity-Fitness Relationships
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1997
* Walter Diehl, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa D. Brooks
* 08/31/1997
* USD 176,000.00

Individual organisms with high levels of genetic variation often show superior
physiological performance in contrast to individuals with lower levels of
genetic variation. It has proven extremely difficult, however, to predict the
precise environmental circumstances under which high genetic variation is
related to superior abilities. This is in part due to a lack of understanding
about the interaction between environmental, genetic and physiological effects,
and also to a lack of understanding about the specific mechanisms responsible
for these relationships. This project will examine the interaction between
environmental stress, genetic variation and performance in a model population of
earthworms. Earthworms were chosen because of their short life cycles, their
availability in the large numbers necessary for this work, and their importance
in terrestrial ecosystems. Experiments will involve both short term (one
generation) and long term (many generations) of environmental stress. The
proposed mechanisms responsible for the phenomena will be investigated using
genetic experiments. This will be the most extensive characterization of the
relationships between genetic variation and physiological performance in any
organism to date. The research will help to identify genetic attributes common
to all species that promote optimal performance under environmental stress. //