* 9221522
* Retrofit Strategies for Non-Ductile Reinforced Concrete     Flat-Slab Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Ahmad Durrani, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

Non-ductile flat-slab buildings are susceptible to severe damage and possibly
collapse during earthquakes of moderate intensity. The central and eastern
regions of the United States have a large inventory of such buildings.
Progressive collapse can result from punching failure at connections. The main
objective of the project is to develop minimum-retrofit strategies to limit the
global response and ensure structural integrity during moderate ground motion.
To accomplish this, a suitable analysis tool for predicting the response of non-
ductile flat-slab buildings under earthquake loading will be developed first. A
recently developed three-parameter hysteretic model will be incorporated into an
existingnonlinear dynamic analysis program to analyze and compare various
retrofit strategies. Experiments aiming at testing retrofit schemes at the
connection level for protection against progressive collapse and controlled
redistribution of loads will also be carried out. In particular, the concept of
using infill walls to improve the lateral load resistance will be studied in
some detail. With both experimental and analytical studies, this project is
expected to provide an integrated retrofit strategy optimized for a balance
between protection at the connection level and a controlled global response.
This project is supported under the NSF Research Initiative No. 92-28 on "Repair
and Rehabilitation Research for Seismic Resistance of Structures."