* 9221034
* The Relation of Phenotypic Plasticity to Ecological Breadth in Four Annual Polygonum Species
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Sonia Sultan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1995
* USD 134,040.00

Phenotypic plasticity permits individuals to express different, functionally
adaptive phenotypes in response to different environmental circumstances. It has
long been speculated that such plasticity increases the range of habitats that a
species may occupy. I propose to determine whether phenotypic plasticity
enhances ecological breadth by comparing two weedy, ecologically broad species
with two ecologically restricted species in the genus Polygonum. The comparative
study will consist primarily of greenhouse experiments with field-collected
material, supplemented with field work to quantify the habitat differences among
the species and their populations. The major experiment will be a growth study
of several populations of each species in a multifactorial set of light,
moisture, and nutrient treatments, designed to determine whether the four
species differ in the range of environments in which they can successfully
survive and reproduce. By evaluating the mechanisms of morphological and
physiological response to the treatments, I can determine whether differences in
environmental tolerance among the species are associated with differences in the
amounts or patterns of functionally adaptive phenotypic plasticity. Finally, I
will compare the environmental tolerance of populations within species to
determine whether the degree of plasticity influences the degree to which
conspecific populations in different habitats differentiate genetically. A
second, smaller greenhouse experiment will examine in detail the specific
aspects of root system plasticity that contribute to species tolerance or
intolerance of variation in soil nutrients and moisture.//