* 9221500
* U.S.-European Regional Workshop on Dynamics and Control of  Nonlinear Uncertain Systems; Vienna, Austria; July, 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1994
* Firdaus Udwadia, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1994
* USD 14,250.00

9221500 Udwadia This award supports ten U.S. engineers to participate in a
U.S.-European workshop on dynamics and control of nonlinear uncertain systems.
The small meeting will be held in Vienna, Austria, in July 1993. It is co-
organized by a group of U.S. and Austrian engineers, principally Drs. F. E.
Udwadia of USC and Hans Troger of the Technical University of Vienna.
Approximately one- third of the participants are engineers at early stages of
their research careers. Special effort was taken to involve experts from Russia
and Eastern Europe, since there is substantial activity there in this field. The
purposes of the meeting are to familiarize these participating representatives
of the pan- European and American research communities with each other's work,
and to promote collaboration among them in future research. The subject of this
workshop has significant implications for manufacturing systems. Rapid
development of technology requires increased precision and robustness in
mathematical modelling of the relevant phenomena. This requires going beyond the
methods of Classical Control Theory and advancing the frontiers of Analytic and
Qualitative Nonlinear Dynamics in Control. Effective design and control of
modern dynamical systems, such as robotic manipulators, demand models that
recognize their full non linearity and allow for the influence of bounded
uncertainty. A formalism developed by the Russian Liapunov offers just that.
There is a very strong Eastern European network of researchers building on his
work. They had very little contact with the West until very recently, so this
meeting will accelerate the diffusion of their valuable research in Western
Europe and the U.S. ***