* 9221654
* Diffusion-Limited Growth in the Presence of Active          Membranes:  A Theory of Neuronal Morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1996
* Alan Fine, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymon Glantz
* 03/31/1996
* USD 258,604.00

The goal of this research is to develop and test a general class of models for
the generation of neuronal dendritic shapes; these models are biologically
constrained and based on diffusion- controlled growth. It is evident that
dendritic arbors gave self -similar structures over a range of scales,
consistent with the concept that shape is controlled by the diffusion of
chemical species. These concentration fields result from the interaction of
dynamic influx, extrusion and sequestration of the growth- regulating factors.
In particular, it is hypothesized that calcium is such a factor, and that the
local calcium ion concentration beneath the cell membrane is the specific
immediate determinant of neuronal growth. The investigators will develop
biologically constrained physical models for the growth of curved membrane
surfaces in the presence of these diffusive fields, and will use computational
methods to explore the evolution of these models under different biologically-
plausible conditions. Most importantly, they will test these models by comparing
the computed morphogenesis with the development of real neurons under similar
imposed conditions. This research may yield an understanding of the mechanisms
controlling the development of neuronal form, which influences the electrical
properties and synaptic interconnections of neurons that are essential to normal
brain function.***//