* 9221819
* Mathematical Sciences: Infinite Dimensional Nonlinear       Programming Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1996
* Hector Fattorini, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 03/31/1996
* USD 56,900.00

This award supports mathematical research in the areas of partial differential
equations and functional differential equations. The work focuses on the
applications of infinite dimensional nonlinear programming theory to optimal
control problems for systems governed by equations such as the Navier-Stokes
equations, reaction-diffusion equations and nonlinear wave equations. The object
is to obtain existence results in the realm of relaxed controls, necessary
conditions for optimal controls of the type of Pontryagin's maximum principle,
convergence results for numerically obtained sequences of suboptimal controls
and feedback solutions by means of Hamilton-Jacoby equations. Work will be done
both in the case of distributed and boundary control for problems that include
sate constraints. Regularization of problems containing singular arcs and the
role of the Hamiltonian in free arrival time problems will also be examined.
Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical modeling of the
physical world. The role of mathematical analysis is not so much to create the
equations as it is to provide qualitative and quantitative information about the
solutions. This may include answers to questions about uniqueness, smoothness
and growth. In addition, analysis often develops methods for approximation of
solutions and estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.