* 9221333
* Statistical Mechanics and Computer Simulations of           Biological Molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Robert Swendsen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1996
* USD 279,000.00

The main thrust of this research concerns computer simulations of biological
molecules. A new class of Monte Carlo simulations has been developed by the
principal investigator which (slightly) relaxes the usual Markovian constraint
to enable greatly improved efficiency for systems with important inhomogeneity
and local anisotropy. These new and quite general methods will be used to
investigate models of biological molecules. The research will study equilibrium
fluctuations of such molecules and continue work on the protein folding problem.
Calculations of free-energy differences and potentials of mean force will be
carried out using multiple histogram techniques developed by the principal
investigator. Another important area of application is the determination of the
structure of biological molecules from x-ray scattering. One of the most
effective current methods of optimizing the fit of the structure of x-ray data
involves simulated annealing with molecular dynamics. The application of new
Monte Carlo simulation methods has promise of improving the efficiency of some
of these structure determinations. The award is funded jointly by the Materials
Theory program in the Division of MAterials Research and the Computational
Biology Activity in the Division of Biological Instrumentation and Resources.
%%% This computational research will focus on algorithm development for Monte
Carlo simulation and applications to problems of biological importance.
Simulations will be done on the behavior of biological molecules and the folding
of proteins. The research has great potential should these new Monte Carlo
simulations be shown to be competitive with conventional molecular dynamics
techniques. The research is jointly funded by the Materials Theory program and
the Computational Biology Activity.