* 9221670
*  Molecular Characterization of the Pseudomonas Syringae hrp  hrm Gene Cluster.
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1997
* Steven Hutcheson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/1997
* USD 314,086.00

A key to understanding the molecular basis for bacterial pathogenicity in plants
is the production and deployment of plant defense elicitors and host range
determinants. We have previously shown that the hrp/hrm gene cluster isolated
from Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae 61 enables nonpathogenic bacteria to
elicit plant defenses. The hrp/hrm gene cluster, therefore, appears to
constitute a minimum genetic unit sufficient to produce plant defense elicitors.
Fourteen apparent transnational units have been identified within the cluster
that are organized as nine apparent transcriptional units. Several hrp genes act
as positive regulatory elements. The overall goal of this project is to
elucidate the role of specific hrp/hrm genes in determining the pathogenicity
and host range of P. syringae strains. Our approach will be to: 1) obtain the
nucleotide sequence for remaining portions of the cluster to facilitate later
manipulation, comparative analyses with other bacteria and deduction of gene
function; 2) characterize the regulatory cascade controlling expression of hrp
genes so that the genes directly contributing to the production of plant defense
elicitors can be identified and manipulated; and 3) perform gene replacement
experiments to test the role of specific hrp genes in determining pathogenicity
and host range. %%% The study of these genes should lead to techniques useful in
stopping the damage to plants susceptible to bacterial infection.