* 9221568
* Connection to NSFNET for the Division of Research of        Kaiser Permanente
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1994
* Joseph Terdiman, Kaiser Foundation Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* George O. Strawn
* 03/31/1994
* USD 30,003.00

The Division of Research of the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program proposes
to connect its local area network to the NSFNET for the purpose of facilitating
its research activities. DOR is applying to the National Science Foundation for
a grant to share the cost of hardware, software and communication services to
connect its Ethernet local area network to NSFNET, under the "Connections to
NSFNET" program through an interagency agreement with the National Library of
Medicine. A connection to NSFNET would allow communication between over 150 DOR
researchers and colleagues in the academic community, at other medical research
institutions and in government agencies, who already have Internet connectivity.
It would facilitate the transfer of data, documents and ideas between
researchers at DOR and other institutions who are working on collaborative
projects and multicenter research studies. It would also provide collaborative
projects and multicenter research studies. It would also provide DOR
investigators with access to national networks and services and improve access
to services which are currently limited by 2400 baud modem connections. To gain
access to NSFNET, DOR proposes to connect its LAN to the Bay Area Regional
Research Network (BARRNet), a regional data network connected to NSFNET, using a
leased line between DOR and a port on the BARRNet backbone at the University of
California, Berkeley.