* 9221304
* Mathematical Sciences: 49th Session of the International    Statistical Institute, Florence, Italy 8/25-9/3/93
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1994
* Barbara Bailar, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 03/31/1994
* USD 20,000.00

This award is for travel grants for United States participants to attend the
49th Session of the International Statistical Institute (ISI) in Florence,
Italy, from August 25 to September 3, 1993. The funds, which will be
administered by the American Statistical Association (ASA), will provide partial
support for transportation costs for individuals selected from institutions and
non-profit associations. A priority of the ASA is to provide opportunities for
junior researchers who have no other funding opportunities, to attend and
participate in this important meeting. The sections of the ISI include (1) the
Bernoulli Society for Mathematical Statistics and Probability, with specific
groups or committees in stochastic processes, statistics in the physical and
engineering societies, European statisticians, and Latin American statisticians;
(2) the International Associations for Survey Statisticians which holds
seminars, work-shops, and tutorials preceding the ISI meeting; (3) the
International Association for Statistical Computing; (4) the International
Association for Official Statistics; and (5) the International Association for
Statistical Education. Also meeting in conjunction with ISI are specific groups
with interests in international training centers, problems of industrial
statisticians, and other special interest groups. The convergence of this broad
spectrum of statisticians, with participants from many countries, provides an
excellent forum to present and discuss research results and educational
activities in statistics.