* 9221217
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Advanced Composites for Concrete Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Antonio Nanni, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 08/31/1994
* USD 58,936.00

This award will support a six-month long-term visit to Japan by Professor
Antonio Nanni, Department of Architectural Engineering at the Pennsylvania State
University. He will be undertaking a cooperative research project with Dr.
Kazuhisa Yahagi, Technical Research Institute, Mitsui Construction Company in
Tokyo and Professor Masanori Tsuji, Department of Civil Engineering, Science
University of Tokyo in Noda. They will be researching the area of fiber-
reinforced-plastic (FPR) composites for use as reinforcing elements in concrete
structures. This will involve testing the fire-resistance of FRP reinforced
concrete members to be sure it holds up to currently established standards and
does not overheat or lose strengtrh in its rods when exposed to flaming fire. In
addition, they will be studying the release of toxic products resulting from
ignited FRP materials. They will further research the substitution of a
thermoplastic resin to replace the more common thermoset resin. This may offer
improved corrosion resistance and enhanced drainage tolerance. It could also
reduce the processing time and may provide a cleaner working environment and
infinite shelf life. This research will be followed by the preparation of
educational materials, encompasssing the properties and design of this new
construction material, to be used for instructional purposes. This research will
likely result in the use of FRP in building construction which is currently
being seriously considered by building designers because of the potential of
improving manufacturing and lowering production costs. Professor Yahagi is a
first-rate researcher and his Institute has recently acquired new facilities
including a fire hood and a braiding machine which allows fire testing and
manufacturing of the FRP composites. The Japanese construction industry is far
more advanced in this technology than the U.S. Professor Nanni, who is a U.S.
expert in this area, should obtain valuable information that he would be unable
to obtain in the U.S. Professor Tsuji has visited Professor Nanni at his
university for three months and this experience should assist them in the
formulation of a curriculum course incorporating the reserach findings and new
technologies for using FRP in building construction. Since previous
collaborations between these researchers have been successful, it is anticipated
that results from this project will be fruitful, as well, and of possible use
throughout the world