* 9221750
* Support for the Mammal Collection of the Museum of          Vertebrate Zoology, University of California at Berkeley
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1995
* James Patton, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James R. Estes
* 05/31/1995
* USD 224,277.00

This project will improve the housing and curation of the mammal research
collection (182,000 specimens; third largest in US) in concert with a planned
relocation of the collection to new facilities. Specific improvements will
involve: (1) replacing older inadequate storage cases and wet-specimen
containers; (2) adding new cases to accommodate past and anticipated growth. The
institution will expend 80 million to renovate the new facility for occupancy by
the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, Museum of Paleontology, and the University &
Jepson Herbaria. Renovations include a doubling of MVZ collection space and
installation of temperature and humidity controls. The University will also
assume all costs of collection relocation. This support will provide much better
access to the collection for research scientists and students and will further
the preservation and use of the collection in biodiversity research. %%% This
project will improve the conservation and accessibility of the mammal research
collection at the University of California, Berkeley, by replacing antiquated
inadequate cases and by accommodating space for collection growth. This
improvement will occur in concert with a move of the collection to new
facilities and will increase the access to the collection by research scientists
and students involved in biodiversity projects.