* 9221032
* Do Mammals and Insects Control Tropical Forest Diversity?   A Community-level Experimental Test
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1996
* Stephen Hubbell, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1996
* USD 278,846.00

This proposal challenges the prevalent view about tropical forests that gap
phase dynamics is the most important part of the regeneration cycle for
determining species composition of tropical forests. This research is the first
to experimentally test the hypothesis that mammals and insects in the understory
of mature tropical forest control tree species diversity. This hypothesis has
important ramifications for tropical forest dynamics, diversity, conservation,
and management. Recent observations suggest that when forests lose their
mammalian herbivores and seed predators they develop low plant species
diversity. Forests with intact mammalian fauna have high species diversity.
Poaching and over-hunting in many tropical forest reserves are threatening
mammalian herbivore populations. If mammalian herbivores are important, than
forests that lose their fauna are likely to lose tree species diversity at an
accelerated rate. The forest on Barro Colorado Island (BCI), Panama, will be
studied in this research. Our findings indicate that gaps do not affect species
diversity in these forests; therefore, the abundance of tree species must be
determined in the understory where seeds, seedlings, and saplings are exposed to
intensive herbivory. We propose to test the hypothesis that herbivory and seed
dispersal control the establishment, composition, and diversity of tree species
in species-rich tropical forests. %%% For the past ten years, research in
tropical forests has focused on the role of gap-phase dynamics as the primary
determinant of tree species diversity. Although studies of seed predation are
common, this project represents the first attempt to conduct a community-level
experimental test of the effects of mammalian and insect herbivores on tropical
forest diversity. The results have important implications for the conservation
and management of biodiversity in tropical regions.