* 9221144
* Genetic and Immunological Analysis of Gas Vesicles in Halobacterium Halobium
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1998
* Elizabeth Stuart, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 309,860.00

9221144 DasSarma Gas vesicles are buoyant intracellular organelles found in many
aquatic bacteria including halobacteria, cyanobacteria, and methanogens. The
vesicles are filled with ambient gas and surrounded by a membrane composed only
of protein (no lipids). Gas vesicles come in a variety of shapes but generally
contain a cylindrical mid-section with conical ends. Although their exact
function is controversial, their buoyancy induces cells to float and thereby
increases the availability of light for photosynthesis and oxygen for
respiration. Biosynthesis of gas vesicles proceeds bidirectionally starting from
the apicies of the cones with incorporation of additional subunits in the
central region. The vesicle membrane is impermeable to water and accumulation of
gases in the vesicle interior is thought to occur only as a result of passive
diffusion of dissolved gases in the medium. Our analysis of high-frequency gas
vesicle-deficient mutants of the halophilic archaebacterium, Halobacterium
halobium, resulted in the identification of a cluster of thirteen genes,
gvpMLKJIHGREDACN, involved in gas vesicle synthesis. We are studying the
function of these genes in gas vesicle synthesis using a combinaton of molecular
genetic methodology that we have recently developed for H. halobium and
immunocytochemical localization techniques. We will utilize an E.
coli-H.halobium shuttle plasmid containing the gvp gene cluster and specifying
gas vesicle synthesis in H. halobium for genetic analysis by linker scanning and
cassette insertion mutagenesis. The effects of mutations on gas vesicle
synthesis will be analyzed by electron microscopy of vesicles and vesicle
fragments. Antibody probes will be used for localization of gvp products by
Western blotting analysis and electron microscopic analysis after immunogold
staining vesicles, vesicle fragments and ultrathin frozen sections of cells.
These studies should provide definitive information on the function of gvp gene
products and a detailed picture of gas vesicle structure and synthesis. %%%
These studies should lay the groundwork for genetically engineering bacteria to
float, a process with significant potential for applications in biotechnology.
***