* 9221879
* Regulation of Nitric-oxide Synthase Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Anthony Persechini, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1995
* USD 49,990.00

WPCh 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x Sj x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS
x @ x X , , 0 FX @ #| x 2 ) * B Z l X Courier 10cpi CG Times 12pt CG Times 6pt
HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS x @ x X , , 0 FX @ " m o 8 ; ^&lt;D\dd DDDd
DDDDddddddddddDD X | |x DL | t l| DDDddDXdXdXDdd88d8 ddddHL8dd ddXXdXd d ddDDddd
D d d d X X X X X X|X|X|X|XD8D8D8D8 d d d d d d d d d d X d d d d dtd X X X X X
X X d|X|X|X|X d d d d d d d dD D D8D L d|8|8|8|8|8 d t d d d d H H
HlLlLlLlL|8|8|8 d d d d d d d X X X d|8 d HlL|8 d d d d d D/ N d ddDXPPdd ddd
dHdddd H d x H d h 1D DD x dp d x d x X L p x xdx X x x xL
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxLLLLLLL x ? x x x , Sj x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ 8 p C &lt; , W X p P
rk ; X P H 8 ! , , 8 P k ; , P s. These TP microspheres behave in many ways like
true neurons; they display memb 2 F ` f " m o 8 ; ^
$040XP$$$0X$$$$4444440444$$dXd,XH@DL@&lt;HH (H@XHH&lt;HD8&lt;HH`HH@
$$44$,4,0,$04 4 P4044$$ 40H40,,4,4 4 04$$044 $ 4 4 4 H,H,H,H,H,XDD,@,@,@,@,
H4H0H0H0H0H4H4H4H4H0H,L0H4H0H0L084H,H,H,D,D,D,D,L0@,@,@,@,H0H0H0H0H0H0H4H4 ( H4@
@ @ @ @ H4H&lt;H4H4H0H0 D$D$D$8$8$8$8$&lt; &lt; &lt; H4H4H4H4H4H4`HH0@,@,@, L0@
H4D$8$&lt; H0H0L0H0H4 $/ddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddd dddddddddddddN d0
44$,((40X444XX4$0440X$ d d 4 &lt; $ ddddHHddd4Hd 4LHXXdd1$Xdd $$X dd dd d
&lt;dXHHHHHHHHHH H48 X 0 HH &lt; 4 &lt; , ( H 8 &lt; &lt;4&lt; 0 D&lt; &lt;
&lt;( &lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&l
t;((((((( &lt; Y # X p P rk ; W X P# 9221879 Persechini Dr. Persechini proposes
to investigate the regulation of neural nitric oxide synthase (n-NOS). Nitric
oxide (NO) is a recently discovered messenger molecule associated with a variety
of functions throughout the body. In the brain and peripheral nervous system, NO
has been implicated in neurotoxicity associated with stroke and
neurodegenerative diseases and it may be the retrograde messenger responsible
for long-term potentiation, a process thought to be associated with memory and
learning. NO has also been implicated in cerebellar long-term depression, which
is thought to be associated with motor learning. NO is responsible for
endothelial derived relaxing factor (EDRF) activity regulating blood pressure
and in macrophages Y it mediates tumoricidal and bactericidal actions. n-NOS
requires Ca 2+ -calmodulin for activity. Dr. Persechini's interest is to define
structure-function relationships in n-NOS relevant to its calmodulin-dependent
regulation by correlating structural alterations in n-NOS with measurement of
binding and activation of n-NOS by calmodulin. These investigations will be
facilitated by utilizing information contained in the amino acid sequences of
two homologous amino acid positions that differ between n-NOS and mac-NOS but
are contained within the calmodulin-binding domain in n-NOS. Proposed studies
are part of an ongoing investigation of the role played by calmodulin in
cellular regulation. Calmodulin regulates the activity of several enzymes
including at least four protein kinases, one protein phosphatase, and nitric
oxide synthase, that are at the top of regulatory cascades. Dr. Persechini has
two broad long-term objectives in this laboratory. The first is to contribute to
the development of a comparative understanding of calmodulin-dependent enzyme
activation. Given the large and growing number of calmodulin targets, such an
understanding is clearly important. His second long-term objective is to
contribute to an in-depth understanding of one of two specific calmodulin-
dependent enzymes. It is primarily the second of these goals that is addressed
here. ***