* 9221383
* Dissertation Research:  Lakota Labor Participation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1994
* Katherine Bowie, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 07/31/1994
* USD 9,100.00

Bowie/Pickering 9221383 This project will investigate the twentieth century
incorporation of Lakota households into wage labor and consumer markets. Despite
the tremendous body of research about Native American communities, and about the
Lakota of South Dakota in particular, the participation of American Indians as
wage laborers in the U.S. economy remains hidden. Similarly, the choices made by
Lakota households among options of wage labor, informal economic activities and
urban migration to meet their needs have not been explored. The thesis of this
project is that incorporation into capitalism is a culturally constituted
process, both influenced by and influencing the trajectory of the world economic
system. Extensive qualitative interviews will be conducted with Lakota people
from the Pine Ridge and Rosebud Indian Reservations. Interview participants will
be selected to reflect three communities on each reservation and from four urban
areas where Lakota people migrate for wage work. Archival resources and U.S.
Census data will be combined with interview information to examine the process
of economic incorporation and household decision-making from 1900 to the
present. This research will contribute to the theory of economic incorporation
as a culturally mediated process, and of capitalism as a dynamic social system.
*** X Z ! ! ! F O O S Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial 1 Pres Elite 5 Courier
New &amp; Casablanca M M M n " h % % = u bowie abstract abstract
dissertation%bowie pickering abstract dissertation Raymond Hames Raymond Hames