* 9221452
* Phylogenetic Relationships Among Spire-bearing Articulate   Brachiopods
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Sandra Carlson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/29/1996
* USD 60,244.00

Brachiopods are fascinating but poorly understood bivalved marine animals. They
look similar to clams, at least externally, but are only distantly related in a
genealogical sense. Even though brachiopods are not commonly found along
seashores today, except in parts of New Zealand and Australia, they were common
and diverse over 250 million years ago in the Paleozoic Era and were important
elements of the Paleozoic marine biota. For this reason, paleontologists are
interested in learning about aspects of their ecology, morphology, growth and
behavior, and their temporal and geographic distribution, in part to understand
their decline and near extinction. Dr. Sandra Carlson of the University of
California at Davis is studying the spire-bearing articulate brachiopods, those
bearing distinctive structures inside their valves that look much like two cone-
shaped springs and that are involved in obtaining food and oxygen and in
reproductive behaviors. The current classification of these organisms suggests
that these structures have evolved only once, but preliminary work by Dr.
Carlson indicates that is not likely the case. If spire- bearing brachiopods
have evolved several times, then placing them together in a single taxonomic
group confuses their evolutionary history and constrains work on ecological
factors responsible for spire evolution. Study of other morphological features
of the fossil and extant organisms will help improve the classification and
phylogeny of brachiopods, and help in understanding their geological rise and
fall in the Paleozoic.