* 9221517
* Investigation of Foundation Rehabilitation Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Sunirmal Banerjee, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/1995
* USD 155,423.00

Existing buildings which do not satisfy modern seismic design requirements may
be strengthened by the addition of steel bracing or reinforced concrete shear
walls. This strengthening, however, can transfer more loads to the foundation.
This research will examine the seismic vulnerability of such structure-
foundation systems. The study will review the major methods of strengthening and
rehabilitating buildings for seismic loading. The demands of these
rehabilitation methods on the foundation will be evaluated and typical
deficiencies of commonly used foundation systems will be ascertained. A range of
foundation rehabilitation schemes including: a) use of additional piles, b)
provision of an additional footing around the perimeter of the building, c)
reinforcement of existing footings and pile caps with additional concrete and
steel, and d) improvement of structure-foundation connections will be
considered. The improved connections may include mechanisms for safely
transmitting short duration overloads to the soil or may allow temporary
separation of parts of the structure from the foundation to prevent damage to
critical elements. The study will involve analyses of a variety of structures
and broad categories of foundation systems and soils. Several earthquake induced
acceleration records will be used as base excitations for analysis and
evaluation. The analytical studies will be correlated with past performance of
buildings and foundations during earthquakes. The emphasis will be on developing
guidelines and recommendations for selecting the foundation rehabilitation
techniques for buildings of intermediate height (approximately 4 to 20 stories).
The results will be summarized in a final report and professional publications.