* 9221225
* Dissertation:  Prehistoric Development and Change in        Southern Scandinavia
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1993
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. T. Douglas Price, Ms. Tina L. Thurston will collect
data for her doctoral dissertation. She will continue her archaeological and
associated documentary studies into change in the district of Jarrestad which is
located in the province of Skane, southern Sweden. Throughout the Early and
Middle Iron Age (ca. 500 BC - AD 800) Skane was composed of a number of
stratified autonomous political systems. During the Late Iron Age or Viking
period (AD 800 - 1100) these polities passed not only from prehistory into
history, but also from existing as several middle- range societies to
unification with an emergent centralized state which was developing in Western
Denmark. The goal of this research is to understand how this change took place
and what were the processes which underlay it. To achieve this goal MS Thurston
will make use of early written documents and will also rely on the excellent
archaeological data base available. In addition she wishes to study changes in
the size and location of settlements and to determine the extent to which a
changed settlement pattern reflects outside imposition by a dominant power. She
will use the technique of soil phosphate analysis. Extensive research has shown
that prolonged human habitation changes soil characteristics and results in a
significant enrichment in phosphorus. Through controlled excavation in known
sites - which will allow the construction of precise stratigraphies -, soil
sampling and subsequent phosphate analysis, settlement size can be determined.
Settlement hierarchies and the pattern of relationships between individual sites
can then be established. While archaeological data make it clear that in some
regions states emerge through a process of internal development, perhaps more
often such complexity develops through a secondary process in which local groups
unify in response of changes in neighboring regions. This took place in areas as
disparate as lowland Middle America and Northern Europe. However relatively
little archaeological attention has been devoted to secondary state formation
and MS. Thurston's research will help to remedy this situation. The work is
important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists. It will, hopefully, shed new light on how social complexity
develops and finally it will assist in the training of a promising young
scientist.