* 9221390
* Tetrahedrally Coordinated II-VI Semiconductors and Their     Heterostructures:  Basic Studies and Opto-Electronic        Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1993,02/28/1999
* Robert Gunshor, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ulrich Strom
* 02/28/1999
* USD 2,423,500.00

This award is for the renewal of the Materials Research Group at Purdue
University (prior award DMR-8913706) on the topic of tetrahedrally coordinated
compound semiconductors and their heterostructures. The research includes growth
of materials using molecular beam epitaxial techniques; spectroscopic
characterization in the visible, far infrared, and microwaves; transmission
electron microscopy; magnetic property measurements; ultra low temperature
calorimetry; study of quantum confinement of excitonic states; nature of the
heterointerfaces; characterization of optoelectronic properties. The materials
being studied include: manganese selenide, manganese telluride, cadmium
manganese selenide, compounds doped with magnetic ions, and superlattices of
these materials. %%% These materials have interesting properties and
combinations of properties, for example, both semiconducting and magnetic
properties, optoelectronic properties, and lasing in the blue and bluegreen part
of the spectrum. Potential applications include optoelectronic signal
processing, lasers, long wavelength infrared detection, flat panel display
technology, etc. The group has a long history of interdisciplinary research that
covers the range of fundamental science and technology. Students trained by this
group have been highly successful.