* 9221816
* U.S.-Bulgaria Cooperative Research in Combustion Experimentsand Numerical Modelling of Dust Explosions and Spontaneous Self Heatings
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Martin Hertzberg, American University in Bulgaria
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 08/31/1997
* USD 37,950.00

This U.S.-Bulgaria Research award is to Dr. Martin Hertzberg of the American
University in Bulgaria, to work with the U.S. Bureau of Mines, in cooperation
(on the Bulgarian side) the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, the University of
Mining and Geology, and the Mining Research and Technology, and the Mining
Research and Technology Institute, to work on "Combustion Experiments and
Numerical Modelling of Dust Explosions and Spontaneous Self-Heatings." The
researchers will perform experimental studies of the explosability of dusts and
the spontaneous self-heating of coals, complemented by theoretical numerical
modelling of those combustion processes. The combustion of phase-heterogeneous
systems plays a critical role in modern technology. The objective of the
explosability part of this research program is to study the fundamental physical
processes responsible for the existence of flammability limits. The need to
solve the problem of spontaneous combustion of low rank coals presenting severe
hazards in underground Bulgarian mines provides a strong incentive to reevaluate
the fundamentals of the spontaneous ignition process formulated in the classical
theory of Semenov and Frank-Kamenetskii, which theory requires substantial
modifications in order to include the processes of natural convection and gas
transport into (and out of) the self-heating mass. In addition, the
exothermic/endothermic moisture transport process must be added to the
exothermic surface oxidation rate of coals, and the numerical modelling of those
processes must be three-dimensional. This project in combustion research
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary
talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.