* 9221798
* University/Industry Coop: Effect of Copolymer Structure on the Bulk and Microscopic Properties of Two-Phase Hydrogels (AMPP)
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Carol Steiner, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/1997
* USD 247,500.00

Hydrophobically modified water-soluble polymers undergo a self-assembly process
in aqueous solutions whereby the hydrophobic side chains cluster together into
micelle-like aggregates, or microdomains, of characteristic size and
hydrophobicity. The resulting network, which are called two- phase hydrogels,
have physical properties which are completely different from those of the
initial solution and which may be exploited to good effect in numerous
applications. In this AMPP investigation, two-phase hydrogels from alkyl-
substituted polyacrylamides are synthesized and the relationships between
polymer structure and hydrogel properties are explored. The focus is on three
structural properties of the polymer, namely, the total hydrophobe content, the
backbone conformation, and the length of the hydrophobic side chains. The
effects of these properties on the structure and composition of the microdomains
and on the rheological properties of the bulk material are investigated. One of
the most interesting features of these unique materials is the demonstrated
ability of the dispersed hydrophobic phase to absorb and retain organic solutes
within an aqueous gel, and to release the solutes to the surroundings at a
constant rate (so-called "zero-order release"). This type of release profile is
much sought after in controlled drug delivery, an emerging technology of great
interest in the pharmaceutical field. A controlled release dosage form is one
which delivers therapeutic levels of a drug at a steady rate over long times,
eliminating the need for repeated doses of a medication and avoiding the
associated problems of oscillating blood levels of the drug. The basic
investigations on these novel materials will be used as the design basis for
two-phase hydrogels for use in controlled drug release. This work will be
conducted in collaboration with colleagues at Exxon Research and Engineering
Company, who will also furnish the polymers to be used in the study.