* 9221392
* Ultrafast Studies of Chemical Reactions in Polyatomic       Molecules in Simple Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1992,11/30/1996
* Charles Harris, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Lesser Blum
* 11/30/1996
* USD 684,000.00

Professor Charles Harris is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to conduct experimental and theoretical studies
of the effects of solvation on the rates of chemical reactions in solution. He
will measure unimolecular dissociation and bimolecular recombination rates on
picosecond and femtosecond timescales using a variety of experimental methods
such as transient pump-probe electronic absorption spectroscopy, transient Raman
scattering, and transient IR spectroscopy. The systems he will study include
triatomics, pseudotriatomics, mono- and di- metal carbonyls, and substituted
polyenes. The solvents used in these studies are primarily monatomic rare gas
liquids. He will also perform molecular simulations of the systems being studied
using Generalized Langevin and Generalized Brownian dynamics. %%% Theories
dealing with chemical reactions in the gas phase are quite well developed. Much
less is known about the factors which influence chemical reactions occurring in
solution, and this is where most important chemical reactions occur. In these
very fundamental studies, Harris will explore the effects which solvent
molecules have on reactions in solution which are initiated by absorption of a
photon of light. The combination of experiment and theory will lead to a better
understanding of the factors affecting chemical reactions in solution.