* 9221691
* Advances in Aerospace Sciences &amp; Engineering, International Symposium, Bangalore, India, December 12-14, 1992, Group    Travel Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1992,04/30/1994
* Inderjit Chopra, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/1994
* USD 8,250.00

Description: This project allows for participation of three U.S. scientists in
an international conference and symposium "Advances in Aerospace Sciences and
Engineering" to be held in Bangalore, India December 12-14, 1992. The topics to
be discussed will include: computational fluid dynamics methods and
applications, aeroelastic optimization, active controls, smart structures,
improved theoretical and computational models of composite structures, novel
model testing techniques, high speed and hypersonic aerodynamics. The sessions
will include state-of-the-art presentations in these areas as well as
discussions on current problems and areas for future research. Scope: This
meeting is in conjunction with the celebration of the golden anniversary of the
Department of Aerospace Engineering at the Indian Institute of Science, and will
be supported by the National Aeronautical Laboratory, India's main research
center for basic research in aeronautics and aerospace engineering. Participants
are expected from several European countries and Australia as well as the U.S.
The project allows the U.S. scientific community to learn about the state of
advances in the field in India and the current research results in other
countries represented. It also promotes the potential for joint research between
India and the U.S.