* 9221280
* Studies of RNA and Protein Dynamics via NMR Relaxation      Measurements
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Mark Rance, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1996
* USD 288,000.00

The principal objective of this research is to study the intramolecular dynamics
of some very important classes of ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecules and several
members of a family of calcium-binding proteins. Experimental data on dynamical
processes in these biomolecules will be obtained via the measurements of nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) relaxation rate constants; development of appropriate
methodologies for measuring heteronuclear relaxation rate constants will be
necessary. NMR spectroscopy is a powerful method for obtaining detailed, site-
specific information on the structure and dynamics of small- to medium-sized
biomolecules in solution. By measuring various NMR relaxation rate constants for
specific nuclei in molecule it is possible in principle to characterize the
types, amplitudes and rates of various internal motions over a wide range of
time scales. The specific aim in the RNA studies is to determine the general
characteristics of dynamical processes in RNAs, such as the relative mobilities
of bases and sugars in loops and duplex regions, the dynamics of nucleotides in
loop regions or bugles compared to nucleotides in duplexes, and the relative
mobilities of mismatched basepairs compared to standard Watson-Crick basepairs.
The specific aim of the protein research is to study the internal dynamics of
several members of a calmodulin superfamily of calcium-binding proteins. %%% The
internal mobility and flexibility of biomolecules play key roles in virtually
all biological processes; for example, fundamental processes such as enzyme
activity, molecular recognition and various molecular transport mechanisms
depend heavily on the intramolecular dynamics of participating proteins, nucleic
acids and other biomolecules. Thus, to obtain a better understanding of the
physical basis for the functional activity of these biomolecules it is extremely
important to probe their dynamical properties. To date very few physical studies
have been made of the structure and dynamics of RNAs, and thus the proposed NMR
experiments should provide invaluable information regarding these molecules
which have a central role in so many fundamental, cellular processes. The
dynamics studies of the calcium-binding proteins will be very important for
understanding their functional activity and for helping to establish the basic
principles underlying the inter-relationships of protein structure, function and
dynamics. The calcium ion functions as a second messenger in a range of
biological processes. In these systems, transient variations in the
concentration of calcium ion are translated by regulatory calcium-binding
proteins, which undergo conformational changes when they bind calcium ions. The
structural aspects of calcium-binding proteins have been under investigation in
many laboratories for some time, but only recently has it become feasible to
study in detail their internal, dynamical properties.