* 9221320
* Biogeochemical and Ecological Analysis of the Population    Dynamics of the Spotted Ladybird Beetle Using Geographic    Information Systems and Naturally Occurring Isotopes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1994
* Peggy Ostrom, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 10/31/1994
* USD 21,982.00

As early as 1962 Rachel Carson recognized the need for biological solutions to
environmental problems. She said: "A truly extraordinary variety of alternatives
to the chemical control of insects is available. Some are already in use...
others are little more than ideas in the minds of imaginative scientists,... .
All have this in common: they are biological solutions, based on the living
organism they wish to control, and to the whole fabric of life to which these
organisms belong. This research project will work within this context to develop
natural alternatives to pesticide and herbicides as crop-land management tools.
The long-term goal of our research is to understand the behavior of insects that
ate natural predators on pests that reduce the productivity of agricultural
crops. We will identify attributes of the landscape that are favored by a
predator on aphids, the ladybird beetles. This knowledge could allow us to
naturally reduce the number of insect pests by designing an agricultural
landscape that promotes a large population of predators. The first step in this
research is to define the link between various crop types and the predatory
insect. This is done by determining if there is a match between the abundance of
naturally occurring stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen in the insect
predators and the agricultural crop. A future step will be to link the spatial
distribution of the predators with respect to landscape elements. These two
steps are a unique approach to studying the behavior of insects because they
combine technology from geology and chemistry (analysis of naturally occurring
stable isotopes), entomology (insect population dynamics, biological control),
and geography (landscape mapping using geographical information systems).