* 9221542
* Engineering Education Coalition for the Center of Advanced Technoligies
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/1993,11/30/1998
* Leo Hanifin, University of Detroit Mercy
* Cooperative Agreement
* Fred Betz
* 11/30/1998
* USD 5,970,000.00

ABSTRACT 9221542 Hanifin PI-NAME: Leo E. Hanifin (U. of Detroit-Mercy)
EEC-9221542 CO-PI NAME: Emory W. Zimmers, Jr. (Lehigh U.) William A. Grissom
(Central State U.) Donald R. Falkenburg (Wayne State U.) Khalil S. Taraman
(Lawrence Tech. U.) Walton M. Hancock (U. of Michigan) The Coalition for New
Manufacturing Education will define a comprehensive paradigm for the education
of advanced manufacturing engineering-technologists. The Coalition is comprised
of Focus:HOPE and six universities; Detroit-Mercy, Central State, Lawrence
Technological, Lehigh, Michigan and Wayne State. The Coalition will design,
deliver, test and evaluate, adopt, and disseminate new resources and
methodologies usable in both industry and university settings. In consultation
with Coalition industry partners, essential course elements in manufacturing
engineering and technology will be identified and modularized for presentation
through a variety of innovative instructional processes. Optimal use of
electronic media and mentors will support an instructional sequence that is
inquiry-driven and customized to the current manufacturing functions and
experience of the engineer or technologist candidate. To foster global
technological access, two foreign languages will be required. Coalition
university partners will each develop modules for a knowledge area (course) in
which that institution has outstanding expertise. Upon satisfactory completion
of all modules associated with a knowledge area, the university responsible for
that content will award appropriate credit. Partner institutions will mutually
recognize all such course credits earned, consistent with procedures for course
credit transfer. Depending on the degree pathway chosen by each candidate, the
appropriate accredited institution will confer an associate, bachelor or master
level degree. Focus:HOPE's Center for Advanced Technologies (CAT) in Detroit
will be the primary development platform for a six-year curricul um integrating
hands-on manufacturing skill mastery and interdisciplinary engineering knowledge
within an applications context, i.e., the actual production of industry
contracts requiring expert use of advanced technologies at competitive levels of
quality, cost, and efficiency. Other key features include futuristic 220,000 SF
CAT facility, it leading-edge manufacturing equipment and information systems,
and its target enrollment of young black adults. Teaching/learning methodologies
and specific curricular modules successfully tested and evaluated at both the
CAT and the participating universities will be codified and disseminated
nationally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.