* 9221480
* Flowing Afterglow - Guided Ion Beam Studies of Reactive     Organic Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1998
* Robert Squires, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1998
* USD 718,500.00

A combined experimental and theoretical investigation of the formation,
thermodynamic stability, and chemical reactivity of neutral and ionic organic
fragments in the gas-phase will be made. This study will measure sequential
carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen dissociation energies for simple organic
compounds such as cyclopropane, benzene, toluene, and naphthalene, and
characterize the gas-phase reactivity of selected ionic fragments involved in
the bond-by-bond disassembly of these molecules. A flowing afterglow-guided ion
beam instrument will be used to measure activation energies for collision-
induced dissociation reactions of selected carbynes, biradicals, triradicals,
and their corresponding negative ions. These data will allow an examination of
thermochemical issues such as the energetic consequences of electronic promotion
(hybridization) effects in chemical bonding, the intrinsic Bronsted acidities of
radicals and carbenes, the relative magnitudes of the first, second, and third
carbon-hydrogen bond dissociation energies in benzene and related aromatic
compounds, and the energetic benefit of through-bond coupling and spin
polarization effects in organic biradicals. %%% This grant from the Organic
Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of Professor Robert R. Squires at
the Purdue University. This study will measure sequential carbon- carbon and
carbon-hydrogen bond dissociation energies of some simple organic molecules and
characterize the gas-phase reactivity of selected ionic fragments involved in
this bond- by-bond disassembly. These experiments will provide new
thermochemical data for neutral and ionic carbon-centered reactive
intermediates. Analysis of these data will allow an evaluation of some important
theoretical concepts in chemistry, which include chemical bonding and acidity of
molecules.