* 9221199
* Proton-Antiproton and Alpha-Alpha Interactions at the CERN  Laboratory (U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research; Science in    Developing Countries)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1992,10/31/1994
* Peter Schlein, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 10/31/1994
* USD 15,430.00

Technical Narrative: This U.S.-Turkey collaborative research project involving
physicists from the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) and Cukurova
University in Adana, Turkey will launch a new full- scale analysis of data on
alpha-alpha interactions. Project funding will enable Drs. Nazife Ozdes and Ayse
Kuzucu of Cukurova University to work with Dr. Peter Schlein and his team from
UCLA at the Super Proton Synchrotron at CERN (Switzerland). Additionally, after
Drs. Ozdes and Kuzucu return to their university, members of Schlein's team will
visit them in order to continue the full physics analysis. This new
collaborative research effort will build on data compiled from a previous
experiment conducted by Schlein's team at CERN. These data constitute the first
evidence for diffractive production of multi-Lambda systems in ion collisions.
Consequently, a more detailed understanding of alpha- alpha interactions will
permit the team to extrapolate to larger ion beams. This project is important
because ion beams can provide a production mechanism for bound multi-Lambda
systems, thereby, avoiding the uncertainties of production via the conjectured
quark- gluon plasma mechanism. This project in high energy physics fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts
in the United States and Turkey to combine complementary talents and pool
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.