* 9221356
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research:  Structural Studies  of Chitin and Chitin-Protein Complexes
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Rick Millane, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 07/31/1996
* USD 14,730.00

This award provides funding over a two year period to permit Dr. Rick Millane
of Purdue University to travel to New Zealand once each year to conduct
collaborative research on structural studies of chitin with Drs. Kenneth M.
Rudall and George R. Clark of the University of Auckland Department of
Chemistry. The molecular and crystal structure of the gamma-allomorph of chitin
will be determined in atomic detail. The overall structural features of a
variety of chitin-protein complexes from different sources will be determined.
This information will be used to examine relationships between the structural
features and the biological distribution and function of chitin. The results of
this study will further extend the knowledge base on the structures and
functionality of these polysaccharide systems that are important components of
the exoskeletons of insects, crustaceans and invertebrates. Structural details
on chitin- protein complexes may also provide information relevant to cellulose
composites in plant cell walls and collagen composites in mammalian connective
tissue. This cooperative research capitalizes on the unique and complementary
skills of the investigators. For Dr. Millane this project adds an international
aspect to his on-going NSF funded research. The Auckland chemists have
considerable experience in biophysical studies of chitin and chitin-protein
complexes. Dr. Rudall is particularly skilled in the extraction and preparation
of chitin microfibrils suitable for x-ray diffraction analysis. Dr. Clark is an
experienced x-ray crystallographer. Dr. Millane is an experienced x-ray fiber
diffractionist who has determined the structures of a number of polysaccharides
and polynucleotides using this technique.