* 9221895
* Study of the Dynamics and Maintenance of the Intertropical  Convergence Zones
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1992,05/31/1994
* David Battisti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sankar-Rao Mopidevi
* 05/31/1994
* USD 38,100.00

The Intertropical Convergence Zones (ITCZs) are climatological features in the
earth's atmosphere that are intimately tied to both the tropical large-scale
meridional (Hadley) circulation and the low-latitude surface circulation. The
ITCZ drives the meridional circulation cells which transport momentum and excess
heat from the tropics to midlatitudes, thereby affecting the baroclinity of the
midlatitudes and hence climate. In addition, the eastern Pacific ITCZ appears to
play a role in the large El Nino/Southern Oscillation climate fluctuations. Yet
the dynamics and energetics of the processes maintaining the Intertropical
Convergence Zones are poorly understood. This study examines the maintenance of
the ITCZ phenomenon and the associated large-scale circulation, using a General
Circulation Model and a simplified 3-layer model of the tropical atmosphere. The
PI is completing a series of carefully designed GCM experiments with
increasingly complicated forcing that explores how the surface boundary heating
(sea surface temperature) and orography affect the location, strength,
energetics and dynamics of the ITCZ. A 3-layer model of the tropical atmosphere
has been constructed and employed to facilitate the interpretation of the GCM
experiments (this model explicitly resolves the boundary layer and the free
baroclinic tropical tropospheric circulations). These results are helping to
better define the relationship between the ITCZ and large-scale meridional and
surface circulations, and hence are contributing to our knowledge of the global
climate.