* 9221592
* U.S.-Spain Cooperative Research:  Using Semi-Analytical     Methods to Solve Scale-Dependent Contaminant Transport      Equations in Heterogeneous Aquifers
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Sergio Serrano, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 13,150.00

93221592 Serrano This two-year award supports U.S.-Spain cooperative research
between Sergio Serrano, University of Kentucky, and Andres Sahuquillo,
Polytechnic University of Valencia, Spain. They will collaborate on the use of
semi-analytical methods to solve scale-dependent contaminant transport equations
in heterogeneous aquifers. The solution of the differential equations for
contaminant transport in heterogeneous aquifers is made difficult by the many
varied boundaries and interfaces encountered under natural conditions. Executing
numerical solutions methods on a fine time-space grid slows the computations to
an extent that can make the method prohibitive. The use of semi-analytical
methods offers an alternative to arrive at stable solutions that may result in
more accurate forecasting models and a better understanding of contaminant
migration in aquifers. The project will take advantage of this approach, more
common to European hydrologists, and the expertise of Dr. Sahuquillo and his
development of semi-analytical methods in groundwater hydrology. This proposal
contributes to greater intellectual interaction between the different approaches
of the European and American communities that may lead to significant
contributions to this important problem. * * *