* 9221157
* RUI:  Long-term Dynamics of Old-growth Northern Hardwood    Forests:  Restoration and Expansion of Permanent Plot       Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1993,02/28/1998
* Kerry Woods, Bennington College
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1998
* USD 147,827.00

The dynamics of plant communities have long been of interest to ecologists, yet
these dynamics are poorly understood. Direct, long-term observations of
populations and communities are difficult, forcing the use of indirect methods
to study community stability and dynamics. Given the potential anthropogenic
changes in climate, the need for long-term, baseline data on forest community
dynamics increases. However, there are few areas with large, intact stands of
old-growth forest available for long-term inventory and monitoring. This
research will use existing data bases from two old-growth stands in northern
Michigan to address hypotheses concerning the long-term stability and dynamics
of northern hardwood forests. These data bases were initially collected by
Forest Service personnel starting in 1934 for one stand, and 1961 in the other
stand. These data will be combined with newly collected data sets on species
growth rates, seedling establishment, sapling growth, and gap dynamics to test
several hypotheses concerning the dynamics of old-growth forest communities. The
participation of undergraduate students is a fundamental component of the
research program. This research will involve up to 20 undergraduate students
over a four year period. Students will be involved with all components of the
study form project design and data collection, to data analysis and publication.
Overall, this project will provide and opportunity to involve undergraduates in
scientific research, as well as gather important long- and short-term data on
the effects of climate change on old- growth forest dynamics.