* 9221611
* Fifth International Vacuum Microelectronics Conference,     Vienna, Austria, (July 13-17, 1992) Travel Support for      Former Soviet Union Scientists
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1993
* Charles Spindt, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/1993
* USD 10,000.00

This grant is for travel support for scientists from the former Soviet Union to
attend the Fifth International Vacuum Microelectronics Conference, in Vienna,
Austria, July 13-15, 1992. The Vacuum Microelectronics Conference provides a
focused scientific forum to address research topics in this relatively new and
emerging technological field. The scope of the conference includes fundamental
theoretical and experimental physics in such topics as non-equilibrium electron
transport in 3-D nanostructures, quantum mechanical tunneling through thin
surface layers of insulators, metals, and semiconductors, and theoretical
descriptions of surface tunneling. It also includes the physics of field
emission from layered materials and fabrication and processing physics of
nanostructures, and the physics and chemistry of micromachining. For a number of
years, scientists from the former Soviet Union have been leaders in this field,
and their participation is considered to be central to the success of the
conference, considering their contributions to the field with respect to
creativity, technical merit, and scientific significance. However, the recent
events in the FSU have left their institutes without resources to provide travel
to the conference even for their leading researchers. The request to NSF to
provide travel funds to bring many of these leading scientists to the meeting is
highly appropriate at this time, given the turbulent economic situation in the
FSU and our desire to foster closer contact with quality scientific groups in
these countries. The funds requested of NSF will be dispersed by the
International Committee based on a priority listing of up to 20 scientists
attached to this proposal.