* 9221222
* Ectomycorrhizal Mat Communities:  Evaluating the Direct     Cycling Hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Robert Griffiths, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1995
* USD 23,861.00

Specialized ectomycorrhizal (EcM) fungi produce extensive perennial hyphal and
rhizomorph mats in the litter and soil of coniferous and deciduous forest
ecosystems around the world. Our previous work has shown these complex microbial
communities to be sites of significantly elevated microbial activity, including
nutrient decomposition and cycling. One of the most persistent problems in
microbial ecology has been the gap between physiological traits observed in pure
cultures and observed or hypothesized activities in nature. Using
ectomycorrhizal mat communities as discrete experimental systems, this research
will attempt to define the specific role of these ecologically important fungi
in the EcM fungus-host tree symbiosis through their capacity to exploit
environmentally significant nitrogen and phosphorus resources in decaying soil
organic matter. The specific objectives of this research are to: 1) assess the
ability of mat-forming EcM fungi to process soil organic matter by changes in
substrate nitrogen and phosphorous chemistry and the production of extracellular
enzymes, 2) determine how EcM fungi dissociate reactive polyphenol-protein
complexes using extracellular enzymes, siderophores or biosurfactants as
possible mechanisms, and 3) measure the ectomycorrhizal contribution to soil
enzyme activities using polyclonal antibodies raised against enzymes from pure
cultures. This research will lead to the understanding of important soil
processes associated with soil microbial systems. In particular, this study will
elucidate the ability of soil biota to release nutrients from decaying organic
matter, and the proficiency of fungi to capture these resources and promote
efficient nutrient cycling in ecosystems.