* 9221708
* Strengthening Research and Science Education Through the    Participation of Puerto Rican
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Roberto Loran, Ana G. Mendez University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Luker
* 12/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

The Ana G. Mendez University System, in representation of the Corporation for
the Academic, Scientific, and Research Network of Puerto Rico (CRACIN for it
spanish acronym) requests support to help enhance and upgrade the connection
with the National Science Foundation Network (NSFNET). This is part of a
comprehensive plan to communicate the potential network user institutions among
themselves,m and with the major academic and research institutions in the
mainland and U.S. Virgin Islands, to improve collaborative research in science,
technology and engineering at the local and national levels. The primary
objective f the proposal is to provide a dedicated line of access between Puerto
Rico and the U.S. NSFNET for competitive researchers within the Academic,
Scientific, and Research Network of Puerto Rico, who are involved in research
and scholarly activities at their respective institutions. The enhanced
connection to NSFNET will also provide access to and promote the development of
linkages between the Caribbean countries and the U. S. mainland. The
universities need greater functionality and network speed to be able to access
supercomputers, libraries, and make file transfers along with being able to
implement a more reliable mail system. Students and faculty research will
benefit from the link. This is also a unique opportunity for the schools to
explore innovative educational resources.