* 9221562
* Memphis Educational Computer Communications Association
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Jack Buchanan, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* David A. Staudt
* 06/30/1997
* USD 318,304.00

The Memphis Educational Computer Communications Association (MECCA) is an
informal multicampus consortium newly formed for the purpose of promoting
computer networking among Memphis educational institutions, as well as promoting
access to the Internet and the NSFNET Backbone. This association will promote an
interinstitutional network of campus computer resources for all educational
institutions in Memphis metropolitan area. The University of Tennessee at
Memphis will closely coordinate and serve as a technological catalyst for local
networking and nationwide collaborations. It will coordinate with all the
educational institutions in the area interested in video conferencing and
distance learning, as well as collaborative research projects across the state.
A primary goal of MECCA is to facilitate collaborative projects and sharing of
resources between institution, including those outside the state. IT will
provide management and information services to all Memphis area institutions.
The universities need greater functionality and network speed to be able to
access supercomputers, libraries, and make file transfers along with being able
to implement a more reliable mail system. Students and faculty research will
benefit from the link. This is also a unique opportunity for the schools to
explore innovative educational resources.