* 9221372
* Synthesis and Optical Studies of Oxides, Oxoanion Fluorides,and Fluorides
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Douglas Keszler, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1997
* USD 240,000.00

The goal of this work is to prepare solid-state inorganic oxides, phosphate
fluorides, and fluorides that may find use as optical frequency converters and
laser crystals. Preparative work with frequency converters involves the
develpment of crystal chemistry of selected borates. The understanding of these
materials are advanced with the computation of microscopic hyperpolarizabilities
(beta) from macroscopic d coefficients and continuing applications of the
anionic group theory. Work with laser hosts focuses on the development of
materials in the STACK family and synthesis of new phosphate fluorides and
fluorides. The synthesis of these materials should provide a variety of new
crystals for study in diode-pumped or high cross-section, high-power laser
systems. %%% The objective of this work is to synthesize and study new solid-
state ceramics that may be used as laser crystals or optical second-harmonic
generators. Simple concepts in reaction and crystal chemistry are implemented in
designing or selecting new materials that have suitable optical characteristics
and can be grown as large single crystals. Optical studies of these materials
provides the basis for testing and developing the applicability of the concepts
and materials themselves. The realization of materials having superior
characteristics may well afford new sources of high-power laser light for
applications ranging from industrial manufacturing to the generation of x-rays
for living- cell holography.