* 9221752
* Technology Policy and The Diffusion of Computing:  A Study  in Asia-Pacific Nations
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/1993,08/31/2000
* John King, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 08/31/2000
* USD 498,683.00

This project involves the scientific analysis of a unique, longitudinal data
base on the role of technology policy in the diffusion of computing in twelve
Asia-Pacific countries. The purposes are to: (1) describe evolving trends in the
international diffusion of computing technology; (2) develop understanding of
the relationship between government technology policy and the diffusion of
computing; and (3) assess the effect of environmental factors, especially
economic development and computing infrastructure, on the diffusion of
computing. The method involves quantitative analysis--by country, across
countries, and over time--of relationships between the extent, rate, breadth and
pattern of computing diffusion and two sets of independent variables:
environmental factors and technology policy. The analyses will use data already
collected for the period 1980-1992, which will be supplemented annually for each
country. The quantitative analysis will be bolstered by reference to qualitative
case histories of each country's political, economic and infrastructure
environment, its government technology policy, and its diffusion results. The
analyses also will be reviewed by experts in each country who are familiar with
government technology policy and computing diffusion. The results of the
research will be new understanding about the relative influences of
environmental factors and of government technology policy on the diffusion of
computing production and use within a country and across countries. The results
also will include a general model of the relationship between general economic
conditions in a country and computing diffusion; and a unique and valuable
database that other scholars can use to pursue related scientific and policy
questions.