* 9221074
* Patterns and Mechanisms of Light Gap Regeneration in a      Caribbean Mangrove Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1993,02/28/1997
* Wayne Sousa, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 02/28/1997
* USD 291,360.00

Mangrove forest habitats are highly productive ecosystems that have significant
ecological, economic, and aesthetic value. They are being degraded and destroyed
world-wide by human-induced, local and global alterations of the coastal
environment. Given the broad geographic distribution of mangroves, there have
been surprisingly few studies of canopy tree regeneration and the interplay of
tree life histories with this process. This study will investigate patterns and
mechanisms of canopy tree regeneration in a Caribbean mangrove forest, with an
emphasis on the role of disturbance-generated canopy gaps. The study will
identify the factors that control forest regeneration and thereby shed light on
important basic ecological questions concerning the relative roles of niche
partitioning versus lottery processes in structuring plant assemblages. In
addition, the information gathered in this study is essential for predicting the
consequences of different kinds of habitat alteration. In particular, this study
will investigate the interactions of tree species life histories with seed
dispersal, soil nutrient levels, disturbance, herbivory, and interspecific
interactions. %%% This study represents an important contribution to the
understanding of processes and mechanisms associated with the dynamics of
tropical mangrove forests. Despite the broad geographic distribution of mangrove
vegetation, there has been a paucity of studies on the natural disturbance
regime and dynamics of this important type of coastal vegetation. The research
protocol described in this proposal contains one of the most comprehensive
attempts to measure pattern and experimentally address processes in the
regeneration of tropical mangrove forests.