* 9221703
* Evolution of Preferences
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1995
* Michael Ryan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 03/31/1995
* USD 41,999.00

Most species in the genus Xiphophorus (swordtail fish) have males that vary
greatly in body size. Females prefer the larger males for mating. One species,
X. pygmaeus, was thought to lack large males, but, surprisingly, female X.
pygmaeus still prefer large males: they are more attracted to big males of other
species than they are to their own small males. Dr. Ryan recently discovered
that large male X. pygmaeus exist at two sites, although all other sites lack
large males. At sites without large males, females are more attracted to the
large conspecific males from other sites than to the small males from their own
sites. However, females from sites with large males did not show any
discrimination based on male body size. Dr. Ryan and his colleagues will
investigate the factors that cause large body size in this species; preliminary
results suggest it does not stem from the same genetic mechanism that causes
large size in other swordtails. The researchers will also attempt to determine
why females at sites with large males do not prefer large males, as do females
from other sites. The results will bear on several areas of animal behavior and
evolution. They will indicate alternative mechanisms for how species evolve
large body size and the consequences for behaviors correlated with body size.
They will indicate if female mating preferences for traits absent in the species
might exist, perhaps because these preferences were inherited from ancestral
species in which males had the trait under question. The results will also
indicate if such inherited preferences could be lost if these preferences begin
to entail costs of mating. Finally, this research will provide badly needed
information about the natural history and biogeography of a species that is a
spectacular component of the Mexican fish fauna but whose range is restricted to
a few small tributaries.