* 9221844
* Collaborative Research:  Linking Environmental Heterogeneityto Foraging Behavior:  Plant Community Geometry and         Herbivore Functional Response
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1996
* Donald Spalinger, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1996
* USD 68,970.00

The ecological consequences of heterogeneity in resources depend on the way
resources are arranged in space and on the functional properties of organisms
seeking them. The PI's derived a model of consumption by herbivores that
incorporates variation in spatial arrangements of plants, and velocities and
food processing abilities of animals. The model generated the following
hypotheses: 1) Increasing patchiness in plant communities causes encounter rate
with resources to decline as foraging time increases. 2) The decline in
encounter rate is opposed by increasing resource apparency and size. 3) Spatial
pattern fails to influence intake rate when resource encounter rate exceeds an
animals food processing rate. 4) At a given scale, the influence of spatial
pattern on intake rate will be greatest for animals of intermediate body sizes.
To test these hypotheses, the PI's will manipulate spatial patterns of
resources, resource apparency, and resource size available to herbivores in
laboratory and field experiments. Results from these experiments will provide an
assessment of the model's ability to predict intake rate of consumers in
comparisons with predictions from more traditional predictive theory. %%% The
PI's have developed one of the first models that relates resource patchiness,
resource abundance, foraging movements of herbivores, and body size to resource
acquisition by herbivores. The model has generated a series of testable
hypotheses, some of which are unique and counter-intuitive. Tests of these
hypotheses will provide an important contribution toward a much needed general
theory of herbivore foraging. Results from this research have important
implications for landscape scale management of grazing systems, and for a
general understanding of foraging behavior in light of the habitat fragmentation
currently occurring in many natural systems.