* 9222440
* "Integrated Tunable Laser/Modulators and Receiver/Preamps for Wavelength Division Systems"
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Larry Coldren, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 08/31/1996
* USD 270,000.00

WPC> 2 B V J Z Courier T ? x x x x 6 X @ K X @ QMS JetScript QMSJETSC.PRS x @ h
h h h }X @ #| x 2 < 9222440 Coldren Recently, several novel schemes to provide
tunable lasers with relative wavelength tuning ranges much larger than the
achievable index change have been proposed. Such lasers are desired in high
capacity wavelength division networks for applications in tele and data
communications, and they may find use in optical sensors and memories as well as
in spectroscopies applications. Two of the most promising structures have been
studied at UC Santa Barbara. Wavelength tuning ranges> 30 nm have been
demonstrated. Unfortunately, current funding for this and related programs has
ended without any renewal prospect due to the sponsoring company's policy. One
of the problems with such lasers is that they are difficult to directly modulate
without simultaneously shifting the wavelength. Thus, it is desirable to
integrate them with separately controlled modulator external to the laser
cavity. At UCSB work on a simple and robust guide/antiguide modulator has
indicated that is an excellent candidate for this function. Again, funding for
this work has also ended. One goal of this proposed program would involve
integrating this modulator with one of the tunable laser structures. It is shown
that this can be accomplished with no extra processing steps.