* 9222476
* Structure and Impact of Spatiotemporal State on Catalytic   Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1996
* Dan Luss, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1996
* USD 306,479.00

A wide variety of spatiotemporal patterns exist in nature with a wide degree of
complexity, from simple and regular to highly disordered structures. These
structures show some order in the midst of complex nonlinear behavior. The
coupling of chemical reactions and transport processes, such as diffusion or
hydrodynamic convection, is known to lead to the formation of spatially
organized distributions of reactive compounds. Analysis and prediction of
pattern-formation in chemically reacting systems to date have been for
homogeneous medium and there is lack of understanding if and in which way
inhomogeneity of a medium will distort the patterns that exist in a uniform
medium. This relates directly to the performance of commercial heterogeneous
catalysts, which are inherently nonuniform. The answer has implications on the
assessment of the impact of spatiotemporal patterns on the performance of
catalysts. This research involves experimental, numerical and theoretical
studies of the formation, evolution, characterization, and impact of spatial and
spatiotemporal patterns on catalytic surfaces. The experiments will provide
quantitative data about the dynamic features of the patterns on catalysts with
simple and symmetric geometry in a well-controlled environment for several test
reactions, and will provide important information on the impact (or lack of
impact) of catalytic- surface inhomogeneity on the observed patterns. The
experimental information will serve as a guide to theoretical- model development
and modification and for determining parameter values. Numerical and theoretical
studies will help direct and organize the experimental research and point out
potentially interesting regions of experimentation and catalyst geometries, and
guide the development of principles predicting pattern formation and its impact.
The research should provide insight into the role and impact of spatiotemporal
patterns on the performance of heterogeneous catalysts.