* 9222748
* Dissertation Research: Therapeutic Practice and Cultural    Conflict: "Non-Compliance" in the Treatment of Anorexia     Nervosa
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1995
* NONE NONE, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 08/31/1995
* USD 4,800.00

The researchers will investigate the social and cultural reasons why anorexia
nervosa is difficult to cure through an ethnographic study of "non-compliance"
on the part of anorexic patients in the United States. Anorexics often resist
treatment, and the purpose of this project is to determine if this resistance is
related to the fact that anorexia exaggerates a contemporary ideal of feminine
"fitness" and bodily control. Many young women today try to attain autonomy and
self-control through dieting and exercise, in the face of pressures to relax and
consume. Anorexics carry the dieter's dilemma to an extreme in their experience
of a control paradox; the more anorexics are able to control their bodies, the
more their bodies seem to control them with demands for food and relaxation. The
central hypothesis for this project is that anorexics do not comply with
psychiatric protocols because these treatment practices participate in the
cultural production of the anorexics' predicament, by recreating her fundamental
anxiety about whether or not she can control herself. The doctoral researcher
will investigate this problem through interviews with patients and clinicians,
case studies of individual anorexics' life histories, and observations of the
interaction between anorexics and clinicians in eating disorder clinics. If the
researchers' central thesis holds up to evaluation, this project will
demonstrate the close relation between clinical practice and cultural
constructions of the ideals of feminine control and should aid clinicians in
devising better ways in which to treat anorexics.