* 9222503
* Flux and Fate of Sediment from Small Mountainous Rivers to  the Continental Margin: The Gulf of Alaska Example
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1994,09/30/1998
* Susan Henrichs, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Epp
* 09/30/1998
* USD 209,979.00

Abstract: ATM-9223114, PI-Henrichs, University of Alaska, "Flux and Fate of
Sediment and Water from Small, Mountainous Rivers to the Continental Margin: The
Gulf of Alaska Example": Small rivers charging directly from mountains into the
ocean carry greater sediment loads than commonly envisioned, a relatively great
percentage of which may escape to deeper waters during high stands of sea level.
This award supports a study of the flux of Holocene fluvial sediment into the
Gulf of Alaska, whose generally small tributary rivers are collectively the
largest supplier of sediment from North America. Alaskan rivers are relatively
uninfluenced by human activities, although glacial activity has resulted in
higher sediment yields than noted for other rivers with similar drainage areas.
The investigation will employ high-resolution seismic profiling for the
identification of sediment accumulation and discharge patterns on the shelf and
slope, and to trace individual sediment layers derived from episodic (flood)
events. Sedimentological data will help define the escape routes/processes, and
a variety of radiometric datings will show frequency of occurrence and rates of
accumulation. Measurements of total organic carbon and total nitrogen, del13C,
del15N, and lignin will be used to determine the amount and source of organic
matter accumulating in the sediments. Contemporaneous oceanographic processes
controlling strata formation will also be evaluated. This information should
help in the interpretation of the older strata observed by seismic profiling and
coring.