* 9222360
* American Iron
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Robert Gordon, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 02/29/1996
* USD 18,040.00

Iron and steel making have traditionally formed the backbone of industrial
strength. As early as 1770, Americans built up their iron industry to the third
largest in the world. They produced increasing amounts of iron through the 19th
century. By the 20th century Americans led the world in iron and steel
production. Dr. Gordon is tracing the development of the American iron industry.
Three research questions shape his study. The first concerns innovation and the
transfer of technology. Dr. Gordon is seeking to demonstrate that while most of
the techniques that Americans had used for making and shaping iron and its
alloys originated in Europe, few of these techniques were useful until local
artisans substantially modified them and raised them to higher levels of
technological development than were ever attained in Europe. The second question
concerns the growth of competence among American artisans. Third, he is
exploring the changing attitudes towards the use of natural resources and the
environment in the development of techniques in this energy-intensive industry.
In order to carry out this study, Dr. Gordon is using archaeological data and
archaeometric methods to supplement the historical records. Laboratory data are
particularly important for this study in dealing with questions about the
quality of products made in the past and metallurgical processes that were
poorly recorded. Metallographic studies and microprobe analyses of slags and
metal artifacts allow Dr. Gordon and his assistants to determine how processes
worked and the reasons for technological success or failure. He is using field
observations to locate sources of artifacts for laboratory study and to examine
the long- term environmental consequences of ironmaking.