* 9222597
* The Rejection of Continental Drift
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Naomi Oreskes, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 12/31/1995
* USD 72,577.00

How science develops is a major subject of investigation for science and
technology studies both because of its intrinsic interest and because of its
obvious policy relevance. A major aspect of studying scientific development is
understanding not only why a scientific theory is accepted but also why
scientists resist accepting a theory. Dr. Oreskes study of American scientists'
resistance to the theory of continental drift promises greatly to enrich our
understanding of factors blocking acceptance of a scientific theory. In the
early 20th century, American earth scientists vociferously opposed the notion of
continental mobility. Yet less than 50 years later, the same idea was hearlded
as a major conceptual breakthough, and today continental mobility is considered
a scientific "fact." Dr. Oreskes is studying why American geologists adamently
rejected an idea that is now considered true. Why did they react so much more
negatively than their British or European counterparts? The standard explanation
given for the rejection of continental drift before 1960 was that there was no
mechanism to explain how enormous blocks of land could slide over the surface of
the globe. Dr. Oreskes rejects this explanation. She has found that continental
drift was rejected in spite of the availability of several explanations of
continental mobility--including the explanation generally accepted today--and
suggests instead that drift was rejected because the implications of the theory
were perceived as a challenge to underlying methodological principles and
standards of practice in American earth science. Dr. Oreskes is attempting to
place this drift debate within the context of existing American geological
research traditions, and to relate attitudes about theory to patterns of
scientific practice in American geology. This work will thus contribute to an
understanding of the relationshsip between scientific theory and practices, the
cultural origins of those practices, and suggest some philosophical issues that
may arise when standards of practice change.