* 9222197
* Neuronal Control of Astroglial Cell Proliferation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* William Brennan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 01/31/1997
* USD 222,544.00

WPCO 2 B V P Z CG Times 12pt 8 p C &lt; , W X p P rk ; X P HP DeskJet 500
HPDES500.PRS X p P rk ; x X , , 0 FX P " m o 8 ; ^&lt;D\dd DDDd DDDDddddddddddDD
X | |x DL | t l| DDDddDXdXdXDdd88d8 ddddHL8dd ddXXdXd d ddDDddd D d d d X X X X
X X|X|X|X|XD8D8D8D8 d d d d d d d d d d X d d d d dtd X X X X X X X d|X|X|X|X d
d d d d d d dD D D8D L d|8|8|8|8|8 d t d d d d H H HlLlLlLlL|8|8|8 d d d d d d d
X X X d|8 d HlL|8 d d d d d D/ N d ddDXPPdd ddd dHdddd H d x H d h 1D DD x dp d
x d x X L p x xdx X x x xL xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxLLLLLLL x 2 = M #| p Brennan Cells
of the adult central nervous system (CNS) have a very limited ability to
compensate for injury and cell death in the brain. This is due in part to the
lack of growth and division of the major cell type of the brain; neurons. This
prevents restoration of normal brain function following injury to neruons during
strokes, unconsciousness and many neurodegenerative diseases. The reason for the
inability of neurons to divide is unknown, but may involve an abnormal growth of
another cell type, astroglia, in response to injury. Importantly, when
astroglial cells multiply, they form a dense, scar-like area in the injured
brain. It is thought that this multiplication of astroglial cells effectively
blocks regrowth of neurons and prevents the reestablishment of neuron
connections called synapses. Dr. Brennan will investigate why under certain
circumstances astroglia cells are capable of cell division an d how this might
be switched off, thus preventing the glial scar formation seen in neural
injuries. The long-term goal of this research is to understand the factors which
regulate cell growth and division in the CNS so that the treatment of neural
injury and degenerative diseases of the nervous system may begin. ***