* 9222812
* Equilibrium and Non-Equilibrium Behavior of Low Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1996
* J. Michael Kosterlitz, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1996
* USD 255,000.00

Theoretical research will be conducted in two areas: phase transitions and
noneqilibrium interfaces. A new method of analyzing simulation data will be
used, including finite size scaling of distributions of energy and order
parameter. This can detect weakly first order transitions and accurately
estimate exponents. Extensions to systems with continuous symmetries, frustrated
junction arrays and random systems will be made. Two- dimensional XY-like
transitions will be studied to see if unambiguous numerical detection is
feasible. Two aspects of driven interfaces will be studied by analytical and
numerical methods. The first study is of the rough-smooth transition in
dimensions greater than three and molecular beam epitaxy growth focussing on
effects of initial conditions and the connections between logarithmic and
algebraic roughness in vicinal surfaces. The second study is of directional
solidification and eutectic growth driven by a moving temperature gradient by
full phase, rather than interface, models. Successful simulations in one- and
two-dimension interfaces have been done. Extensions to allow for thermal and
external noise, a study of interface instabilities, and comparison to
experiments will be made. Generalizations to include convective effects and to
interpolations between one- and two-sided models will be made. %%% The
theoretical research focuses on two areas of broad interest and importance in
condensed matter physics and materials science. Sophisticated numerical
techniques developed by the principal investigator will be exploited to
determine the nature of the phase transition in a variety of complex systems.
The results will have profound impact on the study of phase transitions and
critical phenomena. In addition, the results will provide a better understanding
of the real materials systems involved. A second area of study will be the
growth of interfaces. This area is one of fascinating fundamental interest, yet
also has important ramifications for materials processing through crystal growth
and thin film growth.