* 9222184
* Towards a Balanced Seismic Design Procedure for Strength    and Ductility Requirement
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1994
* Chia-Ming Uang, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/1994
* USD 30,544.00

The main objective of this project is to develop a procedure to balance the
structure's actual strength and the required ductility requirements for steel
frame design. Steel moment frames are popularly used for low-to medium- rise
buildings in all seismic zones. Unlike reinforced concrete frames, member sizes
of steel moment frames are quite often governed by drift limits; therefore the
structure's actual strength may be significantly higher than that required by
seismic codes. Unfortunately, this unique feature of steel design is not
recognized by seismic codes, and stringent ductility requirements as specified
in these codes may be too conservative. Furthermore, since the stringent
ductility requirements are developed primarily for high seismic zones, its
application to moderate or low seismic zones has been questioned. The proposed
design procedure considers explicitly the beneficial structural overstrength
resulting from drift limitations; the required ductility is balanced by this
overstrength. In addition to two ductility classes (Special and Ordinary Moment
Frames) which have been adopted in seismic provisions, a third class
(Intermediate Moment Frame) will be developed in the project. Thus an economic
design which provides a more consistent safely level for all seismic regions can
be achieved. An efficient computer program will be developed to compute
structural overstrength. Several moment frames located in different seismic
zones will be designed by both the conventional and proposed design methods.
Feasibility study will be conducted and cost savings resulting from the proposed
design method will be noted. Safety level of steel moment frames designed by
both methods will also be compared by performing nonlinear dynamic analysis.