* 9222493
* Hot Tunneling Microscopy Study of Epitaxial Growth of       Silicon and Germanium on Silicon (100)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Eric Ganz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/1997
* USD 252,000.00

9222493 Ganz Fundamental aspects of molecular beam epitaxy of silicon,
germanium/silicon, and details of surface diffusion of atoms will be studied
using hot scanning tunneling microscopy. The instrumentation used and
experimental approach followed will allow atomic resolution imaging and electron
diffraction to be measured during the crystal growth process. The effects of
temperature on the kinetics of film growth, as well as direct determination of
important growth parameters including anisotropic diffusion, coarsening, binding
energies, step velocity, and diffusion across or reflection from step edges will
be studied. These parameters are to be investigated for silicon homoepitaxial
growth on Si(100) substrates, and for Ge heteroepitaxial growth on Si(100) with
Sb as a surfactant. %%% This research is expected to provide fundamental new
information about semiconductor materials which are widely used for VLSI
technology. State-of-the-art surface instrumentation and methods are expected to
reveal atomic scale features of surface interactions in real time as reactions
occur. The semiconductor materials under study have wide applicability in
electronic and optoelectronic devices, and a greater understanding of their
primary materials science properties is expected to improve the performance of
devices made from these materials. New devices and device configurations may
result from these studies as well as significant improvements in devices and
integrated circuits currently used in computing, information processing, and
telecommunications. ***