* 9222655
* Molecular Mechanics
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1996
* Norman Allinger, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lesser Blum
* 07/31/1996
* USD 250,000.00

Professor Norman Allinger is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to continue in his development of the MM3
empirical molecular mechanics force field. This force field is parameterized on
the basis of experimental data in the form of structures, vibrational
frequencies, thermodynamic heats of formation, and when necessary supplemented
with ab initio molecular orbital calculations. The MM3 force field is widely
used to perform molecular simulations of organic compounds including
macromolecular species. In this grant period, Professor Allinger will address a
number of specific anomalies between current MM3 predictions and experimental
observation which require special parameterization of the MM3 force field. These
anomalies include: the anomeric effect, the Bohlmann effect, and the
electronegativity effect on bond shorthening. %%% Molecular structure and
thermodynamic properties including the relative energies of different
conformations are frequently related to the overal physical properties of
organic compounds. Chemists are constantly seeking links between molecular
structure and physical properties which will assist them in directed synthesis
of chemical species with desired physical properties and chemical activities.
Computer models of molecular structure have recently become a very important
tool in the quantitative prediction of structure and properties. Although the
more sophisticated molecular orbital theory is the preferred technique for
smaller molecules, empirical models such as MM3 are absolutely necessary for
most larger molecules which are of interest to academic and industrial organic
chemists. Allinger's MM3 force field is one of the most widely accepted
empirical force fields which is used for this purpose.