* 9222685
* Prosodically Transcribed Data and Transcription Tools for   Linguistics Research; June 25-30, 1993; Columbus, Ohio
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1993,03/31/1994
* Mary Beckman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 03/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

ABSTRACT Intonation and prosody provide information unavailable in orthographic
transcriptions, yet crucial to understanding the intended meaning of an
utterance and to generating natural- sounding synthetic speech. A full
understanding of these phenomena is thus prerequisite to advance in many areas
of linguistic research and technology. This understanding requires access to
large labeled speech corpora. Over the last year, a diverse group of
researchers, from Electrical Engineers and Computer Scientists to Psychologists
and Linguists, have cooperated in devising and testing a proposed standard
prosodic transcription system for the purpose of annotating large multi- site
shared corpora. The next step in this cooperative effort is to hold a workshop
(1) to develop training materials for new transcribers and to plan tools for
automating aspects of the transcription, (2) to investigate the full range of
needs for prosodically annotated speech databases in the speech and natural
language research communities while coordinating plans for annotating existing
data bases and for designing new ones in view of these needs, and (3) to extend
the standard to other dialects of English. The tangible products of the
conference will be an online training course and a volume of Conference Notes
edited from the reports and discussion at the conference.