* 9222367
* Numerical Competence in the Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes)
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1993,08/28/1994
* Sarah Boysen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/28/1994
* USD 67,665.00

This research project is evaluating the capacity for numerical competence of
non-human primates. The research focuses on the ability of adolescent and adult
chimpanzees to acquire number- related abilities, including counting, number
comprehension, and the symbolic representation of quantities. Drs. Boysen and
Berntson already have documented the acquisition of counting by chimpanzees, as
well as the ability to manipulate number symbols through implicit counting
strategies. Additional studies of the use of fractions for labelling portions of
foods and other objects will be completed with two young-adult animals. Fraction
concepts will be tested using novel objects and the introduction of a novel
fraction. To test receptive number comprehension, the chimpanzees are shown an
Arabic numeral and then must construct an array of the same number from a
collection of objects. This is a high-level counting skill, and preliminary
tests indicate success unprecedented in animal research. This research is adding
greatly to our understanding of the information-processing capacities of non-
human primates for symbol use, and the similarities and differences in
representational abilities between humans and apes. The demonstration of such
abilities in a species that shares our primate heritage will make important
contributions towards characterizing the possible evolution of cognition in our
early hominid ancestry. These studies may also yield significant teaching and
training strategies for the acquisition of complex numerical skills, which could
be applied in a variety of settings and for a range of compromised human
populations, including learning-disabled, autistic, and developmentally-delayed
children.