* 9222912
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research:  The Behavior and    Application of Fiber-Reinforced Thermoplastic Sheets
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1994
* R. Byron Pipes, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 07/31/1994
* USD 4,862.00

This award will support the travel by Prof. R. Byron Pipes of the Center for
Composite Materials to conduct collaborative research with Dr. Debes
Bhattacharyya of the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of
Auckland. The principal goal of the research is to establish a base for fiber-
reinforced thermoplastic composites that can be integrated into engineering
practice. Thermoplastic polymers can undergo a reversible phase change from
solid to liquid thereby enabling the development of shaping and joining
industrial methods analogous to those for conventional metallic materials. It is
also possible to incorporate various types of fiber reinforcement to suit the
end use of the formed product. The potential processing advantages of
thermoplastics have led to the development of thermoforming processes and to the
adoption of sheet forming techniques typical of those used with metallic
materials. This research will investigate ways fiber-reinforced thermoplastic
sheets can be converted into three-dimensional models using existing metal-
forming equipment with minimal modification. The research areas of the principal
investigators are complementary and the cooperative work should produce
substantial results. Dr. Bhattacharyya is an expert in the sheet forming of
conventional metallic materials. Prof. Pipes is a recognized authority in
composites processing. The travel of Dr. Bhattacharyya to the Center for
Composite Materials in Delaware is funded through the New Zealand Ministry of
Research, Science and Technology (MORST).