* 9222418
* Fabrication and Physics of Low-Disorder Electron and Hole   Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Mansour Shayegan, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 10/31/1996
* USD 315,000.00

This research involves a study of the materials science and physics of the
growth of very high-quality GaAs/AlxGa1-x heterojunction thin- film structures
using the molecular beam epitaxy technique, and the new electron interaction
physics expected to manifest in such ideal electron systems. Very low-disorder,
dilute two-dimensional (2D) electron and hole systems at the GaAs/AlGaAs
interface in the regime of very small Landau level fillings where transitions
between quantum liquid and solid states of the system are expected will be
studied. Several novel quasi-2d systems with an additional degree of freedom
will also be studied. These include systems which contain two or more layers of
electrons in close proximity so that interlayer Coulomb interactions are strong,
and thick-layer electron systems in wide parabolic wells. The additional degree
of freedom in these structures is expected to lead to new collective sates such
as the recently observed fractional quantum Hall state at the even 1/2
denominator filling in a double-layer electron system. These systems will be
probed via low-temperature magnetotransport measurements. %%% The impact of this
advanced materials research program is two-fold. First, optimization of
molecular beam epitaxy growth techniques to produce very high-quality,
selectively-doped interfaces and heterostructure thin-films with the least
amount of imperfections can be useful for the fabrication of other advanced
semiconductor structures and devices. Second, these low-disorder structures will
make accessible a new regime in semiconductor physics where new physical
phenomena are expected to arise from the electron-electron interactions.