* 9222391
* Quadratic Lyapunov Functions and State Feedback via InteriorPoint Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Stephen Boyd, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/1997
* USD 190,020.00

9222391 Boyd One of the most useful qualities of a properly designed feedback
control system is robustness, i.e., the ability of the closed- loop system to
continue working well despite large variations in the (open-loop) plant
dynamics. This property is also the source of some of the hardest problems in
control system analysis and synthesis. For example, the problem of determining a
feedback law that is guaranteed to work well when connected to any plant model
from a given set of models-the robust synthesis problem-is in general quite
difficult. A recent advance is an analytic solution to a specific type of robust
synthesis problem. This analytic solution can be derived in several different
frameworks: Hoo-optimal control, linear-quadratic game-theoretic control, or
linear exponential quadratic Gaussian (LEQG) optimal control. In contrast, this
research centers around a method that couples Lyapunov theory with (numerical)
convex optimization (but is closely connected with the analytic solution method
mentioned above). In particular, newly developed interior point optimization
methods will be applied to some convex and quasiconvex problems that arise in
control theory (analysis and synthesis). Preliminary investigations suggest that
the impact of interior point methods on Lyapunov function and state feedback
search problems will be as profound as it has been on linear and quadratic
programming. The goal of the research is to develop the foundations for method
of control system robustness analysis and robust controller synthesis that
substitutes convex optimization for the computations required in the analytic
solution mentioned above, but in return solves a much larger class of problems.
Moreover, with interior point optimization methods, the increase in computation
effort over that required for the analytic solution, may be quite modest. ***