* 9222175
* Characteristics of Infant Stress
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Michael Lewis, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/1996
* USD 182,243.00

ABSTRACT This research concerns the origins and consequences of individual
differences in infants' reactions to stress. It is focused on the relation
between stress, cortisol release (a physiological indicator of stress), and
measures of behavioral distress in infants and toddlers. It involves a
longitudinal study between birth and 18 months of age. Adrenocortical and
behavioral stress responses will be assess for PKU screening at birth and
routine inoculation at 6 and 18 months if age. Maternal caregiving practices and
family stress will be assessed when infants are 3 months of age. Quality of
mother-infant attachment as well as infant visual self-recognition, self-
conscious emotion, and health will be assessed when infants are 18 months of
age. The research will inform us not only about infant reactivity to stress
using both behavioral and adrenocortical responses, but also the impact of the
mother- infant relationship in infant stress reactivity as well as the impact of
both infant stress reactivity and he mother-infant relationship in early infancy
on subsequent outcomes in the domains of infant health and socioemotional
functioning. This information is important both theoretically and practically,
and will enrich our understanding of fundamental developmental processes in
infancy.