* 9222598
* Mechanisms of Chemical Communication
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1995
* Robert Johnston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 04/30/1995
* USD 64,332.00

The general goals of this project are to understand individual recognition by
scent in animals and, eventually, to use this as a way to understand the
functional organization of the olfactory system in the brain as well as aspects
of social memory. In this project, Dr. Johnston will investigate how animals
communicate by scent. In particular, he will study a phenomenon known as scent
over-marking, in which one animal deposits its scent in the same places as
another. Preliminary results suggest that, by doing so, one animal can mask the
information in scent deposited previously by another individual, suggesting that
over-marking has competitive functions. Using golden hamsters in a variety of
behavioral tests, Dr. Johnston will attempt to (1) document such competitive
functions of over-marking in the social lives of animals, (2) characterize the
special perceptual mechanisms that allow animals to decipher information from
places that have been marked by several individuals, and (3) investigate how
animals use information about individuals in such marks to guide their social
behavior. These experiments have importance for at least three domains of
science, and may have some practical implications as well. First, olfactory
communication and scent-marking are important in the lives of most mammals, a
few birds, most reptiles, some amphibians, and a huge number of invertebrates,
yet we still understand little about it. This research promises entirely new
insights into how animals use scent to communicate with one another and thus to
regulate their social interactions. This new knowledge would help us to
understand such aspects of behavior as territoriality, dominant-subordinate
interactions, mate choice and competition for mates, and social recognition.
Thus, it could eventually have practical implications for how to better house
animals in captivity in labs and zoos, or to manage their behavior in
households, and could even be helpful in wildlife management. Second, these
experiments should give us new insights into the sense of smell by
characterizing heretofore unsuspected sensory-perceptual abilities by which
animals can extract information about one individual from complex mixtures of
scent from two or more individuals. Third, the experiments will provide new
knowledge and new behavioral paradigms that can be used as models for
investigating the brain mechanisms underlying both the sense of smell and more
general processes such as individual recognition and memory.