* 9222263
* Cell Culture Models of the Regulation of Corticotropin-     Releasing Factor Release
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1998
* Dale Birkle, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1998
* USD 158,020.00

9222263 Birkle Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), a 41-amino acid
neuropeptide, plays a central role in the physiological response to stress and
anxiety. Behavioral studies have demonstrated that injection of this
neuropeptide into the brain mimics anxiety-like and stress-like reactions
possibly by its activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Indeed
under certain conditions, CRF is released into the portal system from neurons in
the hypothalamus, stimulates the pituitary to secrete adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) which then acts on the adrenal to release glucocorticoids.
Recently, CRF-secreting neurons have been shown to be not only located in the
hypothalamic area but also in limbic structures, including the amygdala. This is
exciting since the amygdala is considered to be the seat of emotional responses
like fear and rage. Dr. Birkle will examine the regulation of the release of CRF
from neurons in the amygdala. She will use neurons from this brain region that
are isolated from developing tissue and grown in culture. This technique offers
the advantage of creating a pure population of nerve cells in an easily
manipulated environment. Dr. Birkle will first identify neurons that contain CRF
receptors and then determine what type of neurotransmitter are also located in
these cells. She will use then determine the effects of exposure to these
neurochemical mediators and their antagonists on the release of CRF. The results
will provide new insights about the regulation of CRF in extrahypothalamic
sites. Since CRF plays a pivotal role in the expression of anxiety and autonomic
responses to stressful events, the results will provide a better understanding
about how the brain, as a whole, integrates the multicomponent response to
stress and anxiety. Moreover, this work will increase our knowledge of the
neurochemical processes that lead to the experience of anxiety and will provide
direction for the development of better preventi on and therapy for this
disorder. ***