* 9222788
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Moving Mountains:           Technology and the Environment in Western Copper Mining
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 08/31/1994
* USD 7,000.00

Mr. Timothy LeCain, under the direction of Drs. David Hounshell and Reed Geiger,
is probing the complex relationships among society, technology and the
environment. The dangers of environmental degradation have become all too
apparent in recent years. Yet for a society that is highly industrialized and
reliant on advanced technology, the precise role of technological change in
environmental destruction is poorly understood. At the turn of the century,
copper mining in the western United States entered a new era of corporate
domination. Large corporations like Anaconda Company and Kennecott used an array
of new technologies to dig immense amounts of ore from the earth and process it.
Mr. LeCain raises these questions: What were the environmental consequences of
this copper mining? How was it changed by the evolution of mining technology and
management? Was technology a causal factor of the change or simply a tool? How
did technology relate tot he wider process of rationalizing the human and
natural world during the 20th century? What role did the methods and beliefs of
engineers and scientists play in the development of mining and how were these
experts trained? What was the source of technological innovation of mining
machinery and how important were machinery manufacturers in this process? In
order to address these questions, Mr. LeCain is examining archives in the West
(Colorado, Montana, Utah, California and Arizona) as well as university and
government archives in the East. This study promises a significant contribution
to debates within the history of technology, environmental history, western
history, and business history.