* 9222369
* Metabolic and Feeding Strategies For Coping with Food       Scarcity and Cold
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Michael Rashotte, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1997
* USD 192,703.00

9222369 Rashotte To survive in vastly different environmental conditions, such
as occur across the seasons of a year, animals and humans must have good
strategies for keeping their energy expenditure in balance with energy intake.
Endothermic (warm-blooded) animals, including humans, face the most serious
problem because of the need to maintain high body temperature and metabolic
rate. This project will use advanced experimental methods to study in greater
detail than has previously been possible the ways a very widely distributed and,
in survival terms, highly successful endothermic animal (the pigeon) manages to
cope with the range of environmental conditions in which it is found. By using
unique computerized environments, this project will vary the ambient
temperature, the difficulty associated with finding food, and the length of the
daily light-dark cycle in ways that simulate some natural conditions for these
animals. The experimental situation in which they live is highly instrumented to
record their use of strategies for achieving energy balance through changing
their feeding behavior, body temperature, metabolic rate, and overall daily
activity level. In some cases, the environmental conditions are specifically
designed to elucidate factors that influence which of these strategies are
brought into play when the environment changes. This project is unique in
providing new information about the changing interplay of these strategies
across the animal's normal daily cycle of activity and inactivity, and in
providing such data from animals which are free to adopt varied combinations of
these strategies over the long term as they become acclimated to new
environmental conditions. The outcome of this research is likely to deepen our
knowledge of the survival strategies used by endothermic animals to cope
successfully with varied environmental conditions. With the new and detailed
information in hand which this project promises to provided, it shoul d be
possible to encourage new lines of future research on specific brain and
hormonal bases for these strategies. A thorough understanding of the
relationship between changes in environmental conditions and the appearance of
certain survival-related strategies involving feeding, metabolism, activity, and
energy balance will contribute to basic knowledge in the life sciences and may
ultimately have relevance for problems as diverse as the proper management of
animal habitats and seasonally related human disorders involving metabolism and
feeding.