* 9222617
* Phosphorus-Capped Metal Clusters:  Molecular Building-Blocks for Extended Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Cynthia Schauer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 08/31/1996
* USD 257,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program provides
support to Dr. Cynthia K. Schauer of the Chemistry Department, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, for synthesis of linear oligomers of small metal-
phosphorus clusters. The clusters generally contain five atom frameworks of iron
and phosphorus with carbonyl ligands. A variety of synthetic strategies will be
used to form metal bridged, phosphorus-phosphorus bridged, and organic group
bridged chains. The reactions take advantage of the reactivity at the phosphorus
atom when hydrogen or trialkylsilyl groups are removed from that site. The
properties and reactivities of the resulting oligomers will be investigated,
with the goal of providing models for the reactivity of polymeric chains.
Synthesis of longer chained species or chains containing phosphorus cubanes will
also be attempted. %%% This study attempts to find synthetic procedures for the
construction of linear chains containing phosphorus and metals. The project is a
synthetic challenge and is of fundamental interest. Utility may lie in the
extent to which shorter chain, and therefore more easily characterized,
molecules reveal the properties of longer chain polymers built from the same
connecting units. It is possible that these compounds or their analogues may
have interesting electronic properties.