* 9222547
* A Study of the Career Patterns of African-American          Doctoral Chemists:  1916-1990
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Willie Pearson, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 02/29/1996
* USD 120,645.00

Professor Pearson is comparing the relative status of African- American and
White doctoral chemists in the American scientific community. Previous studies
of the career patterns of American chemists have not included racial status.
This research seeks to contribute to this literature by examining the
participation of African-Americans in chemistry. Professor Pearson is examining
the career patterns of all African- Americans known to have earned chemistry
doctorates. He and his student assistants are collecting data by means of a
mailed questionnaire and personal interviews. The control group is comprised of
White chemists matched on four criteria: (1) Ph.D.- granting department, (2)
sex, (3) thesis advisor (where possible), and (4) research specialty. Professor
Pearson is analyzing the data by means of bivariate and multivariate statistics.
Because much of the existing knowledge of the role of race in science in general
and chemistry in particular is unsystematic and anecdotal, the results of the
study will advance our knowledge of the career patterns of African-American
doctoral scientists. The results should provide data that permit scholars to
revise our understanding the experiences of African- American chemists vis-a-vis
their white counterparts. While this history cannot correct past wrongs, it can
point the way to avoiding those mistakes in the future. And to the extent that
recent policy has ameliorated past wrongs, the study should help to assess what
works and does not work in the effort to create true equal opportunity within
science.