* 9222896
* A Dynamic Analysis of Cellular Interactions and Lineage     Relationships in the Developing Optic Tectum
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Linda Ross, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* John S. Edwards
* 09/30/1995
* USD 143,732.00

The cells of the nervous system go through many changes as the develop, and many
factors control their development. Individual cells are born in one region but
must then migrate to another region where development continues. As cells
develop, they extend processes or axons to make connections with other cells of
the nervous system. A cell also receives axonal connections from other neurons.
It has been suggested that projections from neurons in the eye influence the
development of cells with which they connect in visual centers in the brain such
as the tectum. The goal of this project is to determine how cell-cell
interactions influence the birth, migration, and maturation of individual cells.
Individual cells in the optic tectum will be labeled with fluorescent dyes, and
the cells will be followed with video microscopy as they proceed through
development. Subsequently, the environment of the tectal cells will be
manipulated by unilateral enucleation. In these altered embryos, the tectal
cells will not receive the normal contacts from the retina. Using the normal
data as a reference, labeled cells in the tectum will be analyzed to determine
precisely the aspects of development that are affected by interactions with
projections from the eye. The aim of this research is to provide an integrated
description in real time earliest dynamic processes involved in the development
of the visual system.***//