* 9222523
* I/UCRC for Ocean Technology Center Planning Meeting
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Robert Tyce, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 01/31/1994
* USD 9,892.00

The ocean technologies have significant economic and scientific impact to our
nation. An Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Ocean Technology
at the University of Rhode Island could provide a better mechanism to advance
the development and application of basic research on ocean technologies. A
planning meeting will study if industry will support an Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center on Ocean Technology to be headquartered at the
University of Rhode Island. The meeting will asses industry interest and
determine if the Center has sufficient support and merit to meet the
Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers Program criteria. The proposed
research projects will address:1) development of analytical techniques for
environmental monitoring; 2) equipment development and testing; 3) development
of hardware and software for collection and processing of under water acoustics
and optics data. The Principal Investigator is recognized as an eminent
researcher and has the resource for this planning meeting. This project has been
coordinated with Dr. Norman Caplan, Program Director of the Environmental and
Ocean Systems Program in the Division of Biological and Critical Systems at the
National Science Foundation. The Program Director recommends the University of
Rhode Island be awarded $9,892 for one year for this planning meeting.