* 9222472
* International Conference on Biotechnology for Environment   and Agriculture; Karachi, Pakistan, January 6-9, 1993,      Support for U.S. Participants
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1992,05/31/1994
* G. Rasul Chaudhry, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1994
* USD 12,376.00

Description: This project supports U.S. scientists' participation in
"International Conference on Biotechnology for Environment and Agriculture" to
be held in Karachi, Pakistan, January 6-9, 1993. Sessions will be held on
biodegradation, bioremediation, biotransformation of metals, genetically
engineered microorganisms, microbial infectious agents in the environment,
biological control, role of microorganisms in agriculture, and industrial
potential of microorganisms. Specifically the application of biotechnology in
agriculture will be discussed with emphasis on the use of microorganisms for
controlling plant pathogens. The use of Lactobacilli sp. as a probiotic in
cattle and poultry and for the production of bacteriocins by lactobacilli, and
their use in food microbiology. The application of biotechnology in industry
will be discussed. Scope: The conference has specific objectives that include:
allowing scientists and graduate students from Pakistan and other countries in
South Asia and the Middle East to meet and interact with scientists from the
industrialized countries to exchange information and learn about new ideas,
findings and techniques for dealing with environmental problems; increasing the
interest in the developing world in examining environmental problems and
conducting scientific research to solve these problems; and familiarize western
scientists with the problems in countries in the Less Developed Countries (LDC)
and the local efforts for their solution. The conference is partially supported
by international organizations such as UNIDO, and the Third World Academy of
sciences, as well as by the British Council and by several Pakistani
organizations. Participants are expected from Japan, India, the U.K., the
Netherlands, Germany, Italy, Egypt, New Zealand, Belgium, and Switzerland in
addition to Pakistan.