* 9222177
* MHC-Associated Patterns of Mating, Kin Recognition, and     Genetic Diversity in Six Vertebrate Species
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Wayne Potts, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* George W. Uetz
* 06/30/1996
* USD 258,999.00

9222177 Potts The genes of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) play a
major role in immune recognition. Because of this, it has generally been assumed
that their unequalled genetic diversity results from parasite-driven selection.
However, these genes may also function in a genetic-based kin-recognition
system. This possibility is indicated by Dr. Potts' recent demonstration that
female house mice prefer to mate with MHC-dissimilar males, but prefer to nest
communally with MHC-similar females. Dr. Potts will now attempt to extend these
findings in two major ways. First, discrimination in kin-recognition systems
requires a referent to which other individuals are compared. Dr. Potts will use
MHC-based mating preferences in a seminatural population of house mice as an
assay to determine (1) whether self, a parent, a nestmate, or some combination
is the referent, and (2) the nature of the rules for matching MHC haplotypes.
Second, to determine whether or not the unique features of MHC (known primarily
from studies of mice) are general vertebrate traits, Dr. Potts will evaluate
MHC-related patterns of fitness, mating, and genetic diversity in natural
populations of five other vertebrate species. If MHC genes are generally
involved in disease resistance, mating preferences, and kin recognition in
vertebrate species, understanding the mechanisms and function of this MHC-based
discrimination will have important implications for a wide range of areas in
vertebrate biology. These areas include the evolution of immune-recognition
systems, the evolution of social behavior, modulation of kin-based cooperation,
inbreeding- avoidance mechanisms, and the genetic basis of mating behavior and
kin discrimination.