* 9222679
* Flora Novo-Galiciana
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Rogers McVaugh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1997
* USD 227,562.00

WPC 2 _ B P V ` Courier 10cpi | x ? x x x , k x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ Leonard
Krishtalka Leonard Krishtalka 2 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 4 &lt; D L ! 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 '
3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' X 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' X X X 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' 3 ' " 4 &lt; D L
! (# # x \ P C X P# McVaugh 9222679 This project will continue the compilation
of a descriptive, illustrated flora of western Mexico begun in 1951 and now
approximately 50% complete. This area of Mexico is among the most diverse
botanically. Seven volumes will be published by 1993 covering the conifers,
ferns and monocotylodons and two large groups of dicotylodons; this renewal will
treat a number of the remaining dicotylodon groups. Although this flora has been
issued in traditional treatments, the project has now begun to capture
electronically the relevant collections in Mexican herbaria, so that in future
the primary product will be an updatable floral database that will be used by
researchers and land managers in various botanical studies and conservation
measures. Collaborators include Mexican herbaria, at which the collections will
continue to be used to train students. (# ` h p x (# %%% ` h p x (# (# This long
term project involves an exhaustive survey and compilation of the flora of
western Mexico, which is among the most diverse areas botanically. The project
began in 1951 and the descriptive, illustrated flora is projected to be
published in 17 volumes. Although this flora has been issued in traditional
treatments, the project has now begun to computerize the relevant collections in
Mexican herbaria, so that in future the primary product will be an updatable
floral database that will be used by researchers and land managers in various
botanical studies and conservation measures. At the University of Michigan and
at the collaborating Mexican herbaria the project's botanical collections are
fundamental resources for training students and for research projects in
maintaining and understanding this regional biodiversity. (# ` h p x (# ***