* 9222304
* A Physical/Chemical/Biological Simulation Model of          Southern Ocean Air-Sea-Ice Interactions to Predict          Carbon Source/Sink Intensity
* O/D,OPP
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Taro Takahashi, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 02/28/1995
* USD 149,843.00

This physical-biological modeling study of the interactions that control the
exchange of carbon dioxide between the ocean and the atmosphere in the Southern
Ocean is a joint effort between Columbia University and the University of
Southern California. This component of the project concerns the physical and
chemical processes in the ocean that determine the fluxes of carbon dioxide. The
Southern Ocean is of particular importance in this context because it represents
one of the two global regions where deep convection allows the ventilation of
upwelling water masses, and where the sinking of surface waters removes
unutilized nutrients from the euphotic zone. This area has a large range of
physical, chemical, and biological processes, so that the seasonal amplitude of
the carbon dioxide flux is also large, and makes individual observations poor
estimators of the annual mean value. In fact it is currently not clear whether
this region is one of net uptake or release of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.
An existing one-dimensional model which describes the vertical air/sea/ice
interactions and energy fluxes will be modified to include the effects of air-
sea gas exchange and the relevant chemistry and carbon flow within the
planktonic communities of the upper ocean. A series of experiments will be
performed to determine the sensitivity of the model to parameterization schemes,
initial conditions, and boundary conditions. Ultimately the model will be
coupled to a global circulation model developed by the Goddard Institute of
Space Studies in order to answer such specific questions as what are the factors
that determine the general patterns of horizontal phytoplankton distribution as
observed by satellite-based color scanners; what is the relationship between
pigment distributions and rates of primary productivity; what fraction is new
production exportable to the deep ocean, and what is the magnitude of the
biogenic flux of carbon dioxide in the deep Southern Ocean.