* 9222110
* Further Studies Necessary for Adoption by Steel Industry    of Slotted Bolted Connections
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1993,02/28/1994
* Egor Popov, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/28/1994
* USD 56,590.00

An experimental study at University of California, Berkeley (UCB), spanning
three years, has led to the development of a Slotted Bolted Connection (SBC),
which under cyclic rectilinear loading exhibits almost ideal elastic-perfectly-
plastic behavior. This arrangement has provided a cost effective, predictable
and reliable energy dissipator with possible applications beyond the originally
intended area of seismic design and retrofit. Analytical studies have shown that
structures equipped with SBCs perform very well under violent earthquake
excitations. Preparations for shake table tests of a three story frame at
Richmond facility are currently in progress. It is expected that the results of
these tests will further affirm the significant utility of SBCs in earthquake
hazard mitigation. However, it is felt that in order to bring this project to
full fruition, that is to attain confident acceptance and application by
industry of SBCs, a number of additional tests of SBCs with bolt sizes other
than the 1/2 inch diameter for which results already exist, and variations in
other design parameters must be conducted. In this project, additional
connections with different bolt sized, bolt spacing and connection plate sized
will be tested on the existing test facility to obtain more information of
practical importance for utilization of these connections in steel structures.