* 9222988
* Expression and Purification of Functional Tubulin Domains   for Crystallization Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1994
* Berl Oakley, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1994
* USD 49,999.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research. The determination of the
structure of the tubulin dimer, the major component of microtubules, would be of
great value in understanding how microtubules assemble, disassemble and function
in cells. In addition, it should greatly improve our knowledge of how several
medically and agriculturally important compounds bind to and act upon
microtubules. Previous efforts to crystallize tubulin have failed because of
problems with tubulin heterogeneity and stability and because of the tendency of
tubulin to assemble into microtubules rather than crystallize. To circumvent
these problems, Dr. Oakley proposes to purify beta-tubulin, one of two molecules
that form the tubulin dimer, and to purify a polypeptide containing an important
structural domain of beta-tubulin. The genes encoding the molecules will be
placed under the control of a powerful inducible promoter and inserted by
transformation in the filamentous fungus, Aspergillus nidulans. The molecules
will be produced at high levels and will be purified by affinity chromatography
using six histidine residues inserted at the carboxyl termini of the molecules.
GTP and drug binding studies will be performed to determine if the molecules
have their native structure and if the structure is stable over time. If these
experiments are successful, the purified molecules will subsequently be used for
structural studies. %%% Tubulin, the monomeric component of microtubules, is a
structural protein ubiquitous in the eukaryotic world and fundamental to life as
we know it. Understanding its molecular structure would be important for
understanding its functions in nature, and would allow genetic engineering
approaches to be used to adapt it for new functions of possible commercial
interest (such as molecular switches). Tubulin is a scaffolding for shape, a
road map for intracellular motility, a determinant of post-cleavage cell fate;
it is the stuff of the mitotic spindle, responsible for chromosome segregation
to daughter cells, and the stuff of cilia and flagella, responsible for cellular
locomotion. Tubulin is actually a family of genetically distinct proteins, which
are further diversified by post-translational modifications. It has proven very
difficult to get structural information on tubulin, because of the difficulties
inherent in purifying a homogeneous protein from natural sources. This project
represents a plausible yet very high-risk approach to obtaining sufficient
quantities of homogeneous, pure, native, monomeric tubulin for structural
studies.