* 9222284
* Renovation of the Vertebrate Paleontology Collections at    Carnegie Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Mary Dawson, Carnegie Institute
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1996
* USD 618,259.00

The Section of Vertebrate Paleontology of Carnegie Museum of Natural History
will over three years institute major improvements of collection facilities in
Vertebrate Paleontology, specifically installation of a modern moveable
compactor system in the collection area, thereby increasing storage capacity by
approximately 110%. These improvements will promote and advance study,
maintenance, and conservation of the paleontological collections, which are
international stature and importance. These collections include over 100,000
specimens, ranging in age from Late Silurian to Quaternary and encompassing all
vertebrate classes. Field research projects add specimens at the average rate of
2500 per year. The paleontology collection areas include two large rooms in the
Museum's basement as well as space set aside for collections in the second floor
office complex. These areas are filled to current capacity, with the result that
large parts of the collections are difficult to access and crowded past optimal
conditions. The only solution to these crowded conditions is to increase density
of the collections, which is best accomplished by compactors. Data verification
of the Section's computerized database will accompany rehousing specimens in
compactors. Previous Carnegie Institute commitments to this project include
computerization of the collections and additions to the staff of two full time
preparators/collection managers (the latter to be implemented in 1993).
Compactor installation will be preceded by development of environmental controls
and renovation of spaces occupied by the collections. %%% Collections of this
type comprise a nationally important suite of resources that serve to facilitate
a much broader array of activities than just current research. They are key
resources for educational endeavors important to all age groups and levels of
specification. They provide the documentary data base for the past history of
life on earth. They are important repositions for materials awaiting the
attention of future generations.