* 9222474
* Flexible Production Technologies and Changing Work          Relations:  An Ethical Evaluation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Tony Smith, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1995
* USD 39,926.00

9222474 Smith This award provides partial support for philosophical research on
the ethical implications of flexible production technologies. These technologies
include numerically controlled tools, robots, and other forms of information
technology that are or have the potential to change work relations in
manufacturing. This research project examines these changes and claims about
these changes from an ethical standpoint. Among the ethical principles that form
the basis in normative social theory for an approach to this subject are those
of individual autonomy, or freedom, and the social good, defined as the absence
of fundamental social antagonisms. The analytical component of the research
involves a thorough review of the empirical literature and studies of flexible
production technologies that have been published, including those from both
management and labor perspectives. The research involves identifying alleged
consequences of ethical relevance in this literature, including areas of
agreement and disagreement about the consequences of these technologies. It
involves clarifying the assumptions and evidence that underly the various
conclusions, and their strengths and weaknesses. Careful consideration of these
issues may allow the investigator to formulate conclusions that are defensible
normatively and empirically. If this is not possible, he may be able to make
clear the kind of further empirical work needed to resolve the normative
questions. This research will be undertaken with regular interaction and
discussions with a group of social scientists who are doing empirical research
on these issues. Results will include publication of articles and a monograph
and presentations at professional conferences. Results will also be presented in
more public media. ***