* 9222758
* Global Regulation with Limited Information
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1995
* David Sappington, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/1995
* USD 94,966.00

Government officials commonly face the difficult problem of having to make
important policy decisions in the absence of perfect information about the
ultimate impact of their decisions. Often, those affected most directly by
government policy have better information than the government about the likely
impact of policy decisions. However, those affected by public policy are often
reluctant to share their superior information with the government, because doing
so can jeopardize their financial interests. The purpose of this research is to
examine the optimal design of public policy in such settings, and to analyze how
government policy makers can best elicit and employ superior information held by
individuals and firms who will be affected by government policy. A number of
specific settings will be examined. First, the question of whether and how the
government should identify and provide special treatment or protection for
particular domestic industries in order to improve their international
competitiveness will be explored. Second, the optimal design of government
policy to enhance environmental quality will be examined. The proper use of
tradeable resource rights will receive special attention. Third, optimal
regulatory policy for public utilities will be investigated. Fourth,
alternatives to traditional regulatory policy will be analyzed.