* 9222046
* Regulation of Pattern Formation in Retinal Photoreceptors
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Peter Hitchcock, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dr. Susan F. Volman
* 12/31/1996
* USD 245,007.00

Normal function of the vertebrate nervous system depends on a precise pattern
of distribution of the different cell types. For example, cone photoreceptors,
which constitute a sheet of light-sensitive neurons in the retina of the eye,
come in three main types, each type maximally sensitive to light of a certain
color, red, green or blue. The different cone-cell types are arranged in a
regular, repeating lattice or mosaic pattern. The developmental mechanisms that
build the lattice, i.e. that control the spacing and determine the fate of the
presumptive cone cells, are not well understood. Most biologists agree that the
immature cells send signals to their neighbors that determine the fate of the
neighboring cells. To begin to understand this process, the earliest stages in
the development of the cone mosaic will be examined. Molecular markers will used
to identify the early developing cone types. The hypothesis to be tested is that
one cone type acts as the "founder" to establish a blueprint of the mosaic
pattern, and the other cone types develop later, filling in the pattern. This
study will give new insight into how the distribution of different neuron types
are established and will provide new information about the way cells communicate
with each other during development.