* 9222373
* Political Geography of Mayan Peten
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Prudence Rice, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 299,762.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Don Rice and his colleagues will
conduct two field seasons of archaeological research in the Peten region of
Guatemala. The goal of the work is to understand what happened to Mayan cultures
after the collapse of the "Classical Maya." Archaeological evidence clearly
demonstrates the degree of social complexity which was achieved at the height of
Mayan development. Priest emperors ruled over large areas of lowland Middle
America. A writing system was devised and the importance of monumental
architecture is demonstrated by temple mounds which survive to present times.
Both archaeological and textual data indicate that large numbers of people were
integrated into single political units and that traditional agricultural
techniques served to provide adequate food in a difficult lowland tropical
environment. In approximately the 9th century AD however this classic Mayan
society "collapsed" and the reasons for this are poorly known. Dr Rice and his
colleagues will focus on the time interval between the 9th and 17th centuries
AD, when Europeans conquered this area. They will work from early Spanish texts
which described, and located - in a general way - major Mayan towns. Through on
the ground survey they will attempt to locate these and through limited
archaeological excavation, provide dates. This information will provide the
framework for a major excavation project which will allow the Mayan "decline" to
be traced over a ca. 800 year interval. This project is important for several
reasons. It will provide information on a little understood period of
prehistory. The data it produces will be of interest to many archaeologists and
it will increase our understanding of how complex societies arise, and also
decline.