* 9222862
* Workshop in Economic Theory to be held at Northwestern      University, Evanston, IL.; Summers of 1993, 1994 and 1995
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Matthew Jackson, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/1996
* USD 158,388.00

This project provides funding for conferences to be held at Northwestern
University during the summers of 1993, 1994, and 1995. Each will consist of two
week-long workshops, one concentrating on theoretical issues in macroeconomics
and the other on microeconomics. To promote interaction, a group of researchers
in different but related fields will be invited to each of the workshops. The
topics for the three years will vary. For the first year, the topics on the
macro side will be politics and growth, local externalities of human capital,
dynamics of the labor market, monetary policy and welfare and technological
innovation and growth. On the micro side, the topics will be the economic theory
of organizations, and the design of contracts. Topics for the second and third
years will be decided later. On the macro side, areas likely to be included are:
dynamic models of international trade, dynamic models of monetary and fiscal
policy, models of aggregate growth and its determinants, models of the long-run
distribution of income and wealth, models of fertility and human capital
accumulation, and computation of equilibria for dynamic models. On the micro
side, areas that look promising are: the role of information in asset pricing,
the economic implications of evolutionary game theory, bounded rationality and
learning, the empirical implications of industrial organization models, and the
design of political institutions.