* 9222907
* Professional Ethics:  A Group-Oriented Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Lawrence May, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1995
* USD 39,880.00

The orientation in philosophy to ethical questions has traditionally been to
those that arise between individuals. This project seeks to shift away from the
individualistic model of the isolated professional struggling to decide what is
right. The emphasis in it is to consider questions about the ethical
responsibilities of professionals in groups and organizations. To be undertaken
by a philosopher who has already done extensive work in the theory of collective
resp9onsibility and in professional ethics, the project seeks to provide a group
oriented picture of professional ethics. It recognizes that professionals work
increasingly for large corporations or institutions, and that they are members
of communities that have created expectations on the part of the public.
Generally, professionals are not isolated practitioners nor their own bosses;
they must contend with various groups that have a significant impact on their
professional lives. Issues of collective and shared responsibility need to be
integrated more fully into the educational and theoretical discussions of
professional ethics. This project will explore the theoretical and practical
significance of reorienting the discussion of ethics in the professions to
include attention to its institutional context. It will produce a book focused
on the professions of engineering and law, with significant application to the
various sciences. This project will interest scholars as well as profesionals
from a wide spectrum of the population, most importantly those who are currently
writing or revising codes of professional conduct.