* 9222590
* Studies of Chemical Rates Processes by Means of Size and    Charge Resolved 2D-NMR
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Charles Johnson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 07/31/1996
* USD 380,500.00

In this project, supported by the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Prof. C. Johnson of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
will conduct research in the area of diffusion-ordered two-dimensional nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. This research will be devoted to the
development of techniques and instrumentation, and their applications to
chemical exchange effects, binding equilibria involving surfactants and
macromolecules, and micelles and micellanes. Work will also be done on the
continued development of mobility-ordered two-dimensional nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy with special emphasis on electrokinetic studies and data
analysis for the diffusion and mobility of vesicles ranging in size from 50 to
200 nanometers. %%% The relaxation rates observed in nuclear magnetic resonance
spectra of condensed media are affected by frictional effects determined by the
sizes and shapes of molecules as they undergo translational and reorientational
motions in the medium. The recently developed technique of diffusion-ordered
two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy allows the
identification of molecular components of mixtures and the simultaneous
characterization of the sizes of aggregates and other structures present. Using
a variation of this technique, mobility-ordered two-dimensional nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, one is able to identify and determine the mobilities of
ions in condensed media. The research by Professor Johnson serves to improve on
these methods and extend them into the three dimensional domain.