* 9222437
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Adoption of Tokyo       University Modified Marker and Cell Program (Tummac) for    Invetigation of Free Surface Flow Around Work Boat Hulls
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1993,02/28/1995
* Robert Latorre, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 02/28/1995
* USD 20,336.00

This award provides support for a long-term visit to Japan for Professor Robert
Latorre, Professor and Chairman, Department of Naval Architecture and Marine
Engineering, University of New Orleans, who will work with Professor Hideaki
Miyata, Department of Naval Architecture and Ocean Engineering, University of
Tokyo, from January to June 1993. The project involves computer modeling of the
free surface flow around a flat or blunt bow typical of barges, towboats, and
workboats used in the Gulf of Mexico. The numerical calculations will be made by
using the Tokyo University Modified Marker and Cell program, TUMMAC. This
program has been used to study a number of free surface flows caused by slender
and moderately full hull forms, as well as breaking waves. The research project
will contribute to the advancement of technology in the area of ship design and
ocean engineering. The unique problem is the inclusion of the free-surface in
the fluid dynamics equations. Although it may be awhile before shipbuilding is
restored to its previous level of activity, it may not be so long before ship
design using computer aided virtual simulations is internationally centered in
the United States. The integration of codes such as TUMMAC into the design
procedure is important in this development. The project will also result in
enhanced engineering education through computer and video instructional
materials.