* 9222148
* Communal Breeding in Nicrophorus tomentosus
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1996
* Michelle Scott, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 04/30/1996
* USD 79,000.00

Reproductive cooperation and conflict lie at the heart of the evolution of
sociality. Communal breeding in which adults share a nest or mate and may
provide care for unrelated young, has been identified as one path leading to
complex social systems in both insects and vertebrates. But even in social
insects and birds, facultative reproductive cooperation among non-relatives is
rare. To understand the origins of alternative reproductive strategies, where
individuals can breed either independently or communally, it is essential to
identify the options open to each individual and assess the relative success of
each alternative. %%% Both male and female Nicrophorus tomentosus (Coleoptera:
Silphidae) demonstrate facultative communal brood care. More than one male
and/or female may help to rear young that may not be related. The aims of this
research are to examine the frequency of communal breeding in a natural
population and to identify the parentage of these offspring using a DNA
fingerprinting technique. %%% This study will examine why the reproductively
dominant individuals allow communal breeding and how this might be achieved.
Several hypotheses for the evolution of sociality and of communal breeding in
particular, have been constructed with considerable general application. These
have been tested in communally-breeding vertebrates and in social insects with
joint nest foundation. They can and should be tested in other groups. %%% The
study is of practical value because the survival of the many species committed
to a Social way of life is dependent on survival of individuals and the well-
being of their social organizations.***