* 9222644
* An Assessment of Dopant Effects on Surface and Interfacial  Properties in Alumina
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1997
* Andreas Glaeser, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 03/31/1997
* USD 340,000.00

This project plans to study the dopant effects on surface and interfacial
properties in alumina. It will examine the effects of dopants, such as Ca, Mg,
and Ti on the relative energies and thermodynamica stabilities of different
crstallographic planes through measurements of equilibrium pore shapes. It will
also study the Rayleigh instability of lithographically introduced pore channels
with preexistent finite amplitude perturbations of known but systematically
varied wavelength. Finally, it will also study the grain growth, pore drag, amd
pore-boundary separation, by varying pore size, shape, and spacing at the
interface between undoped and doped single-crystal and polycrystalline alumina.
%%% This proposal uses a lithography-based method for studying pore- boundary
interactions. It studies the effects of dopants such Mg, Ca, and Ti on the pore-
boundary separation conditions and on surface diffusion in alumina. Through this
approach, the effect of these dopants on the surface energy anisotropy in
alumina can be critically investigated. The role of anisotropy on the
microstructural development can be ascertained, and it will be very helpful to
the fabrication of in-situ composites such as those with elonagated grain
structures.