* 9222387
* Theoretical Study of Nitride Wide Bandgap Semiconductors forElectronic and Optical Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Benjamin Segall, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/29/1996
* USD 254,000.00

This research will provide theoretical investigations of several areas which are
crucial to the emerging class of wide bandgap semiconductor compounds comprised
of group three-nitrides. A range of basic properties, including the electronic
transport and optical properties of aluminum nitride, gallium nitride and indium
nitride, will be calculated by means of first-principles methods. Calculations
of the dependence of the electronic properties on strain and optical phonon
distortions will provide information needed in the modeling of high temperature
transport. The optical response functions and other spectroscopic information
will be calculated for both the zincblende and the wurtzite forms. The nitrogen
vacancy, an important defect for the quality of the material, will be
investigated. The project will study the corresponding properties for ternay
alloy systems composed of aluminum and gallium, and indium and gallium with
nitrogen, as well as the pseudo-binary alloy of silicon carbide with aluminum
nitride. This part of the work will make use of appropriate statistical models
in the treatment of disorder. The optical properties of small period
superlattices and the band-offsets of heterostructures will be studied. The work
is expected to have a significant impact on the characterization efforts of
material produced by novel growth techniques currently under development. This
will assist the development of opto-electronic devices operating at short
wavelengths and at high temperatures. %%% Computationally intensive research
will be conducted in order to calculate the properties of a new class of
semiconductor compounds which have the potential for many applications. These
complex materials, which are based on the nitrides, are particularly useful for
their optical properties in addition to their electronic ones. Also, these are
hard materials which can function at high temperatures. Thus, applications
requiring opto-electronic devices operating at high temperatures will benefit.