* 9222876
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Dynamic            Conductivity of Lateral Superlattices
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1996
* James Merz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 07/31/1996
* USD 23,600.00

9222876 Merz This award supports the participation of a group of young American
scientists and engineers in a regional European collaboration investigating the
electronic properties of semiconductor quantum structures. The technical
coordinator for the U.S. side of the linked effort is Professor James Merz,
Director of the Science and Technology Center for Quantized Electronic
Structures (QUEST) at the University of California, Santa Barbara. The senior
U.S. participants in the proposed research are Professors H. Kroemer and P.
Petroff of UCSB; however, the engineers to be funded by this NSF award are
students, postdoctoral researchers and new faculty affiliated with QUEST. The
European group most involved in collaborating with the QUEST group is led by
Professor J. P. Kotthaus of the Physics Section of the Ludwig-Maximilians-
University in Munich, Germany. Their work is part of a regional effort with
several European partners which is funded by the ESPRIT Basic Research Program.
The participating U.S. and German engineers will produce three distinct lateral
superlattice systems based on III-V semiconductor quantum structures and then
investigate their specific electronic properties via dynamic conductivity
experiments at low temperatures and in high magnetic fields. The U.S. group
contributes expertise in the conception and fabrication of these structures by
growth with molecular beam epitaxy and patterning with focused ion beam. The
German group also has very strong fabrication capabilities with particular
expertise in lithographic processing for semiconductor nanostructures. In
addition, the German group has specialized equipment for detailed analysis of
the electronic properties of the jointly fabricated structures. By combining
their expertise and specialized facilities, they will be able to optimize the
fabrication technologies and better assess which types of superlattices offer
the best high-frequency device performance. In addition, the planned exchanges
of junior researcher s between the two groups will give them the opportunity to
work in a top flight laboratory with equipment and strengths different from
their own. They will also gain insights into the practice of research in another
country and make some early contacts with potential professional colleagues. ***