* 9222426
* Emergent Properties of Irrigation Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* John Lansing, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Raymond B. Hames
* 06/30/1995
* USD 15,132.00

For centuries the Balinese have used an irrigation system controlled by temple
priests to coordinate the water schedules of paddy rice farmers. The
effectiveness of indigenously run irrigation systems has been questioned by
social scientists and development planners in terms of whether they will permit
the maximization of rice yields or the minimization of risk of failure. This
project will help answer this question and potentially provide insights into how
complex systems are simply and effectively coordinated. The research will
evaluate the hypothesis that Balinese water temple networks are self-organizing
managerial systems, a hitherto unknown form of complex adaptive system. It will
also test whether computer simulation models can predict variations in the
structure of temple networks. Previous research has enabled the investigators to
build and test a predictive linear simulation model of the role of water temples
in the management of the terraced rice field ecology. This project builds
directly on that research, but shifts attention from the ecological role of
individual water temples to possible system-level properties of temple networks.
Models of coadaptation on rugged fitness landscapes will enable one to
investigate emergent properties of temple networks under varying ecological
conditions in a comparative study of five different river systems. The results
of optimization analyses will yield models of the adaptive landscape of each
river, which will then be compared to existing temple networks.