* 9222077
* RUI:  Corticotropin-Releasing Factor and Infant Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1997
* Michael Hennessy, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 11/30/1997
* USD 246,809.00

Infants that are involuntarily separated from their mothers may suffer severe
physiological and behavioral consequences. Most of what we know concerning the
physiological effects has derived from studies using nonhuman primates. These
effects include increases in sympathetic activity, changes in neurotransmitter
levels, and increased activity of the pituitary-adrenal system, a neuroendocrine
system associated with stress. For many years, it was only possible to study
such questions in primates since common laboratory rodents have been thought to
respond to separation in a fundamentally different way than to primates, and
possibly humans. In his previous NSF support, Dr. Hennessy demonstrated that the
responses of young guinea pigs to maternal separation are in many ways similar
to those of primates. The guinea pig model provides an alternative to primate
research which, in turn, offers many practical advantages. Dr. Hennessy would
continue his research to further our understanding of how brief periods of
maternal separations alter neuroendocrine and behavioral function. He will
examine the role of corticotropin- releasing factor (CRF) since this
hypothalamic neurohormone is of primary importance in the body's diverse
physiological and behavioral responses in threatening situations. Dr. Hennessy
will investigate the role of centrally and peripherally administered
corticotropin-releasing factor and its antagonists in mediating stress-induced
behavioral changes. These basic studies will contribute to our understanding of
the consequences of mother-infant separation and processes of attachment and
elucidate the nature of the stress response in young.