* 9222092
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Refraction/Wide-Angle       Reflection Investigation of the Byrd Subglacial Basin       Field Test
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1998
* Charles Bentley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 06/30/1998
* USD 289,942.00

This award supports an in situ and short traverse seismic reflection/refraction
and magnetotelluric experiment in West Antarctica. This collaborative experiment
involves four awards at four institutions. The four-fold purpose is 1) to
investigate part of the Byrd Subglacial Basin, 2) to test techniques for this
work that could be done in a long traverse, 3) to determine the viability of the
magnetotelluric method on a thick (electrically resistive) ice sheet, and 4) to
evaluate the relative merits of refraction with wide reflection versus
reflection with narrow refraction seismic studies in imaging the lithosphere.
The geophysical techniques that will be employed are capable of imaging the ice
sheet, the continental lithosphere, and the upper mantle, as well as determining
physical properties of parts of the lithosphere and mantle. Investigations of
outcrop geology over the last thirty years in West Antarctica and the
Transantarctic Mountains have lead to recent interpretations that the crust is
made up of many different lithospheric blocks. Seismic reflection work is the
only way image the crust in detail and the refraction work is the only way to
determine physical properties of the layers and blocks defined by the reflection
work. The magnetotelluric work is scientifically risky because it may not yield
useful information when used over the electrically resistive ice sheet. However,
if it works it has the potential to image molten rock in the crust and upper
mantle. In a continental rift region such as West Antarctica, the presence of
melt in the lithosphere is likely and, if documented, has very important
ramifications to ice sheet dynamics. Research work supported by this award is
expected to provide constraints to models of a range of crustal processes from
models of ice sheet dynamics to tectonic and kinematic models of lithospheric
thinning and rifting.