* 9222214
* Organization of a Neural Modulatory System                                                                      (
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Laurence Cohen, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Raymon Glantz
* 11/30/1996
* USD 153,662.00

This proposal is the U.S. side of a U.S.-Russia Cooperative proposal
simultaneously submitted together with Dr. Pavel Balaban of the Institute of
Higher Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology in Moscow. The proposal is directed
at several questions about the organization of a serotonergic neuromodulatory
system in the gastropod mollusc, Helix aspersa. These questions have recently
become approachable with the advent of voltage-sensitive dye recording methods
that can simultaneously monitor the action potential activity of several hundred
neurons in these ganglia. In this first grant period we hope to answer the
following: How uniform is the group of serotonergic neurons in their response to
touch and to noxious stimuli? How much synaptic interconnection is there among
these serotonergic cells? Is the response of these cells sensitive to the
satiation state of the animal? Are there fundamental differences from animal-to-
animal in the functioning of the modulatory neurons? How does the function of
this group change during habitualtion and sensitization? The answers to these
questions would provide specific information about neuromodulation in the Helix
nervous system but will also be more general significance. These experiments
will be the first attempt to obtain physiological data on the functional
cohesiveness of a group of apparently similar neruons. Further, some of the
results from Helix will test the generality of conclusions about consistency in
nervous systems obtained from experiments on the Aplysia abdominal
ganglion.***//