* 9222224
* Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Egyptian State - Local   Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1994
* USD 11,969.00

Under the direction of Dr. David O'Connor, Mr Stephen Harvey will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. Working at the site of Abydos in Southern Egypt,
he will examine the large funerary cult complex established by the pharaoh
Ahmose to determine how it developed and changed over time. The underlying goal
of the work is to examine the economic and political relationships between a
state level of government and and local level communities and to understand how
state level goals are translated and adapted to often different local needs. It
is known from recovered texts that Ahmose originally established a cult complex
at Abydos to commemorate himself and his lineage. During the ca. 300 year course
of its history, the function and direction of the complex was dramatically
redirected towards more local ends. Mr. Harvey will conduct a three stage field
project. He will first survey portions of the site which have not yet been
carefully examined. This is possible because remains of structures are still
visible. He will then collect surface ceramics and use these to date different
areas and structures. On the basis of this information he will carry out
controlled excavations. These data should allow him to examine how the nature of
the site changed over time and gain insight into the underlying social processes
responsible. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed light on the long term
relationships between state authorities and local communities. Finally it will
assing in the training of a promising scientist.