* 9222394
* RUI: Typology and Topology, the Acquisition and Use of      Tzotzil Spatial Language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1993,02/28/1998
* John Haviland, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 02/28/1998
* USD 250,055.00

ABSTRACT The linguistic expression of spatial relations is central to recent
work in semantics, cognitive anthropology, and language acquisition.
Universalist claims have been advanced about the nature of linguistically coded
spatial concepts, their origins in human perception and cognition, and their
order of acquisition. There are, however, few studies of spatial language in
non- European contexts, and even fewer studies of the use of spatial language in
ordinary life. This projects investigates three spatial domains in Zinacantec
Tzotzil (Mayan, Chiapas, Mexico) which challenge current typological claims: (1)
verbs of motion; (2) positional roots involving "support" and "containment"; and
(3) inalienably possessed nominal roots encoding "anatomical" spatial relations.
Extending existing studies of spatial semantics in adult Tzotzil, this project
investigates the use of elements from these linguistic subdomains in both
natural and semi-natural contexts: in everyday work, and in constructed
interactive "space games". The project also explores the Zinacantec child's
acquisition of the structure and use of these lexical systems, cross-sectionally
and longitudinally. The project will elucidate, first mutual relationships
between semantic systems and the indexical structure of specific cultural
communicative practices. Second, it will reveal possible interactions between
the acquisition of spatial concepts and language-specific systems of spatial
representation.