* 9222741
* Protein-Protein Orientation and Dynamics in                 Electron-Transfer Reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Nenad Kostic, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1997
* USD 291,000.00

9222741 Kostic The objective of this research is to understand the mechanism of
electron transfer in electrostatic (noncovalent) protein/protein complexes. The
molecular basis for the optimal reaction rate and specificity will be studied
with the fully-characterized metalloproteins cytochrome c (cyt) and plastocyanin
(pc). Building upon this laboratory's recent successes, a detailed plan is
proposed that combines molecular biology (mutation of pc), computational
chemistry (analysis of electron-transfer paths), and kinetics (laser flash
photolysis) in order to achieve the following: (1) determine reactive
orientations of cyt/pc complexes; (2) pinpoint dominant transfer paths from the
heme to the Cu site; (3) examine how variations in distant electronic couplings
controls the rate of electron transfer; (4) determine the rate of structural
rearrangement of cyt/pc complexes and establish kinetic requirements for
"gating"; and (5) explore the importance for electron transfer of conformational
fluctuations at the protein/protein interface. %%% This research is important
because electron-transfer reactions of metalloproteins are essential to various
biological processes. These reactions are involved in animal metabolism and
plant photosynthesis. A deeper understanding of electron transfer, at the
molecular level, is necessary for a better understanding of the origin and
transformations of chemical energy in a living cell. ***