* 9222728
* Research In Econometric Theory
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1997
* Peter Schmidt, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1997
* USD 191,073.00

The principal focus of this project is panel data,i.e., data which contain
repeated observations over time for each individual. Panel data are increasingly
the data of choice for empirical economic research in labor and industrial
organization because the data capture both changes over time and cross-
sectional relationships at a given point of time. Existing statistical tools do
not permit economists to utilize all of the rich informational detail provided
by panel data. This project provides applied economists with statistical tools
that will do as better job in exploiting the information in panel data. The
research project also extends methods for estimating changes of industry
technological inefficiency and it improves forecasting methods for rational
expectations models. More specifically, the research on panel data has three
components. First, the project considers the dynamic panel data model, in which
one of the explanatory variables is the lagged value of the dependent variable.
Existing estimators for this model are inefficient, because they fail to utilize
all of the available moment conditions, and the efficiency gains from using all
moment conditions are quantified. Second, various panel data models with
autocorrelated errors are considered. Once again it is possible to find
efficient estimators that make use of all available moment conditions, and the
interesting question is to find equally efficient estimators that use less
conditions; that is, to find out which conditions are superfluous. Third, the
project investigates a model with interactive individual and time effects. A
connection is made between generalized method of moments and likelihood-based
approaches to this model, and the model is extended to the case of more than one
interactive component. In addition, the project extends the literature on
frontier production functions in ways that allow a flexible pattern of technical
inefficiency over time. The project investigates the possible efficiency gains
in estimation of rational expectations models from the use of observable
forecast errors.