* 9222903
* Dynamic Duopoly and Bounded Rationality
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1994
* Robert Rosenthal, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1994
* USD 78,003.00

One of the characteristics of standard modelling in decision theory, game theory
and economic theory has been the postulate that all the people in the models are
completely rational; they have well-specified objectives, unlimited memories,
and unlimited abilities to compute without using up time or other resources. In
recent years discontent with this postulate has been growing within economics
because of the cumulative weight of years of data from experiments consistently
showing that even in very simple decision problems and games the theories do not
predict the actions of subjects very well. This project explores alternatives to
the standard optimization model. In these alternatives, each decision-making
situation is a pattern recognition problem in which the individual decision
maker decides which of a small set of decision making tools ("rules of thumb")
or actions to use. The project addresses such questions as how did the
individual's set of rules and method of assigning rules to decision making
problems come to be and how do they evolve. More specifically, the project
examines two broad classes of models. In the first class there are single
decision-maker models in which the decision maker's choices influence the path
of some stochastic process about which the decision maker has little information
but which affects his well-being. The effect of certain crude rules of thumb on
the long-term survival of an individual is explored in a variety of contexts.
The second class builds on previous work by the investigator on bounded
rationality models in which individuals use rules of thumb to conserve on
decision-making costs and to overcome imperfect reasoning and computing
abilities. A population of individuals interacts over time using crude rules of
thumb in a variety of settings. Here the focus is on what profiles of rules can
survive over time as poorer performing rules are weeded out. The models used in
the latter part of the project are adapted from the literature on anonymous
random matching games.