* 9222784
* I/UCRC for Pilot Projects in Simulation-Based Concurrent    Engineering of Military Vehicles and Space Flight Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1992,07/31/1997
* Edward Haug, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 07/31/1997
* USD 9,326,986.00

This project "Pilot Projects in Simulation-Based Concurrent Engineering of
Military Vehicles and Space Flight Systems" augments the research program of the
University of Iowa's Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
Simulation and Design Optimization of Mechanical Systems. It has been approved
by the National Science Board (NSF-92-104). Funding for various tasks within the
proposal originate from a variety of sources. The Defense Modeling and
Simulation Office or the Department of Defense is providing $950,000 for one
year to fund a portion of task 3.4 in the proposal. The Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defense is providing $938,000 for
one year to fund a portion of task 3.2 in the proposal. The U.S. Army Industrial
Engineering Activity at Rock Island Arsenal is providing $100,000 for one year
for a membership and to fund a portion of task 3.3.4 in the proposal. Goddard
Space Flight Center of NASA is providing $70,000 for one year to fund a portion
of task 3.1.1 and another $86,000 for one year to fund a portion of task 3.5.
The U.S. Army Tank Command (TACOM) is providing $100,000 for one year to fund a
portion of task 3.1.1 in the proposal. The Program Manager recommends the
University of Iowa be awarded $2,244,000 for one year under a three-year
continuing award for $17,029,786.