* 9222657
* RUI:  Stress Induced Changes in the Hypothalamo-            Neurohypophysial System
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Gwyneth Beagley, Alma College
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 09/30/1995
* USD 81,778.00

Although plasticity of the nervous systems has been viewed as the property of
the development central nervous system, increasing evidence indicate that the
adult brain has great potential for modulation of functional organization and at
least part of this reflects hormonal effects. The hypothalamo-neurohypophysial
system has proved to be a useful model to study environmentally induced neural
plasticity. Under conditions of increased physiological demand such as
lactation, parturition and dehydration, neurosecretory cells in the supraoptic
nucleus and the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus undergo
morphological changes reflecting an increase in manufacture and release of
neuropeptide hormones from the pituitary. Dr. Beagley will determine whether
non-painful stressors can change the ultrastructural features of cells in these
specific regions of the hypothalamus. Undergraduates will be involved
extensively in these experiments and will learn state-of-the-art anatomical
techniques including ultramicrotomy and electron microscopic (EM) procedures.
This project will not only generate important new information about how
physiological and psychological stressors result in rapid morphological changes
in the brain but also provides an excellent opportunity for students to become
exposed to exciting and timely research problem.