* 9222423
* A Comprehensive Study of Direct Photon Production in Hadron Induced Collisions, U.S.-India Cooperative Research, Award  in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1997
* R.K. Shivpuri, University of Delhi
* Continuing Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/1997
* USD 34,958.00

Description: This project supports Dr. R. Shivpuri of the Physics Department at
the University of Delhi, and a number of his graduate students, for
collaborative research with a team of U.S. scientists working at Fermi
Laboratory. The U.S. team includes Dr. John Peoples at Fermi Lab. and Dr. Paul
Slattery at the Universsity of Rochester. The Indian scientists and graduate
students will participate in a multi-institution experiment at Fermi Laboratory.
The experiment E706 is designed to study interactions of protons, pions and
kaons in a variety of targets, triggering on high transverse momentum (>5 GeV/C)
electromagnetic showers. It is a second generation fixed target experiment using
high energy beams (800 GeV protons from Fermilab Tevatron) and with a wide
acceptance spectrometer, it is intended to reach approximately 10 GeV/C. A goal
of the experiment is to obtain information on quark and gluon interactions in
collisions of positive pions, negative pions and protons with nucleons. The
Indian scientists participation includes building detectors, data acquisition
and data analysis. Scope: This is a renewal of work currently under the
leadership of Dr. Peoples at Fermilab, Dr. P. Slattery of the University of
Rochester, and of Dr. R. Shivpuri of the University of Delhi. The collaboration
is considered quite successful, and a number of joint publications have
resulted. The project fits the U.S.- India Cooperative Science Program
objectives.