* 9222762
* Structure and Surface Interactions of Condensed Fullerene   Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Dror Sarid, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 08/31/1996
* USD 235,000.00

Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) are being
used to directly image isolated fullerene molecules and obtain a mapping of
their local density of states. The structure and electronic properties of the
fullerenes are being studied by the surface microscopy tools. Fullerene-metal,
fullerene-semiconductor, and fullerene-molecule interactions in condensed films
are under study. Preparation of composite fullerene materials will be carried
out using C-60 molecules embedded in methyl isobutyl ketone films. The latter
have revealed pronounced intermolecular contrast, the origins of which are being
investigated in this project. Finally, the tip-sample interactions involved in
the microscopy technique is being investigated with the objective of improving
the utility of these techniques. %%% This project concerns the characterization,
by surface microscopy, of a technologically important group of the recently
discovered fullerene molecules. Materials composed of these molecules have
recently demonstrated dramatic properties of interest to solid state physicists
as well as materials scientists and chemists. The proposed research will provide
information about the structure and electronic properties of these materials.
This information is of fundamental interest and should pave the way toward
practical application of these materials.