* 9222061
* Regulated Splicing of the Neuron-Specific Human Tau Gene
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1996
* Athena Andreadis, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 01/31/1996
* USD 135,375.00

WPC? 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| p Sj x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS
x @ x X , , 0 FX @CG Times 12pt 2 V @ Z 8 p C &lt; , W X p P rk ; X P HP DeskJet
500 HPDES500.PRS X p P rk ; x X , , 0 FX P " m o 8 ; ^&lt;D\dd DDDd
DDDDddddddddddDD X | |x DL | t l| DDDddDXdXdXDdd88d8 ddddHL8dd ddXXdXd d ddDDddd
D d d d X X X X X X|X|X|X|XD8D8D8D8 d d d d d d d d d d X d d d d dtd X X X X X
X X d|X|X|X|X d d d d d d d dD D D8D L d|8|8|8|8|8 d t d d d d H H
HlLlLlLlL|8|8|8 d d d d d d d X X X d|8 d HlL|8 d d d d d D/ N d ddDXPPdd ddd
dHdddd H d x H d h 1D DD x dp d x d x X L p x xdx X x x xL
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxLLLLLLL x #| p 2 = 9222061 Andreadis The symptoms of
Alzheimer's disease (AD) are progressive neural degeneration with accompanying
loss of mental function. Connected to the phenomenon of neuronal abnormality is
a protein molecule named tau. In normal brain tau stabilizes microtubules and
probably contributes to the organization and maintenance of neuron shape (and
therefore function). In the brain of Alzhemer's patients tau appears in
characteristic diagnostic assemblages of dead and dying neurons, the
neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). The tau gene produces a number of variant
protein forms by a process called splicing, which is strictly regulated. The tau
protein found within the NFTs is a v ariant abnormal with respect to both its
cellular location and its particular form; the implication is that in AD the
regulation of tau may have gone awry and may directly or indirectly affect
neurons. The goal of this research proposal is to understand how tau splicing is
regulated, in the hope of getting closer to discovering the molecular cause of
AD and/or developing useful probes for its early stages. ***