* 9222411
* Synthesis, Reactivity, and Catalytic Studies of Mixed-Metal Gold Cluster Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Louis Pignolet, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 08/31/1996
* USD 338,300.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program provides
continued support to Dr. Louis H. Pignolet of the Chemistry Department,
University of Minnesota, for the investigation of mixed metal cluster compounds
containing gold, platinum, and palladium. Pignolet will synthesize additional
cluster molecules that are larger, contain a wider variety of metals, and use
less bulky phosphine ligands. Recently, Pignolet has observed that hydrogen
molecules can equilibrate with deuterium molecules on the surface of these
clusters. He wishes to explore the mechanism of this interaction and
characterize the species involved. He would also study the catalytic activity of
these clusters upon hydrogenation under both homogeneous and heterogeneous
conditions. The catalyst systems would be characterized using TEM, XPS,
chemisorption and other surface methods. %%% Many industrial catalysts contain a
mixture of metals, and it is speculated that the effectiveness of these
catalysts depends on a synergistic interaction between the various metals. Mixed
metal clusters, containing eight to twenty metal atoms, have been postulated as
useful model compounds for understanding the details of such catalytic activity.
In this project, Pignolet will make larger and more varied clusters and reduce
the size of the stabilizing phosphine groups attached to the metals so as to
enhance the cluster's catalytic effectiveness. The catalytic behavior of the
clusters will be investigated, particularly for hydrogenation catalysis, and
both free and alumina-supported clusters will be studied. The results could
provide increased understanding of the factors affecting the reactivity of
catalysts.