* 9222792
* A Unified Crystallography for Periodic or Quasiperiodic     Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* N. David Mermin, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/1996
* USD 177,000.00

Research will be done to complete and extend a broader, simpler, and more
physically based reformulation of the crystallographic description of periodic
and quasiperiodic materials. There are now great simplifications to be made in
both the derivation and the description of the so-called superspace-group
categories of quasiperiodic materials. In the case of the (3+1) non-cubic and
the (3+3) cubic superspace groups this reformulation will clarify conceptually,
condense in form, and extend in scope the existing scheme, while demonstrating
explicitly that its present restriction to weakly modulated crystals is entirely
unnecessary. Rules will be extracted for this new crystallography (including
rules for the compatibility of point group and lattice that are obscure in the
quasiperiodic case) by deriving the generalized crystallography from the general
stability conditions for materials with diffraction patterns consisting of Bragg
peaks. The extension of this approach to magnetic and color groups will be
investigated in both the periodic and quasiperiodic case and the question of
commensurate-incommensurate transitions will be reexamined from this new
perspective. %%% Research will be done on a new formulation of crystallography.
The work is motivated by the discovery of quasiperiodic materials which are not
adequately described by conventional crystallography. In reformulating
crystallography to account for these quasiperiodic materials, a new scheme has
been devised to cover periodic materials as well. This unique approach could
have a major impact in crystallography.