* 9222327
* RUI:  Mechanisms of Synchronized Oscillatory Activity in the      Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1997
* James Angstadt, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1997
* USD 132,927.00

The basic patterns of rhythmic motor behavior are generated by central nervous
system circuits called neural oscillators. The oscillatory activity under
investigation in this study, induced by suppression of calcium currents, is
unusual in that it depends on sodium currents (rather than calcium currents as
observed in other animals) and because the oscillations occur synchronously in
all neurons of the same invertebrate nervous systems. These novel features will
allow several questions of broad significance to be addressed. First, what
cellular mechanisms generate these sodium-dependent oscillations and why are
sodium-dependent oscillators so rare compared to calcium-dependent oscillators?
Second, what cellular mechanisms are used to synchronize oscillatory activity
within neural networks? To answer these questions, Dr. Angstadt will 1) develop
an isolated neuron preparation that expresses oscillatory activity similar to
that observed in intact ganglia, 2) identify and characterize the role of
persistent ionic currents in generating the oscillations, and 3) determine the
cellular mechanisms responsible for synchronizing the oscillations in different
neurons. His approach will be to remove identified neurons from invertebrate
ganglia, isolate these neurons in cell culture, and study their ionic currents
using voltage clamp techniques. In other experiments, mechanisms underlying
synchronization of oscillations will be investigated in experiments on intact
ganglia. These studies are important because they will further understanding of
persistent sodium conductances in nerve cells, including their functional role
in the generation of oscillatory activity, and may provide a model system for
studies of cellular mechanisms underlying the synchronized neuronal activity
associated with epileptic and other seizures in more complex nervous systems.