* 9223570
* GPS-LEO Occultation  System for Monitoring the              Terrestrial Neutral Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* G. Leonard Tyler, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 08/31/2000
* USD 227,214.00

Tyler/Abstract The objective of this research is to investigate the combination
of propagation, meteorological, and measurement problems associated with an
Earth occultation observing system. In comparison with exploratory measurements
of other planets or measurements of less dynamic and complex atmospheres farther
from the sun, occultation measurement of Earth's atmosphere is believed to
present a considerable challenge. In the area of radio-wave propagation, we will
investigate the effects on radio occultation measurements of: (i) local
departures from spherical symmetry in the terrestrial atmosphere (e.g., due to
weather fronts and baroclinicity); (ii) diffraction of radio waves, which will
occur frequently in terrestrial occultations (e.g., due to small-scale gravity
waves or abrupt refractive variations in the ocean boundary layer); (iii)
multipath propagation, which occurs in connection with complex refractivity
structures and is at a minimum an important factor in preventing reliable
GPS/MET observations of the lowest several km of the atmosphere; and (iv)
critical layers (i.e., ducts) in the basic refractivity structure, which
fundamentally limit the region of the atmosphere accessible to remote sensing
through radio occultation. With regard to item (ii), the standard retrieval
algorithm (Abel inversion) for radio occultation data ignores diffraction
effects and we will attempt to develop (and apply) a new algorithm that, by
properly accounting for diffraction, can yield profiles at enhanced, sub-
Fresnel-scale vertical resolution. These propagation effects will be studied
with the dual objectives of better understanding radio occultation data already
acquired with the GPS/MET instrument on Micro Lab 1 and of gaining insight
toward the design of an advanced GPS receiver that can be used to collect radio
occultation data on future satellite missions. With regard to the former, we
will analyze a subset of GPS/MET data with emphasis on areas (e.g., studies of
atmospheric waves) where the data have not yet been fully utilized.