* 9223220
* Identification Problems in the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Charles Manski, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1997
* USD 204,158.00

Econometricians have long found it useful to separate inferential problems into
statistical and identification components. Studies of identification seek to
characterize the conclusions that could be drawn if the researcher had available
a sample of unlimited size. Studies of statistical inference seek to
characterize the generally weaker conclusions that can be drawn given a sample
of positive but finite size. Statistical and identification problems limit in
distinct ways the conclusions that may be drawn in empirical research.
Statistical problems are most severe when the available sample is small.
Identification problems are most severe when the researcher knows little about
the population under study and the sampling process yields only weak data on the
population. The proposed research continues the investigator's program of work
on identification problems in the social sciences. Four projects are planned:
(1) continued research on the selection problem; (2) analysis of identification
in the presence of errors in data; (3) study of identification of endogenous
social effects; and (4) investigation of the use of subjective data to identify
personal expectations. One of the most exciting and novel parts of the project
involves the use of subjective data to identify personal expectations.
Distinguishing the objective and subjective determinants of behavior may be the
most challenging identification problem facing social scientists. It is
certainly the problem that most clearly separates the social from the natural
sciences, where the units of analysis are not thought of as possessing free
will. For many years, economists have exercised a self-imposed prohibition on
the use of subjective data in empirical analysis. Economists have sought to
infer the subjective constructs of economic theory, namely preferences and
expectations, almost entirely from data on actual choices. But, economists do
not know whether they are making valid inferences on preferences or wrong
inferences based on incorrect expectations assumptions. This project develops
methods that will permit economists to rethink their research conventions and
entertain seriously the collection and analysis of subjective data on
expectations and preferences.