* 9223804
* Statistical Mechanics of Polymer Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1993,03/31/1997
* Karl Freed, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/1997
* USD 252,000.00

Theoretical research will be conducted on polymer systems. Theories will be
developed for calculating corrections to Flory- Huggins theory for the
thermodynamic properties of polymer melts, blends and block copolymer systems.
Studies will be made of the influence of monomer structure, local correlations,
equation of state effects, etc., on interfacial widths and tensions of phase
separated polymer blends, on the validity of a mean field description of blends,
and on the microphase separation transition in block copolymer systems. The
theory will be developed further to treat rigid rods and extended rigid
particles in order to describe polymer liquid crystals. Computations will be
performed of altered chain dimensions in binary blends and diblock copolymer
systems to assess their influence on theories of microphase separation. A theory
of long time dynamics of flexible protein molecules will be further developed by
evaluating the memory functions in terms of input equilibrium information and
including them into the generalized Rouse-Zimm approach. Appropriate simulations
will be used to test the assumptions of the theory and to suggest directions for
further improvements. %%% This renewal grant will continue studies of theories
for polymeric materials. A variety of polymer systems will be studied and
appropriate theory will be developed. The principal investigator is one of the
leading polymer theorists and this work will help understand these complex, but
technologically important, materials.