* 9223727
* Renegotiating the Social Contract:  The 'Demand-Side        Management Revolution' and the Restructuring of the         American Electric Utility Industry, l978-l992
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Richard Hirsh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 11/30/1996
* USD 80,000.00

Dr. Hirsh is examining the creation of a new consensus emerging between electric
utilities and consumers that results in increased energy efficiency, lower
customer costs, greater corporate profits, and enhanced environmental quality.
In contrast to the acrimonious relationship between utilities and customers that
existed in the 1970's, the new "social contract" has at its core the increasing
sophistication of so-called "demand-side management" (DSM) technologies. A
catch-all phrase that subsumes conservation measures and high-efficiency, end-
use technologies, demand-side management curbs customer requirements for
electricity and reduces the need for utilities to construct power plants, with
all the attendant environmental savings. In a novel fashion that promises
universal rewards, activist groups, utilities, and other players in the late
1980's seized upon DSM technologies to reach a new consensus. Dr. Hirsh's study
is focusing on technological, regulatory, political, and managerial events that
have coalesced to create a new social contract within the utility community.
Employing oral history and documentary sources, his work extends research that
deals with the restructuring of the utility industry that resulted from
technological and regulatory innovations in the 1970's and 1980's. Dr. Hirsh's
goal is to interpret the utility industry's transformation since the 1970's as
the result of a process in which various players negotiated their contractual
roles and responsibilities. The study promises to become not just a history of
these events but a useful planning tool for policy makers and utility managers.