* 9223791
* Ion/Surface and Ion/Molecule Collisions in Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1998
* Robert Cooks, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 09/30/1998
* USD 1,037,400.00

This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program, addresses the development of an understanding of the processes which
occur when molecular ions of tens of eV energy impact upon surfaces. Surface
induced dissociation (SID) and ion/surface reactions occur upon collision. The
overall goal of this work is to develop the understanding which is needed to use
ion/surface collisions as a structural analysis tool in analytical mass
spectrometry. Self-assembled monolayer surfaces, as well as molecular adsorbates
on characterizable gold and silver substrates will be investigated as useful
surfaces for these SID applications. The range of ion/surface collision
phenomena to be explored will include low energy sputtering of ionized
adsorbates, partial neutralization of doubly charged ions, and molecular beam
collisions with surfaces. %%% The structural characterization of large molecules
by mass spectrometry is facilitated by the use of ion collision methods which
introduce significant internal energy into the analyte. A very promising
approach for introducing this internal energy is the process of ion/surface
collision. Ion/surface collisions result in surface induced dissociation and
reactions with the surface which can be used to obtain structural information
about the molecules involved. This research project addresses the fundamental
ion/surface interaction chemistry which forms the basis for this analytical
approach.