* 9223057
* Collaborative Research on Principles of Constitutional and  International Stability
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Peter Ordeshook, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/29/1996
* USD 74,974.00

Designing a constitution involves one of the most critical and complex series of
explicit decisions that a society can confront. Should the government be
presidential or parliamentary; should it have a two-house or single-chamber
legislature; should there be any differences in the powers of the chambers of a
bicameral legislature; should representation be territorial or by proportional
representation; what role should the courts play in constitutional
interpretation; what provisions should be included for emergencies; what
authority should be given to local and regional governments; what rights
properly belong in a constitution? Large and ethnically heterogeneous states
confront an additional series of questions, including: Should the country be
federal or unitary, and if it is federal, should its constituent parts have the
right to secede, to veto legislation, or to nullify federal law on their
territories? These last questions are important not only because they influence
the operation and stability of a state after it has formed, but also, as in the
case of countries such as Russia and Ukraine, they can influence whether a
viable constitution can be written and implemented in the first place. With
various republics and regions of Russia, for example, claiming autonomy,
sovereignty, and even independence and secession, it may not be possible to
implement a constitution that does not provide for the right to secession.
Unfortunately, we do not know very much empirically or theoretically about the
implications of including a secession right in a constitution. Nor do we know
the extent to which other provisions, such as allowing subunits the right to
veto or nullification. Which device (secession, veto, nullification) provides a
constituent unit of a federalism the greatest guarantee against violation of its
rights and which, if any, fosters the development of a mutually beneficial
federal state? This research investigation explores such questions by drawing a
theoretical parallel between federations and alliances in international
political systems. The rationale for this parallel is that alliances, like
federations, must be consummated and maintained on a wholly voluntary basis. As
such, alliances contain within them the right to secession and veto (and, in
some instances, nullification). At the same time, in joining an alliance, each
member must relinquish some of its sovereignty to a central, coordinating agent,
or at least state a verbal (but possibly non-enforceable) agreement to do so. By
developing some common ideas and theoretical principles, the researchers hope to
show how alliances and federations operate under the same principles and how the
properties of unstable alliances parallel and are different from stable and
unstable federations. Finally, by looking at alliances, it is possible to gain a
clearer view of the way in which the right of secession might operate in a
constitutional democracy.