* 9223175
* An Examination of Theoretical Predictions of the            Strength of Economic Forces.
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* David Levine, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1995
* USD 57,224.00

At times powerful governments seem to be seized by economic forces beyond their
ability to control: during a twenty-four hour period, for example, the British
government raised interest rates to astronomical levels, swearing under no
circumstances to devalue the pound, only to do exactly that. At other times,
seemingly minor tinkering with policy can unleash profound and unplanned change:
the enormous changes in the former Soviet Union, for example, seem to have been
triggered by relatively mild political reforms introduced by Gorbachev in the
mid-eighties. Although it is not widely recognized, economic theory predicts
that under certain circumstances economic forces will be overpoweringly strong,
and at other times extremely weak and susceptible to manipulation. Indeed, the
theory can make quantitative predictions about the strength of economic forces.
To the extent that such predictions are correct, they are of great value,
directing our attention to those types of problems and situations where policy
can make a real difference. There are two broad goals of this research: first to
use data from experimental economics to validate the theory, and second, to
advance the theory to improve its predictive power in assessing situations where
economic forces are weak. Experimental data in economics is extremely mixed:
sometimes the theory predicts extremely well, and at other times strange
anomalies occur, often changing with seemingly trivial modifications in
experimental design. What has not been examined carefully is the extent to which
the anomalies are correlated with the strength of economic forces involved. Our
hypothesis is that the theory predicts well when economic forces are strong, and
that it predicts poorly when economic forces are weak. This research plans to
review a broad cross-section of economic experiments in an effort to determine
whether the anomalies are due to the weakness of the economic forces. To the
extent that they are, this validates the idea that current theory can assess the
strength of economic forces in a useful way. Unfortunately, an implication of
our hypothesis is that predictions made by theory will be weakest exactly when
the consequences of policy changes will be most profound. Many economists feel
that under these circumstances, the ability of individuals to learn and adapt
plays an important role. (This is clearly the case in the changes unfolding in
the former Soviet Union.) The second major component of this research is to
examine the theoretical consequences of learning, and the types of predictions
such a theory makes. The goal is to develop useful mathematical approximations
for making quantitative predictions.