* 9223555
* Privately Provided Public Goods: Theoretical, Econometric   and Experimental Studies of Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1997
* James Andreoni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1997
* USD 123,234.00

Millions of people contribute money or volunteer time to charitable
organizations, and the levels and frequency of these donations far exceed what
could be predicted by standard economic models. Such cooperation is also seen in
laboratory experiments. Many scholars have explored cooperation with the
prisoner's dilemma, and over recent years, there have been many experiments on
the private provision of public goods. The general results of these experiments
is that subjects cooperate well in excess of that predicted by theory. This
project carries out experimental, theoretical and econometric research on
cooperative behavior. The results are important because they could lead to a
better understanding of why people cooperate and how to encourage cooperation.
For example, cooperation is an important element in human adaption to global
environmental change. Four major experimental projects are conducted to
determine how much of the cooperative behavior observed in experiments can be
attributed to things other than altruism or warm-glow. There are four major
econometric projects. The first looks at both the Survey of Consumer Finance and
the Independent Sector survey on gifts and time. By combining the strengths of
these two surveys, the project provides the first detailed study of the
interdependence of volunteerism and charitable giving. Three other projects
examine the data from the 1989 Current Population Survey to study household
decisions on labor force status, hours of work, and volunteerism. This project
explores the puzzle of why American corporations contribute almost 2% of pretax
profits to charity. Currently there are almost no studies of corporate
philanthropy in the economics literature. Another project addresses the "fund
raising puzzle," which is that charitable organizations rely heavily on
"leadership gifts" in fund raising campaign. A new model is developed of how
personal charitable contributions can be influenced by peer pressure or "social
comparisons."