* 9223217
* Far Infrared and Microwave Magneto-Optical Studies of       Strongly Correlated Electronic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1993,09/30/1997
* H. Dennis Drew, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 320,000.00

This research concerns far infrared and microwave magneto-optical studies of
type II superconductors and semiconductor heterostructures. A systematic
investigation of vortex core excitation resonance and the magneto-optical
activity of type II superconductors will be made. The goal is to gain an
understanding of high temperature superconductors and vortex dynamics in
general. The magneto-optical studies will look for direct evidence for cyclotron
resonance and optical activity and search for helicon propagation and the ac
Hall effect in superconductors. These investigations will break new ground in
superconductivity research and hold the promise of opening new paths for the
science and technology of superconductors. The work on semiconductor
heterostructures will be directed toward the study of the low lying collective
excitations in low dimensional electron systems. The goal of these studies is to
elucidate electron correlation effects in these strongly interacting systems.
Magneto-optical and magneto-transport studies will be carried out. These studies
may lead to the discovery of novel condensed phases such as the Wigner crystal
or new correlated liquid phases in 3D or quasi 3D electron systems. The infrared
techniques will also be used to study magneto plasmons in 2 dimensional electron
systems. In this case the interest is the observation and study of the magneto-
rotons associated with the fractional quantum Hall effect. %%% This research
concerns fundamental studies of superconductors and semiconductor
heterostructures in high magnetic fields. The studies on superconductors are
directed toward improving the understanding of the electrodynamics of these
materials at microwave and infrared frequencies. They are based on the recent
observation of new magneto-optical effects in these materials and will be
systematically studied in both high temperature superconductors and in
conventional superconductors. These studies are likely to break new ground in
superconductivity research and they hold the promise of opening new paths for
the science and technology of superconductors. The work on semiconductor
heterostructures will be directed toward the investigation of collective
excitations in low dimensional electron systems. The goal of these studies is to
elucidate electron correlation effects in these strongly interacting electron
systems. Magneto-optical and magneto-transport studies will be carried out and
may lead to the discovery of novel condensed pahses in electron systems. The
program involves collaboration with both industrial and government laboratories.