* 9223502
* The Determinants of Industrial Location and Urban Air       Quality
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1995
* J. Vernon Henderson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1995
* USD 40,427.00

This project explores the determinants of industrial location i n terms of both
current and historical conditions. The questions addressed include: In what
urban locations do different manufacturing industries in the USA concentrate and
how much persistence in location patterns is there over time? Can persistence be
linked to dynamic externalities and how strongly do measures reflecting various
externalities affect productivity measures? How strong is the direct link
between industrial location patterns and local air quality and has the link
weakened in the last twenty years with stronger environmental regulation? What
is the indirect link between air quality and industrial location decisions,
given the impact of air quality on wages and rents through disamenity
capitalization effects, which impact firms' costs? For metropolitan areas in the
USA this study combines data from the Sixth Count of the 1970 Population census
(detailed industry employment), the 1972 Census of Manufacturing, the 1987
Census of Manufacturing, and the 1970 and 1987 County Business Patterns
publication (to fill in holes in the Census of Manufacturing created by
censoring for disclosure reasons), and other government sources (City and County
data Book, State and Metro Area Data Book, and EPA publications). These data are
used to estimate econometric models of where industries locate, their scale of
operation, their productivity, and the nature and extent of external economies
of scale. They are used to estimate models of the determinants of urban air
quality, account for the interactions between air quality and industrial
composition, air quality and wages and rents, and industrial composition and
wages and rents.