* 9223985
* The Spatial Modeling and Forecasting of the Aids Epidemic
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1996
* Emilio Casetti, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 05/31/1996
* USD 93,876.00

Spatial dimensions of the spread of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome)
have not attracted significant scientific attention. Most epidemiological
studies of the spread of AIDS focus on male homosexuals and intravenous drug
users. These studies imply that the spatial spread of AIDS will occur across
geographical environments, but they have not been followed by systematic
investigations of the geographic and temporal patterns of AIDS dispersal, or the
types of geographical environments through which the spread of AIDS is most
rapid. This project attempts to fill this gap in knowledge by investigating the
spatial diffusion and forecasting of the AIDS epidemic. It will test hypotheses
concerning the spatial diffusion of the epidemic in the aggregate and separately
for the three major risk groups: male homosexuals and bisexuals, intravenous
drug users, and heterosexuals. The hypotheses to be tested are drawn from the
geographic literature on diffusion theory and spatial epidemiology and are set
within conceptual understandings of the mechanisms and behaviors specific to the
disease. At the core of the project, mathematical models will be developed
relating incidences of AIDS to various temporal and spatial variables. The
explanatory and predictive capabilities of these models will be tested at a
number of different spatial scales, including counties. More focused tests will
also be conducted for major risk groups in the 100 largest metropolitan areas,
by counties within six states, and by census tracts for four major cities.
Investigations of the spatial diffusion of AIDS are few, but they provide
crucial inputs to knowledge about this critical problem. Further research on the
spatial aspects of the spread of the epidemic is necessary to inform planners
and policy makers as they formulate strategies to contain the epidemic. The
spread of AIDS has an important spatial dimension, and this research will add
significantly to the theoretical and empirical body of knowledge related to this
important societal problem. This research will also enhance general
understandings of the process of spatial diffusion.