* 9223317
* Reference Networks and Scientific Development:  A           Comparative Study
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Lowell Hargens, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 02/28/1995
* USD 28,410.00

In the "great chain of being" humankind is placed at the top of the hierarchy of
creation. In science, ironically, the study of humans and their behavior is
ranked at the bottom in prestige and funding. Physical and biological sciences
are "hard" sciences while social sciences are "soft." This ranking is maintained
even within the "science of science" which has sought to support via citation
studies the view that scientific research within the physical and biological
sciences are progressive along a fast-moving research front while the softer
social and behavioral sciences fail to progress beyond the founding theories of
their disciplines. Derek de Solla Price, founder of the modern "science of
science" argued in 1965 and 1970 that a basic feature of the production of
scientific knowledge is researchers' tendency to build on relatively recent
work. Price claimed that this tendency evidences a cumulative enterprise in
which scholars extend recently won knowledge, and that it distinguishes the
production of scientific knowledge from humanistic knowledge. If this is true,
he argued, reference networks for scientific literatures should show a
concentration of references to relatively recently published papers --the
"research front"--and few to older papers--the "archive." Price argued that
humanistic scholarship shows a different pattern, one in which the age of a
previously published document is uncorrelated with its probability of being
cited. Finally, he claimed that reference networks in the social and behavioral
sciences fall somewhere between these two extremes. Although Price's thesis has
been an important guiding principle in "scientometrics" and bibliometrics, he
presented only weak evidence for these claims. Professor Hargens is examining
whether research in different fields generate the characteristic reference-
network patterns Price hypothesized. Such a study will provide evidence on
putative differences--or similarities--between "hard" and "soft" sciences, and
will allow us to begin integrating results from micro-studies of individual
journal articles and macro-studies of entire research literatures