* 9223638
* Divided Government and Deficits in the States
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1996
* James Alt, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 03/31/1996
* USD 102,005.00

After a long period of relative prosperity, American state governments have
recently been experiencing significant fiscal difficulties. Ten states began
their 1992 fiscal year without a budget, including New York, which set a record
by going over three months past its April 1 deadline before adopting a budget,
and Maine and Connecticut, which temporarily shut down all but essential public
services. Some observers blame this pattern on excessive spending by state
governments in the 1980s, while others argue that the "new federalism" is to
blame, by increasing state responsibilities while decreasing federal revenue
contributions. The investigators believe there is also a political cause: of the
ten states that lacked a budget at the beginning of their 1992 fiscal year, nine
currently had divided government, meaning that the same party did not control
the executive and both houses of the legislature. The investigators of this
project contend there is also a constitutional cause: states whose laws allow
easy carryover of deficits accumulate debt faster than others. The investigators
will use political and economic models to explain how fiscal imbalance in the
states results from such political and legal causes. They will test whether
America's parties really differ systematically in fiscal policy at the state
level, with Democrats taxing and spending more. If so, they will also test
whether Democratic states with no-carryover constitutional provisions act like
Republican states, while Democratic states without such provisions amass large
cumulative deficits. Most of all, the researchers seek to explain how divided
government exacerbates budget deficits in recessions. This research promises to
enhance our understanding of the impact of divided government on political and
economic factors.