* 9223375
* International Conference on Establishment Surveys           Buffalo, New York - June 27-30, 1993
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Barbara Bailar, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/1995
* USD 30,948.00

A nation's official statistics are directly affected by the quality of the data
derived from its business, economic and agricultural surveys. Yet there are few
commonly accepted and practiced methodologies for these surveys-- unlike the
situation for social and demographic surveys. The reasons for this situation are
diverse, the most important ones being that establishment surveys face much more
difficult design and execution problems and that far less is published on
strategies to solve these problems. The International Conference on
Establishment Surveys (ICES) is being planned (1) to provide a forum to describe
current methods being used for surveys of businesses, farms, and institutions;
(2) to present new or improved technologies for solving the unique problems
associated with establishment surveys; and (3) to promote international exchange
of ideas by providing an opportunity for business, economic, agricultural and
statistical researchers to exchange ideas for future interdisciplinary and even
cross-country research. This conference is being jointly supported by the
American Statistical Association (ASA, Survey Methods Section and Business and
Economic Statistics Section), the International Association of Survey
Statisticians (IASS), the National Association of Business Economists (NABE),
Statistics Canada, and the Statistical Society of Canada (SSC). The meeting is
currently scheduled to be held at Buffalo, New York, June 27-30, 1993. This
Conference could be an important beginning in an effort to focus more attention
on critical methodological issues in the area of surveys of business
establishments. The people and the government agencies involved are
representative both of those that have work going on in the field and those who
should begin such work. The interaction among those responsible for the design
and implementation of establishment surveys across agencies and across countries
is likely to contribute to an improvement in the quality of U.S. statistics.