* 9223865
* US-Poland Joint Fund Research on Reactivity of Silver       Clusters in Zeolites
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1992,12/15/1995
* Jacek Michalik, Institute of Nuclear Chemistry
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/15/1995
* USD 0.00

This US-Poland Marie Sklodowska-Curie Joint Fund research project between Dr.
Jacek Michalik of the Department of Radiation Chemistry and Technology,
Institute of Nuclear Chemistry and Technology, Warsaw, and Dr. Larry Kevan,
Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, is on "Reactivity of Silver
Clusters in Zeolites." The researchers will explore the reactivity of small
silver clusters as an entry into the utilization of silver cluster species in
heterogenous catalysis. The critical aspect of this study is to control the
cluster size within narrow range. Many generation methods lead to a broad size
distribution. One method to limit this is to produce the metal clusters within a
molecular size cage or channel as one finds in molecular sieves called zeolites.
In addition to ESR and associated optical spectroscopies (infared and diffuse
reflectance), the researchers propose a pulse ESR method known as Electron Spin
Echo Modulation (ESEM) as a major new tool in characterizing the reactivity of
silver cluster species in zeolites. By analyzing the modulation signal
associated with weak electron-nuclear dipolar interactions, it is possible to
determine the coordination geometry of paramagnetic species with adsorbed
molecules. In favorable cases this should provide the structure details, not
readily obtainable by other techniques, such as the number of adsorbate
molecules, their orientation as well as the changes of coordination geometry in
the course of reaction. Thus, rather detailed structural information about
reaction intermediates can be obtained by using a combination of ESR, ESEM,
diffuse relectance and infrared spectroscopies which will improve our knowledge
about the mechanism of heterogenous catalysis on metal clusters. This project in
radiation chemistry fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading experts in Poland and the United States to combine
complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence.