* 9223427
* Group Travel to the International Cartographic Association  Meeting; Cologne, Germany; May 1993
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1993,05/31/1994
* Alan MacEachren, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 05/31/1994
* USD 9,000.00

Meetings of the International Cartographic Association are held every two
years. More than 500 cartographers and scientists and practitioners from related
disciplines convene at these meetings to learn the latest research results, to
plan future collaborative research activities, to examine the latest equipment
and techniques, and to meet other professionals who share their interests. This
award provides $9,000 to enable nine U.S. cartographers to attend and
participate in the next ICA meeting, which will be held in Cologne, Germany, in
May 1993. Distribution of group- travel funds will be made by a subcommittee of
the U.S. National Committee of the ICA. One-half of the funds awarded will be
used to support participation at the ICA meeting of three younger scientists.
Group-travel support through this award will enable more Americans to attend and
participate in the 1993 ICA meeting. Their participation at this meeting will
enable them to stay informed on new research results and to plan future
activities. Because special emphasis is being given to the support of members of
groups that have been underrepresented in past ICA activities, the quality and
range of scientific activities facilitated by this meeting will be even greater.