* 9223013
* Relationships Between Cloud and Thermodynamic Variables
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Bryan Weare, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/1997
* USD 260,889.00

An extremely important set of uncertainties in climate change theories are
those associated with cloud/radiative/thermodynamic/ dynamic interactions. Among
the most troublesome of these uncertainties are those associated with the nature
of the large- scale thermodynamics processes leading to the observed complex
structure of clouds at any given location and time. Currently, climate models
generally relate cloud fractions and liquid water contents to local relative
humidity or convection precipitation rates. The formulas used are based on the
results of theory and a few short-term detailed field experiments. Analyses of
global, long-term observations are needed to verify these parameterizations and
to test their applicability to regions, seasons or climatic eras, which were not
directly sampled in the field experiments This project will carry out such
analyses with the best available regularly observed data. These data will
consist of satellite derived estimates of fractional cover of seven cloud
'types' derived from the International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project,
thermodynamics and dynamics variables from the operational analyses of the
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasting and standard observations
of precipitation form surface measurements. In addition to using the previously
derived cloud types, the PI will derive and utilize a new specification of cloud
fraction at standard pressure level. Variations of these parameters for much of
the globe over seasonal and interannual time scales will be used to derive new
and assess current interrelationships used in the cloud parameterizations of
climate and long-range forecast models.