* 9223091
* Approaches to Communication in Games
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Joel Sobel, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1997
* USD 166,653.00

This research consists of four projects related to effective transmission of
information between agents. One study will investigate evolutionarily stable
outcomes in cheap-talk games. Communication about private information cannot be
ignored in an evolutionary framework. It forces players to obtain efficient
payoffs when no conflicts of interest exist. The goal is to study whether
evolutionary forces favor the informed party, whether messages are used
efficiently when talk is cheap but not free, and whether nontrivial
communication must occur when players' interests partially coincide. The project
will also characterize how much must be communicated when agents have different
interests. A related study will investigate games of communication that change
over time in order to discover whether words will take on meanings that apply in
more than one context and whether agents will use words honestly in complicated
settings even if it is against their short-term strategic interests. The third
project will provide a general framework for studying deviation-based
equilibrium refinements and dynamic behavior in games. This topic has strong
connections with communication, although it is not directly related to
communication. This study will better our understanding of results in situations
where evolutionarily stable sets of strategies fail to exist. The fourth project
will study a specific model of communication in order to describe conditions
under which it is optimal to delegate decision-making authority to an informed
expert (the doctor in a doctor-patient relationship). In the model the patient
may be unable to acquire perfect information either because he is boundedly
rational or because it is not in the best interests of the doctor to communicate
completely. It may be inappropriate for the patient to give complete decision-
making authority to the doctor either because the doctor's preference is
different from the patient's or because the doctor does not know the patient's
preference. Preliminary study suggests that full communication may be impossible
whenever the doctor and the patient have different preferences.