* 9223195
* The Quantum Dynamics of Molecular Interaction
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* W. Ronald Gentry, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 09/30/1996
* USD 141,600.00

In this project Profs. W.R. Gentry and C.F. Giese of the University of Minnesota
will conduct basic research on the dynamics of molecular energy transfer at
temperatures in the range from 1K to less than 1 mK, and will perform crossed
beam studies of reactions involving hydrogen atoms with methane and silane
molecules, as well as study reactions on weakly bound clusters. %%% Previous
studies at extremely low temperatures have been conducted nearly exclusively in
condensed phase systems. The present research at ultra low temperatures is
devoted to theinvestigation of phenomena of bimolecular collisions in the gas
phase. The extremely low kinetic energies are expected to reveal the highly
quantum mechanical nature of the translational, as well as internal, motions
under such conditions. The isotopic exchange and substitution reactions
involving hydrogen atoms with methane of silane molecules or their isotopic
variants at elevated temperatures has revealed unexpected behavior. The present
research under low temperature beam conditions will provide critical data to
assist in the understanding of these processes. The work on cluster reactions is
directed toward the understanding of the elementary dynamics of cluster growth,
exchange and metathesis reactions as function of cluster size, composition, and
energy available.