* 9223711
* Connectionist Models Summer School
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1994
* Michael Mozer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 03/31/1994
* USD 30,000.00

The interdisciplinary field of "connectionism", or "neural networks," explores
computer systems that are loosely modeled on the human brain. These systems,
composed of large numbers of simple neuron-like computing elements, exhibit a
variety of intelligent behaviors, including the ability to recognize visual
images (e.g., handwriting recognition), store and remember facts by association,
control complex mechanical systems (e.g., robot arms), understand natural
language, and learn from experience. The field has experienced rapid growth in
recent years and is now enjoying an explosion of popularity, due in large part
to the rapid rate of advances and practical applications of recent theoretical
developments. Connectionism provides a possible approach to solving complex
problems in artificial intelligence and pattern recognition for which no other
approaches appear viable. Connectionist models are being used successfully in
the real world and have opened new possibilities for explaining aspects of human
cognition and perception. Research in the field requires remarkably broad and
deep training in a number of areas--neurobiology, cognitive science, theoretical
foundations, computational methods, engineering applications, and hardware
implementation. Some students are fortunate enough to receive training from
leaders in one or two areas, but few if any have access to the full breadth of
high-quality training required. For this reason, Summer Schools have been
organized to train top young researchers and to encourage interdisciplinary
research collaboration. These Summer Schools provide an intense and stimulating
opportunity for graduate students to become immersed in the latest research in
this fast-changing field. The success of the previous Summer Schools has been
widely acknowledged; they have had an extremely important catalytic effect on
the field. Many of the leading young researchers in the field today attended a
previous Summer School, and their research directions and contributions were
influenced by the experience. The next Summer School will be held in Boulder,
Colorado from June 21 through July 3, 1993. The faculty of the 1993 Summer
School will consist of approximately twenty leading researchers from the US and
Canada. Sixty-five graduate students will be selected by a competitive
admissions process for the 12-day intensive program. This funding will allow
graduate students to be selected on the basis of merit and potential for
contributing to the field.