* 9223726
* Development of Composite Nonlinear Optical Materials Based  on Local Field Enhancement
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Robert Boyd, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 08/31/1998
* USD 236,855.00

9223726 Boyd We will perform experimental and theoretical work aimed at the
development of new nonlinear optical materials with improved nonlinear response.
The basic idea of our approach is to form a composite material of two (or more)
constituents that differ both in their linear and nonlinear optical properties.
The electric field of an applied optical wave will therefor be nonuniformly
distributed between the two constituents, leading to an effective nonlinear
susceptibility of the composite that can exceed that of either of its
constituent materials. In our initial theoretical studies, we have discovered
realistic conditions in which such a local-field enhancement can be at least a
factor of five. In our approach, both constituents can be optically lossless,
and thus our approach should be distinguished from recent work involving metal
colloids and semiconductor-doped glasses in which the composite material is
necessarily absorbing. Experiments to be performed as part of this investigation
are aimed both at developing a fundamental understanding of the role of local
field effects in determining the nonlinear optical properties of composite
materials and at developing actual composite materials with improved nonlinear
response. Our method is general in scope, that is, it is applicable to both
second- and third-order nonlinear optical materials and it can be used to
increase the nonlinear optical response of essentially any homogeneous optical
material by forming a composite out of that material. However, our initial
experimental studies will consider the enhancement in the nonlinear optical
properties of polymeric optical materials. ***