* 9223718
* 4th Engineering Foundation Conference on "Reaction          Engineering for New Materials and Processes."
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1992,10/31/1993
* Michael Klein, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/1993
* USD 24,400.00

Reaction engineering deals with the quantification of molecular interactions at
solid surfaces, transport phenomena, dynamics and control of reaction systems
and the interplay of all of the above. The size scale ranges from 10-10 to 102
meters. The application of reaction engineering principles is essential in
experimentation, scale-up, and design for chemical, biochemical, petroleum,
electrochemical and other processes. Reaction engineering is an interactive
discipline whose initial applications were confined to the petroleum and
chemical industries, but current utilization of these principles is spreading to
the biotechnology, electronics, and specialty chemical industries where the
emphasis is upon new meterials. Three Engineering Foundation Conferences in
Chemical Reaction Engineering have been held in the past that have focussed on
the various research issues of the day in this area. This grant is partial
support for the fourth Engineering Foundation Conference whose main theme is to
open pathways between chemists and chemical engineers by cross-cutting the
established boundaries between these two disciplines with topically and
technically common themes. The meeting will be divided into four days that cover
catalysis, kinetics, modeling, and reactors and its overall format will be
similar to the "Gordon Research Conference" style with ample time for lengthy
discussions.***