* 9223712
* U.S.- Singapore Cooperative Research on Computer-Aided      Design of VLSI Circuits
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* C. Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 12/31/1996
* USD 25,482.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. C. L. Liu, Department of Computer
Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, to pursue with Dr. Hon-Wai
Leong, Department of Information Systems and Computer Sciences, National
University of Singapore, for a period of 24 months, a program of research in the
area of computer aided design of very large scale integrated (VLSI) circuits.
Their research will be directed toward two major areas, namely, (1) design and
synthesis and (2) reliable VLSI circuits. Initially, their effort in the first
area will deal with research on physical design, an area in which they have
considerable experience. Later, they will work in the area of higher level
synthesis on such topics as logic minimization, module generation, and state
assignment. In the area of reliable VLSI circuits, they will build on their own
promising results on reconfigurable VLSI chips. One of the goals of the research
is to understand the interplays between design and reliability. The research
problem is of great importance in computer science and has the potential for
impacting favorably on the semiconductor industry in the United States and in
Singapore. This research could assist in solving some of today's design problems
and produce new design tools for the future. Singapore's computer and
semiconductor industries are thriving and are key players in the world market.
In addition to direct benefits derived from this collaboration, it will be
important for U.S. scientists to follow scientific developments in Singapore.
Dr. Liu is a senior researcher who has an excellent international reputation.
Dr. Leong brings to the project special expertise in algorithms for VLSI
physical design. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Division of
International Programs which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between
U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing countries
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. This project adds an
international cooperative dimension to the PI's research under NSF Grant No.
MIP-8906932.***