* 9223405
* Research into Database System Theory
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1997
* Jeffrey Ullman, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/1997
* USD 226,137.00

9223405 Ullman Research into Database System Theory This is the first year of a
three-year continuing award. High- level algebraic or logical query languages
have been shown to be extremely useful in modern database systems, and there is
a need to extend their scope. These sorts of languages allow database programs
to be written clearly, quickly, and accurately. However, they make it harder for
the database system to find an efficient method to answer queries or to
implement constraints. Logically expressed constraints are an important feature
of distributed database systems, especially when used for collaboration or
integration of separate databases. Methods for checking constraints as the
connected databases change is especially important; goals are to check for
constraint violations as locally and efficiently as possible. Logical languages
frequently involve negation in rules, or nonmonotonic reasoning, where providing
more information at one level allows one to infer less at another level.
Efficient and general ways to find intuitively correct interpretations of logic
with negation are being sought. Finally, the use of algebra or logic as a query
language requires the optimization of expressions involving the join of many
relations. Efficient ways to find good orders of joining are being studied. If
successful, large-scale database systems will become easier to use and will be
capable of performing operations such as distributed constraint maintenance that
they are not able to do with adequate efficiency today. ***