* 9223557
* Monte Carlo Investigation of Three Issues: Exact Monetary   Aggregation under Risk, Tests for Nonlinearity and Chaos,   and the AIM Model's Regularity Properties
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* William Barnett, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1996
* USD 49,991.00

If there is risk aversion relative to current period prices or interest rates,
the tracking properties of all statistical index numbers, including the Divisia
and superlative index numbers, are unknown. Under the previous NSF grant, the
investigator demonstrated that the tracking ability of the discrete time Divisia
index is not seriously compromised by risk aversion. However, that study used
data produced by the economy. The use of data from the economy leaves many
problems unanswered. For example, it is possible that specification errors might
be large and might coincidentally offset the tracking error in the Divisia
index. If that were true, the conclusion that the Divisia index is robust to
risk aversion might be wrong. This project uses a Monte Carlo approach to
generate simulated data in which only one possible source of tracking error
remains: the degree of risk aversion. The results of this project are important
for monetary policy because monetary aggregates are used by monetary authorities
to track the performance of the economy. The research is also methodologically
significant because it requires computationally demanding replications of state
of the art nonlinear rational expectations models.