* 9223855
* Investigation of Levantine Mousterian Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Donald Henry, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1996
* USD 148,284.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Donald Henry will continue his
archaeological research in southern Jordan. He will excavate at three stratified
sites proven rich in archaeological remains. The materials they contain are
attributable to the "Mousterian" cultural tradition and the upper layers of one
have been dated to ca. 65,000 years ago. All are rich in cultural remains. Work
will center on a block (ca 45 square meters) excavation of Tor Faraj which
contains a large deep (+3.5m) Levantine Mousterian deposit. The top 80 cm. of
the deposit display hearths and ash lenses defining three "living floors." In
addition to analysis of lithic and faunal remains, Dr. Henry and his colleagues
will study the pollen and phytoliths contained in the sediments as well as the
matrix itself. The team's goal is to reconstruct and date the changing
environment and understand Mousterian adaptation within this context. Many
anthropologists are interested in the question of when and where anatomically
modern humans emerged and how these groups spread across both the Old and New
Worlds. While most recent data points to an African origin, the Near East has
been the focus of much attention because of the apparent intermixing of "modern"
and more "ancient" forms as well as the archaeological remains which
characterize each. The term "Mousterian" refers to the stone tool tradition and
culture which, in the Near East, North Africa and Europe, characterizes the last
of the pre-modern forms. Archaeologists wish to understand how these groups were
socially organized and what subsistence strategies they followed since they set
the stage from which modern humans emerged. The sites which Dr. Henry will
excavate date from the end of the Mousterian period and are thus directly
relevant to this question. They are also extremely rich in cultural remains and
the apparently undisturbed living floors should yield valuable social
information. This research is important for several reasons. It will increase
our understanding of the factors which led to the emergence of anatomically
modern humans. It will shed new light on the prehistory of the Near East and
provide data of interest to many archaeologists.