* 9223265
* Light Regulation of Carbon Partitioning and Growth of       Eelgrass
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Randall Alberte, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/1996
* USD 250,000.00

Seagrasses are distributed along the margins of all but the most polar seas and
form the basis of some of the most productive plant communities in the world.
They play important ecological roles in nutrient cycling, sediment deposition
and binding, provision of habitat for a large and diverse fauna, and contribute
significantly to nearshore food webs. Eelgrass, Zostera marina, is found
typically in monotypic stands in nearshore waters characterized by light
limitation and the presence of anoxic, organic-rich sediments. The very nature
of eelgrass habitats imposes diurnal and often prolonged hypoxia/anoxia on
subterranean tissues and severe restrictions on carbon gain. The ability of
eelgrass to withstand and recover from these conditions must underlie its
ecological success. Ongoing studies have begun to examine the physiological and
biochemical mechanisms responsible for the success of eelgrass in these
habitats. This research project will build on prior research and advance current
understanding, beyond a simple accounting of whole plant carbon budgets, to the
biochemical and molecular features that dictate integrated plant responses to
submarine light environments and anoxic sediments. This research will address
the fundamental mechanisms by which submarine light regimes control the survival
depth, growth and productivity of Zostera marina, and elucidate the primary
physiological, biochemical and molecular features of this species that ensure
its ecological success in littoral environments. In particular, this project
will investigate the controls on carbon partitioning between shoots and roots in
Zostera marina, and initiate molecular examinations to determine the relative
importance of translational and transcription events in regulating root
responses to diurnal and prolonged anoxia. This project should provide the
needed mechanistic understanding of the major factors that control the
distribution and carbon allocation strategies of eelgrass, so that this level of
sophistication can be incorporated into a predictive numerical model of growth
and productivity for this species. The knowledge gained form these studies will
not only advance our understanding of factors that control marine benthic
productivity and contribute to our basic understanding of the adaptive
mechanisms that function in plants, but provide information essential to sound
and informed management of submerged macrophytes.