* 9223476
* A New Framework for Inference Using Quantitative and        Qualitative Information
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1996
* Philip Jefferson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/1996
* USD 88,690.00

This project introduces a framework for inference using qualitative and
quantitative information. It is designed for applications where the researcher
is faced with the problem of drawing inferences of an unobservable state
variable in a time series context. Quantitative information is taken to be
observable time series variables. Qualitative information is taken to be an
indicator (dummy) variable that is coded by the researcher and that reflects the
researcher's distillation of literary materials that is believed to contain
information about the true unobserved state variable. The framework is based on
an iterative algorithm that produces an inference oaf the unobservable for each
sample period using the two types of information and presents a probabilistic
assessment of how useful an indicator of the true unobserved state is the
indicator variable proposed by the researcher. The framework's output fills a
gap in the applied macroeconometric literature that was created by the recent
revival of interest in the use of qualitative information in macroeconomic
analysis. It also complements classical regression analysis in cases where
qualitative events are important by providing a novel way of assessing dummy
variables. Finally, theoretical applications of the approach to inference
suggest that the algorithm could be used by policymakers when policy depends in
part on an inference of an unobservable.