* 9223462
* Firm Location, Foreign Direct Investment, and Trade
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* S. Lael Brainard, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1996
* USD 105,303.00

Over the past decade, foreign direct investment among industrialized countries
has grown substantially, frequently flowing across borders in both directions
within the same industry. In addition, in several industrialized countries,
multinational production substantially dominates exports as the vehicle for
foreign market penetration. These trends have received little attention from
economists, who focus a disproportionate share of attention on trade, and
largely ignore intraindustry investment. This research will analyze the
relationship between the international location decisions of firms and trade. It
will incorporate multinationals into a general equilibrium model of trade with
differentiated products. The model will explain intraindustry investment in
terms of a tradeoff between concentration and proximity advantages, and contrast
this with investment motivated by factor endowment differences. The project will
then use a partial equilibrium framework to examine the firm's choice between
exporting and overseas production in a setting with dynamic market share
dependence. It will also investigate the policy implications. These
relationships will be tested empirically. The empirical tests will be based on
gravity equations, which are ideally suited to comparing the roles of transport
cost and trade barriers in explaining the choice between multinational
production and trade.