* 9223081
* Theoretical and Experimental Study of Electronic Non-       adiabaticity in Molecular Collisions and Photofragmentation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Millard Alexander, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 12/31/1996
* USD 311,400.00

In this project, supported by the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Profs. M. Alexander of the University of Maryland and P. Dagdigian of
Johns Hopkins University will pursue a joint theoretical-experimental effort to
determine how molecular collisions and photodissociations are affected by
molecular energy states. In particular, since molecular energy states are rarely
the idealized, independent states used in the initial stages of theoretical
formulations, the interactions between them play a signifant role in determining
the details of the collision and photodissociation processes. Several
prototypical free radical molecules, including di-and triatomic monohydride
species, will be investigated. The theoretical portion of this project (M.
Alexander) involves the development of new methods to elucidate the mechanism of
molecular collisions and photodissociation. The experimental portion (P.
Dagdigian) involves the determination of cross sections for inelastic collisions
in which molecules undergo energy changes. Also to be determined are the
distributions over the internal energy states of a molecular fragment that
results from the photodissociation of the parent molecule. %%% Molecular
energies are considered in the main to be the result of translational,
rotational, vibrational and electronic motions, with the latter being made up of
orbital and spin contributions. This separation of the total energy into
independent contributions is, however, only an idealized first step in the
conceptual model of molecular structure and dynamics, and allowing for
interactions between these motions is necessary in order to account for the
observed molecular properties. Photodissociations and collisions between
molecules are also affected by these interactions, which are particularly
evident in open shell (free radical) molecules. The investigations to be carried
out in this research will contribute to the understanding of these processes and
will assist in establishing the limits of validity of the fundamental Born-
Oppenheimer approximation to open shell molecules.