* 9223894
* An International Conference on Infrared Astronomy           with Arrays:  the Next Generation on the UCLA campus from   July 18-23, 1993
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1994
* Eric Becklin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin B. Snavely
* 01/31/1994
* USD 19,257.00

Department of Astronomy and Physics at the University of California, Los
Angeles (UCLA), in collaboration with Caltech and JPL, propose to hold a timely
conference entitled Infrared Astronomy with Arrays: the next generation on the
UCLA campus from July 18-22, 1993. Infrared array detectors have been in
widespread use for only 5 or 6 years, but already their impact on infrared
astronomy has been tremendous. Efforts to design and construct even better IR
arrays with larger formats have also continued at a rapid pace. By the date of
the proposed conference, many infrared instruments using arrays with up to
256x256 pixels will be in operation. The UCLA meeting will bring together, in a
unique forum, astronomers, technologists and IR array manufacturers, to see and
hear about the exciting science that is already being done, to exchange
knowledge on methods of operation and data reduction, and to discuss future
prospects in the era of very large ground- based telescopes, Antarctic astronomy
and space missions dedicated to infrared science. Equally important, the
conference will produce direct interactions between developers and a large, and
growing, number of users and will serve to focus the concern of the community on
funding detector improvements and ensuring availability of future supplies at
this critical juncture. This meeting, although aimed primarily at ground-based
infrared astronomy, will capitalize on the synergism with space-based
applications. The conference will be modelled on the successful "turning-point"
workshop held in March 1987 in Hilo. The conference is timely since it has been
three years since the most closely related event.