* 9223818
* Impact of Strategic Alliances on Financial Performance of Technology-based Ventures
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Claudia Schoonhoven, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 09/30/1995
* USD 145,180.00

New firms face a number of performance obstacles created by their newness and
small size. These obstacles include lack of legitimacy in the industry and
marketplace, the challenge of raising sufficient capital, and the risks and
uncertainties of new technology development. Yet, some entrepreneurs transform
these obstacles into opportunities by using their newness, small size, and
cutting edge technologies to attract other firms in cooperative relationships,
called strategic alliances. The strategy of allying with other organizations has
become increasingly prevalent, and yet little is known about the objective value
of such relationships to new ventures. Using a longitudinal data base on a
population of 102 new ventures in the U.S. semiconductor industry which have
created 635 strategic alliances with other firms, this research tests a model of
financial performance and strategic alliances. Among the variables to be
investigated in the research as factors affecting financial performance are: (1)
alliance partner attributes such as relative power, cultural distance, and
prominence; (2) the number and type of strategic alliances formed; (3)
technological innovativeness; (4) strength of the founding top management team;
(5) organizational resources like investment capital raised; and (6) broader
market conditions.