* 9223156
* A Subjective Approach to Dynamic Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1996
* Ehud Lehrer, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1996
* USD 270,925.00

Existing economic equilibrium models assume that agents, participating in
interactive systems, have precise knowledge of the system, the environment in
which it operates, and the behavior of the other agents. When such knowledge is
not available, or when differential information is possessed by different
agents, the models assume that uncertain parameters are drawn from prior
probability distributions which are known to the agents. Since the parameters
and distributions assumed known are the correct ones, these models may be
considered objective. While some of the data available in interactive situations
is objective, the vast majority is not. For example, when one models competition
with uncertainty about production costs, any probability distribution over these
parameters must be highly subjective. Probability distributions over future
prices and competitors' actions, which compound uncertainties about basic
primitives with uncertainties about other agents' responses to such
uncertainties, become even more subjective. A second criticism of economic
equilibria is the lack of dynamical systems describing the learning processes
that lead agents to equilibrium. Without such a process it is difficult to
justify equilibrium analysis as a predictive model of agents' actual behavior.
This project aims to address the above two issues. Some well- established
dynamic equilibrium concepts will be expanded to allow economic agents to hold
subjective beliefs. The research will concentrate on (1) developing further
theoretical methods in the theory of Bayesian and Bounded Bayesian forecasting,
and (2) applying these methods to some well-established equilibrium concepts in
economic theory. These include equilibrium analysis in strategic environments,
rational expectations equilibrium, and equilibrium analysis of more general
social dynamics.