* 9223552
* Synthesis and Properties of Narrow-Band Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Arumugam Manthiram, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/1997
* USD 420,000.00

The goal of this research is synthesize and measure properties of high
temperature superconductors. In general, it is proposed to extend previous
copper-oxide studies to more complex systems and investigate whether a reduced
Madelung energy allows for a cross- over from more ionic to covalent bonding in
the superconducting phase of the n-type superconductors. Specifically, eight
topics associated with narrow-band phenomena in solids are addressed: 1) the
transition from a superconductor to a conventional metal; 2) the critical
feature of high temperature superconductivity in n- type superconductors; 3)
measurements of frequency of charge fluctuation in systems below 150 K; 4) use
of low-temperature synthetic procedures to make metal oxides with unusual
valence states; 5) study of narrow-band phenomena in vanadium oxides; 6)
investigation of low-spin vs. high-spin configurations in cobalt compounds; 7)
examination of overlapping redox potentials in solids; and 8) exploration of
variation of properties of monochalcogenides and pnictides due to the placement
of redox couples with respect to the valence-bond edge. The ultimate aim is to
pin point what is the essential confluence of properties that makes possible the
high temperature phenomenon. There is no consensus as to the mechanism
responsible for high- temperature superconductivity in copper oxides, even six
years after the discovery of the phenomenon. This proposal addresses this issue
on a relatively broad front by bringing together experimental techniques and
conceptual thinking from both chemistry and physics. In general, it is proposed
to extend previous copper- oxide studies to more complex systems. Materials
exhibiting narrow-band phenomena are prepared and characterized, and eight
topics are addressed to pin point what is the essential confluence of properties
that makes possible the high temperature phenomenon.