* 9223988
* Impact of Aging and Spatial Heterogeneity of Snow on the    Preservation of Atmospheric Signals in the Snowpack at      Summit, Greenland
* O/D,OPP
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1996
* Jack Dibb, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 01/31/1996
* USD 118,449.00

This is one of four coordinated projects that will make use of the camp
facilities established on the ice sheet in the interior of Greenland as part of
the GISP-2 ice core drilling effort, in order to investigate how atmospheric
trace elements are deposited on the ice and what kind of changes they undergo as
they are being incorporated into the ice. An understanding of such processes is
necessary in order to properly interpret the proxy climate data that can be
recovered from ice cores. While significant progress has been made recently in
extracting and analyzing ice cores, progress in understanding the air to snow
transfer process for reactive chemical species has lagged behind. The major goal
of this project is to understand the reasons for changes in the composition of
snow at or near the surface of the Greenland ice sheet that are observed to
occur within days or weeks after deposition. It is known that the concentration
of soluble ionic species and aerosol-associated species may change rapidly with
time, but the variability may be masked by small-scale spatial heterogeneity. A
sampling protocol will be set up to characterize the spatial variability on the
one meter to one kilometer scale. Beryllium-7, a naturally-occurring
radionuclide that is formed in the stratosphere, will be used as an indicator
for small aerosol particles. Its close association with atmospheric particulates
and half-life of 53 days make it a useful tracer of the incorporation of
aerosols in the snow and their post-depositional redistribution within the
snowpack