* 9223767
* Mathematical Sciences: The Fine Structure of Superstable Theories
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Steven Buechler, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1997
* USD 91,500.00

Professor Buechler's research is in stability theory, a subfield of model
theory. In recent years several general model-theoretic problems have been
systematically approached via the stability-theoretic hierarchy. Even though a
problem itself may not involve stability-theoretic notions, considering
separately the cases: totally transcendental, superstable, etc., brings into
play a mass of technical machinery. Such is the case for Vaught's conjecture,
which was proved by Shelah for totally transcendental theories and (over the
past 5 years) by Buechler for the superstable theories of finite rank. Buechler
intends to continue using the methods of geometrical stability theory to gain
insight into Vaught's conjecture for all superstable theories. The geometrical
methods bring modules into the picture, allowing for the use of representation
theory and other algebra to pin down further the models of these theories. This
research lies in the general setting of abstract "Classification Theory." In
many diverse branches of mathematics researchers attempt to code each element of
a class of structures with an element of a "simpler" class of structures. The
original class is then more easily analyzed, using the more detailed information
that one can obtain for this simpler class. Classification Theory is the
abstract study of such codings. Researchers have shown that it is possible to
determine when such a simplification exists by using only rather basic
information about the original class. Buechler intends to study when an abstract
class can be simplified down to a very precise class of objects called
"modules," which have been studied in great detail by algebraists.