* 9223483
* Perceptrons Play Repeated Games: New Approach to Bounded    Rationality
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* In-Koo Cho, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1996
* USD 101,465.00

Traditional economic theory presumes that decision makers have no limits on
their ability to absorb and process information, to carry out calculations, or
to explore the implications of alternative courses of action. In reality,
however, economic agents often face problems that are too complex for any
individual to treat in this way. Therefore, it is important to examine whether
the results of traditional models are robust when the assumption of unlimited
informational capacity is relaxed. The focus of this project is to analyze a new
way of describing limits on this capacity. Specifically, each decision maker is
represented by a network of simple computers. The aggregate computational power
of a network often exceeds the sum of the capabilities of individual machines.
Small but well designed computer networks can store and process substantial
amounts of information. Notion of complexity will be formalized, and the
implications of limited capacity to handle complexity will be investigated. In
addition, such networks will be used to study adaptive learning processes. Some
of the initial results obtained in this framework are strikingly different from
those found in the existing literature on bounded rationality. It is then
essential to further this research by critically reviewing the existing tools
for modeling the limited informational capability of economic agents.