* 9223512
* Causation and Uncertainty in Twentieth-Century U.S.         Industrial Safety Law
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1996
* Arthur McEvoy, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1996
* USD 91,621.00

Workplace safety problems have played a significant role in US history since the
onset of industrialization in the mid-nineteenth century. Workplace accidents
and their prevention are crucial factors in the evolution of, among other
things, technological development, labor organization and tort law. This project
focusses particularly on changing scientific, legal and popular explanations for
why industrial accidents occur: how different groups at different times have
understood the causes of accidents in different ways and how they have
translated that changing knowledge into demands for legal reform has been a
significant catalyst for the growth of American liability law in general since
the 1850's. Existing scholarship in labor history, however, has all but ignored
the role of accidents and of accident liability law in determining the nature of
factory production, while the legal and scientific literature on industrial
health and safety has paid little attention to the role of culture and politics
in determining what factors the law has been able to recognize as significant
threats to industrial health and safety. This study aims to synthesize those two
bodies of knowledge so as to answer that question, and to analyze the critical
role that industrial accidents and disease have played in American economic
development. The study will rely on extensive research into workers'
compensation decisions and the case law on industrial accidents in several
states from the late nineteenth century to the present. Primary sources in labor
history such as the labor press, union archives, and the personal records of
individual workers will show how accidents and disease figured in the lives of
industrial workers and how they attributed responsibility for them. To explain
changes in common sense notions of causality and their application to workplace
safety problems, the study will rely on contemporary works in physics,
economics, psychology, anthropology, law, and industrial hygiene. The study will
show how the law both reflects and contributes to accepted notions about
causality in the natural and social sciences. It will clarify the theoretical
and practical problems that underlie ongoing crises in tort and administrative
law where the control of hazardous technology is at issue.