* 9223678
* Amplification and Refinement of Bayesian Scientific Methodology
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1993,05/31/1994
* Abner Shimony, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 05/31/1994
* USD 20,000.00

Scientific inference, the process of going from particular instances to general
laws, has been a matter of philosophical concern since the time of Aristotle.
Not until Thomas Bayes (1763), however, was there any explicit method presented
to use probability theory to justify the inference from particulars to general
laws. The entire family of Bayesian scientific methodologies formulates
scientific inference in terms of the concept of epistemic probability, considers
the prior probability of scientific hypothesis to be a meaningful concept, and
makes use of Bayes's theorem for evaluating posterior probabilities. A version
of Bayesianism proposed by Professor Shimony in 1970, called "tempered
personalism," recommends that personal probability evaluations be "tempered" by
openmindedness towards all seriously proposed hypotheses in an investigation.
Among the virtues of tempered personalism is the possibility of arriving at a
non- negligible posterior probability for a strong scientific generalization.
There are, however, some weaknesses in tempered personalism which require
modifications: notably, a difficulty in justifying the axioms of probability,
the vagueness of "seriously proposed," and uncertainty regarding the evaluation
of the "catch- all" hypothesis. Under this grant, Professor Shimony, working
with two graduate students, is amplifying and refining his original positions to
take account of these difficulties. He expects to remove the first difficulty by
a procedure of "tempering without tempering." He believes the second and third
difficulties are ameliorated by properly combining analytic propositions of
probability with a posteriori principles. He and his students are undertaking a
number of scientific case studies for the purpose both of illustrating the power
of this refined methodology and for heuristics in formulating the a posteriori
principles in inductive inference.