* 9223546
* Metal Surfaces, Quantum Wells, and Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Tai Chiang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 09/30/1996
* USD 285,000.00

A study of the structure, growth behavior; and properties of selected metal
surface, interfaces, overlayers, quantum wells, multilayers, and superlattices
is proposed. The purpose is to obtain a fundamental understanding of the
scientific principles that govern the crystalline form, chemical composition,
and electronic properties of metal epitaxial systems and quantum structures. The
experimental techniques to be employed include (angle-resolved) synchrotron
photoemission, Auger spectroscopy, electron diffraction, scanning tunneling
microscopy and spectroscopy, and grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction. Samples
will be prepared and fabricated using standard ultrahigh vacuum techniques as
well as molecular beam epitaxy and chamical vapor deposition. The work will
include investigation of bulk and surface band structure, coherence and
scattering lengths, and spatial distributions of electronic states; adsorption
geometry, cluster and island formation, and film growth behavior; evolution of
surface, interface, and quantum-well states as a function of sample structure;
atomic structure of buried interfaces; coupling between quantum wells; and
phenomena pertaining to superlattices and multilayer structures. %%% Artificial
structures made of stacks of thin layers can exhibit interesting and potentially
useful electronic properties. Using state-of-the-art techniques for materials
synthesis, it is now possible to fabricate layer configurations with layer
thicknesses approaching the atomic dimension. In such systems, electrons can
become trapped, reflected, or refracted by the boudaries between layers. Because
these happen on an atomic scale, substantial modifications of the electronic
properties can be achieved by tailoring the structure. This research project
will employ a variety of experimental techniques to address the basic questions
concerning the growth and characterization of various layer configurations, and
the relationships between the atomic structure and the electronic properties.
Part of the work will be carried out at the Synchrotron Radiation Center at
Madison, Wisconsin and the National Synchrotron Light Source at the Brookhaven
National Laboratory. This research involves a cooperation between work supported
by the National Science Foundation and the Department of Energy.