* 9223377
* SGER: Properties of Thermal Protein Microspheres
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Sidney Fox, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/29/1996
* USD 40,236.00

WPC 2 B P Z Courier 10cpi #| x Sj x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ HP DeskJet 500 HPDES500.PRS x
@ x X , , 0 FX @Courier 10cpi CG Times 12pt 2 N X Y F ` " m o 8 ; ^&lt;D\dd DDDd
DDDDddddddddddDD X | |x DL | t l| DDDddDXdXdXDdd88d8 ddddHL8dd ddXXdXd d ddDDddd
D d d d X X X X X X|X|X|X|XD8D8D8D8 d d d d d d d d d d X d d d d dtd X X X X X
X X d|X|X|X|X d d d d d d d dD D D8D L d|8|8|8|8|8 d t d d d d H H
HlLlLlLlL|8|8|8 d d d d d d d X X X d|8 d HlL|8 d d d d d D/ N d ddDXPPdd ddd
dHdddd H d x H d h 1D DD x dp d x d x X L p x xdx X x x xL
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxLLLLLLL x ? x x x , Sj x 6 X @ 8 ; X @ 8 p C &lt; , W X p P
rk ; X P presence of water to form cell-like structures called thermal protein
(TP) microsp s. These TP microspheres behave in many ways like true neurons;
they display memb Y # X p P rk ; W X P# 92 Fox Many scientists interested in
evolution are aware that when mixtures of amino acids are heated they polymerize
to thermal proteins which, in turn, self-assemble in the presence of water to
form cell-like structures called thermal protein (TP) microspheres. These TP
microspheres behave in many ways like true neurons; they display membrane
potentials, generate action potential-like electrical discharges in response to
light, form junctions, and extend axon-like outgrowths. Thus, TP microspheres
can be c onsidered "protoneurons:, the scientific study of which may help to
elucidate which basic properties of modern day neurons are ingerent to these
protocells that assemble in a nonrandom way under conditions believed to have
existed on the primitive Earth. In the proposed research, the chemical,
electrical, and possible psychological microspheres will be studied. The
electrophysiological responses to light will be quantified and possible ion
channel-like characteristics of their membranes explored. Finally, whether any
relatively permanant change in the behavior of TP microspheres can be induced by
experience will be explored. This will be determined by testing interconnected
networks of TP microspheres for basic learning processes known to occur in both
vertebrate and invertebrate species, as well as in single-cell eukaryotic
organisms. The basic learning processes to be investigated include habituation,
sensitization, and possible associative changes which might occur in TP
microspheres electrical response to light, as a result of experience. ***