* 9223114
* Collaborative Research: Flux and Fate of Sediment and Water from Small Mountainous Rivers to the Continental Margin:    the Gulf of Alaska Example
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Charles Nittrouer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Epp
* 03/31/1998
* USD 220,285.00

Abstract ATM-9223114 Nitrouer, Charles A. State University of New York at
Stonybrook Title: Flux and Fate of Sediment and Water from Small, Mountainous
Rivers to the Continental Margin: The Gulf of Alaska Example Small rivers
charging directly from mountains into the ocean carry greater sediment loads
than commonly envisioned, a relatively great percentage of which may escape to
deeper waters during high stands of sea level. This award supports a study of
the flux of Holocene fluvial sediment into the Gulf of Alaska, whose generally
small tributary rivers are collectively the largest supplier of sediment from
North America. Alaskan rivers are relatively uninfluenced by human activities,
although glacial activity has resulted in higher sediment yields than noted for
other rivers with similar drainage areas. High-resolution seismic profiling, in
conjunction with seismic data previously collected, will allow the
identification of sediment accumulation and discharge patterns on the shelf and
slope, as well as trace individual sediment layers derived from episodic (flood)
events. Sedimentological data will help define the escape routes/processes, and
a variety of radiometric datings will show frequency of occurrence and rates of
accumulation. Facies will be defined by compositional and textural analyses, as
will be sources (and fates) of terrigneous grains and organic matter in shelf
sediments. Measurements of total organic carbon and total nitrogen, d13C, d15N,
and lignin oxidation productions in sediment organic matter will be used to
determine the amount and source of organic matter accumulating in the sediments.
Contemporaneous oceanographic processes controlling strata formation will also
be evaluated. This information should help in the interpretation of the older
strata observed by seismic profiling and coring.