* 9223826
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Rewriting      Systems for Groups
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1995
* Susan Hermiller, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/1995
* USD 39,550.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Susan Hermiller of New
Mexico State University to the University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, to
work with Dr. John R. J. Groves. A finite complete rewriting system for a group
is a presentation which solves the word problem for the group in a way that is
particularly easy to implement on a computer, and which provides a regular
language of normal forms. The proposed research is a study of the class of
groups with such rewriting systems. Several questions will be pursued. The first
- Given a group with a finite complete rewriting system, must every finite index
subgroup also have one? The second - Does an automatic group necessarily have a
finite complete rewriting system? The third - If a finitely presented group has
finite derivation type, does it have a finite complete rewriting system? To
answer these questions, it would be helpful to construct rewriting systems for
more families of groups, especially Artin groups, if possible. They also intend
to study a weaker property for a group, given by a subword closed regular
language of normal forms. The award recommendation provides funds to cover
international travel and a stipend for twelve months.