* 9223783
* Flame Structure and Kinetics in Chlorinated Hydrocarbon     Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1997
* Chung Law, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 10/31/1997
* USD 294,267.00

This program is a continuation of an on-going research project in the area of
flame structure and kinetics in the combustion of chlorinated hydrocarbons
(CHCs). In the first half of this program, the research will involve modifying
an existing burner setup to study CO flames in the presence of HCl and CH3Cl;
both premixed and nonpremixed flames will be studied. Velocity, temperature, and
species concentration fields will be measured via laser diagnostic procedures.
In addition, numerical simulations for validation of the existing CO reaction
mechanisms in the presence of HCl and CH3Cl will be carried out, with
modifications to previous chloromethane work being re-examined. With the new
flame structure measurements obtained with the expanded diagnostic procedures,
comprehensive comparisons will be made between numerics and experiments. In the
second half of the program, the research will involve studies of the influence
of higher Cl/H ratios on global flame characteristics and flame structure using
mixtures of chloromethane, dichloromethane, trichloroethylene, oxygen, and
nitrogen. Under these highly chlorinated conditions, the existence of two-stage
flame structures will also be examined in premixed and nonpremixed flames, again
through non-intrusive mapping of the flame structure. Finally, the tendency of
soot formation will be investigated in detail and possible control approaches
examined. The experimental results are anvicipated to provide a basis for
validation of detailed reaction mechanisms employed in the numerical simulation
of flame structures. Such comparisons should provide useful insight into the
oxidation mechanisms of CHCs. In addition, through identification of the
important species and reaction steps via sensitivity analysis, simplified,
reduced mechanisms can be developed to describe the chemistry of CHC flames;
these reduced mechanisms will enable incorporation of realistic finite-rate
chemistry models into simulation of turbulent and/or three-dimensional flame
structures found in incinerators, with ultimate development of design capability
for safe, optimal incinerator operation.