* 9223136
* National Science Foundation Alan T. Waterman Award
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/1992,09/30/1995
* Shrinivas Kulkarni, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jane Russell
* 09/30/1995
* USD 514,750.00

Dr. Shrinivas Kulkarni is receiving the Alan T. Waterman award for his work on
pulsars, the interstellar medium and astronomical instrumentation. He was co-
discoverer of the first known millisecond pulsar. His research group has carried
out surveys to discover pulsars in globular clusters and is responsible for
about 1/3 of the known examples. He has also investigated many individual
pulsars. This work has included the detection of x- ray emission from a
millisecond pulsar and the discovery of one of the oldest known examples of a
pulsar associated with a supernova remnant. He showed that a peculiar radio
source was a supernova remnant with a pulsar embedded in its rim. This implies
that supernova explosion was highly asymmetric and ejected the resulting neutron
star at high velocity. His studies of the interstellar medium have demonstrated
the existence of a magneto-ionic disk in the galaxy which extends out to 25 kpc
while providing the first high-resolution images in the 3-mm line of CO for
another galaxy, M 51. In the area of instrumentation he developed a pulsar
timing instrument with a wide band width and fast signal processor. This device
permits the detection of fainter and shorter period pulsars than had been
possible previously. He has developed an optical interferometer which can
produce diffraction limited images of stars. Observations of the long period
variable star Mira with the 200 inch telescope at Mt. Palomar Observatory showed
that the star is not round and is, thus, likely to be undergoing non-radial
oscillations. He is currently carrying out studies of optical interferometry
aimed at combining those techniques with developments in adaptive optics.