* 9223399
* The Production of Information Services:  A Model, Empirical Analysis, and Operational Application
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Kenneth Kraemer, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 02/29/1996
* USD 129,172.00

The objective of this project is to improve scientific knowledge about the key
factors contributing to the performance and productivity of information systems
(I/S) in U.S. corporations. The research is funded under the Joint NSF/Private
Sector Initiative and will be conducted through collaborative work with a
Cooperating Organization. The Cooperating Organization will provide scientific
and practical input, access to study sites, assistance in data collection, and
leadership in dissemination of the results of the research to other
corporations. The research involves five activities: 1) development of models of
information services as a production process, 2) collection of data to provide
empirical estimates for the social, organizational and performance variables in
the models, 3) analysis aimed at determining the relationships between these
variables in computer operations and systems development as separate processes,
4) application of the models in the operations of at least one organization, and
5) conduct of a workshop aimed at disseminating the results of the project to
other corporations. The research will advance knowledge in the information
systems field by developing and applying models of the production of information
services. The models will identify the key variables in I/S production and their
inter-relationships, and thereby provide a means of greater understanding and
operational control. The results of the research will be generalizable to the
private sector, and are expected to improve performance of the I/S function in
U.S. corporations from "common practice" towards "best practice."