* 9223234
* A Hybrid Sliding Isolation System with Controllable         Friction Bearings
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Maria Feng, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/1997
* USD 180,000.00

Recently, a hybrid sliding isolation system employing computer-controllable
friction bearings has been developed and proven to be more effective in
controlling the seismic response of a single-degree-of-freedom system than the
corresponding conventional passive sliding system. This proposed research
intends to extend the applicability of this hybrid isolation system to
multistory buildings by conducting a series of analytical and experimental
investigations to develop an improved isolation system design. Analytical work
will involve development of two control algorithms and computer simulation
studies with different structural and isolation system parameters and different
input motions. The experimental work will involve shaking table laboratory test
on the proposed computer controllable isolation devices. The hybrid sliding
isolation systems are more advantageous over the conventional passive systems in
that they are more effective for earthquakes with a broad intensity range, and
tend to be more robust. However, to fully implement such a system with
confidence in practice, there appear to exist several major technical and
practical problems that are yet to be overcome. The proposed research will
develop: (1) improved friction controllable bearings with proper consideration
of the problems of the possibility of uplifting and its prevention, choice of
the proper materials for sliding interface, chamber pressure control, energy
supply, and system maintenance, (2) robust control algorithms to satisfy
requirements for simultaneously controlling three-dimensional multitudinous
responses, such as floor acceleration, interstory deformation, and sliding
displacement, and to prevent excessive overturning moment and uplifting problems
associated with buildings, and (3) a unified computer codes package to conduct
simulation studies of isolation performance on various building models under
different earthquake excitations. The laboratory tests for component performance
and scaled building model tests using a shaking table as well as the redesign of
systems incorporating the changes suggested by the experimental results will
also be performed in this study. The proposed research will resolve the
remaining technical as well as practical problems existing with the innovative
hybrid sliding isolation system - thus paving the way for its broad applications
in building structures constructed in active seismic areas.