* 9223847
* Size Effects in Ferroic Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,11/30/1998
* Leslie Cross, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ulrich Strom
* 11/30/1998
* USD 1,620,000.00

9223847 Newnham This award is the initial funding for a new Materials Research
Group at the Pennsylvania State University on the topic of size effects in
ferroic solids. Scaling phenomena in representative oxide ferroics are being
investigated theoretically and experimentally. Emphasis is being placed on
determining the critical sizes for the following four regimes: (1) large
particles that each contain many domain walls which reduce in number as the
particle size decreases, (2) particles that contain a single domain, (3)
particle sizes smaller than a single domain, (4) particles in the nanometer size
scale. The material systems of choice are ferroelectrics, ferroelastics, and
secondary ferroics. The goal is to determine the critical particle sizes for
each system where the material and its behavior transitions from bulk behavior
to single domain behavior to glass-like, and non-ferroelectric behavior. The
experimental program involves preparation of fine-grain powders plus
ceramic/polymeric, and ceramic/ceramic composite materials in the form of thin
films; characterization of the particle/grain microstructure, domain
configurations, phase transformations, and critical sizes using thermal
analysis, x-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, electron microscopy, and
spectroscopic ellipsometry; measurement of permittivity, elasticity, as a
function of applied field, temperature, and frequency. The theory component is
based on the Landau-Ginsburg-Devonshire formalism. The effects of volume,
external surfaces, and internal interfaces (both grain boundaries and domain
walls) are considered. Ferroic crystals have domain walls which can be moved by
electric fields (ferroelectrics), magnetic fields (ferromagnets), mechanical
stress (ferroelastics), or some higher order phenomena involving a combination
of the first three (secondary ferroics). These materials are used as
transducers, capacators, transformers, sensors, and actuators, because of the
lar ge contribution that domain walls make to piezoelectricity, permittivity,
permeability, elastic compliance, and other property coefficients. A basic
understanding of size effects is critical to the development of these devices,
which are being made smaller in the form of thin films, fiber-filled composites,
and multilayer ceramics with submicron grain sizes.