* 9223989
* Experimental Validation of Interconnection and Transistor   Delay Models for the GaAs-Based Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Ashok Goel, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Foster
* 04/30/1997
* USD 133,945.00

Goel During the last few years, GaAs technology has emerged rapidly from basic
research to device and circuit development. It is crucial to know the expected
propagation delays in an integrated circuit before it is fabricated. To meet
this objective, numerical models have been developed that address crosstalk and
propagation delays in the parallel and crossing VLSI multilevel interconnections
as well as for the transverse delays in the GaAs MESFETs and GaAs/AIGaAs
MODFETs. In addition to determining the crosstalk and propagation delays, the
models can be utilized to achieve the optimization of the device and
interconnection dimensions and other parameters for minimum crosstalk and
delays. Validation of these numerical models by comparison of the modeling
results with actual experimental observations is critical if they are to be
incorporated into GaAs CAD tools. This research effort focuses on the following
set of objectives: 1. design and fabrication of several GaAs-based logic
circuits to retain the ability to alter the various design parameters; 2.
application of the interconnection and the GaAs MESFET delay models recently
developed for the determination of propagation delays in these GaAs-based logic
circuits; 3. experimental measurements of propagation delays in these circuits
and comparison with developed delay models; 4. modification of the
interconnection and transistor delay models, as required; and 5. experimental
validation of the final models.