* 9223967
* Collaborative Project:  The Internal Kinematics of Dwarf    Spheroidal Galaxies:  Do They Contain Dark Matter?          (Part I of 2 Projects)
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1999
* Edward Olszewski, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Susan M. Simkin
* 11/30/1999
* USD 180,800.00

An extensive series of imaging and spectroscopic observations and analysis
designed to test for and measure the distribution of the putative dark matter in
dwarf spheroidal galaxies will be carried out in this research grant. The
velocity dispersion, or characteristic width, of stars in the Leo I and Leo II
systems will be measured for the first time. These are key objects for deciding
if the large velocity dispersions measured in the other dwarf spheroidal
galaxies are caused by tides or the presence of dark matter. Multifiber
spectroscopic data have been collected for the Ursa Minor, Draco, and Sextan
dwarf galaxies. Combined with echelle data for the Fornax galaxy and with new
observations, these data will allow the gravitational potential of these
galaxies, not just their mass, to be determined. Measurement of the mass-to-
light ratio of the distant halo globular cluster NGC2419, which is thought to
contain no dark matter, will provide a necessary comparison when assessing the
mass-to-light ratios of the dwarf spheroidal galaxies. Extensive imaging data to
improve or measure the structure of these low luminosity galaxies has been
collected. Finally, further radio observations of some intriguing radio sources
with no optical counterparts will be made. This project is a collaborative
project with Dr. Mario Mateo of the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor (AST
9223968).