* 9223677
* Microanalysis of Peptides Using an Ion Trap Storage/Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1997
* David Lubman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 02/28/1997
* USD 167,548.00

In this work we will develop methodology based on new instrumentation which can
be used for structural analysis of molecules of biological importance, i.e.
peptides and post- translationally modified peptides. In particular, this will
involve further development of an ion trap/reflectron time-of- flight mass
spectrometer and the development of the various capabilities that result from a
combination of these two technologies. This device will be used to obtain
structure and sequence information on large peptides and modified peptides using
electrospray or matrix-assisted laser desorption (MALDI) to produce ions
externally for injection into the trap. The ion trap will act as a front end
storage device for a time-of-flight mass spectrometer with capabilities for
long-term storage thus providing the possibility for ultra trace analysis. In
addition, this will provide the ability to investigate photodissociation and
collision induced dissociation of these large ions in the trap with detection of
long-lived metastable fragmentation. This will be especially important in the
case of large molecules which may only dissociate on a long time scale (&gt;10
ms) that is beyond the capabilities of many mass spectrometer. In addition,
various factors that will allow sufficient fragmentation for interpretation of
the structure of these large peptides will be investigated. Ultimately, using
fragmentation patterns and metastable ion analysis provided using a reflectron
time-of- flight, the capabilities of this methodology for structural analysis
will be evaluated.