* 9223002
* The Evolution of Global Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1996
* Jeffrey Williamson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 09/30/1996
* USD 139,887.00

The media is filled today with reference to the global economic village,
political leaders talk in terms of world competitiveness, and Americans fear the
loss of productivity and living standards. Economists have come to call this
process convergence, and theory and empirical analysis on post World War II
experience with it have flourished. It is often forgotten, however, that this
process of economic convergence has a very long history. It starts in the 19th
century following two important economic events; the discovery New World
resources and the industrial revolution. Both of these events created economic
divergence: wage, standard of living and per capita income gaps between members
of the current OECD industrialized club increased sharply. After the 1850's,
however, this divergence was followed by more than a century of convergence when
poor countries grew faster than rich countries. What has been observed since the
1950s, therefore, has been going on since the middle of the last century. This
process of convergence took place in fits and starts, and one major goal of this
project is to identify which episodes underwent convergence and why. A second
major objective is to uncover the forces which caused convergence. These would
include international labor migrations, international capital flows,
international trade, skill formation, and technological advance. War, policy
intervention, and other events favoring or suppressing factor flows and trade
are also likely to have played a central role in shaping those forces underlying
the convergence. A better understanding of these historical forces should
provide useful insights about the course of future world- wide economic growth.