* 9223637
* Generalizing Multiple Imputation to Time Series Data, with  Application to Survey Research and Evaluating Electoral     Systems and Redistricting Plans
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Gary King, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* JEANETTE CAMPBELL
* 01/31/1996
* USD 70,000.00

9223637 King Nearly everyone who has ever done quantitative analysis in
political science has come across the problem of needing data where none exist.
One might have found the right survey, but it is missing a critical question. A
researcher may have data on U.S states, but not all the information is known for
all states. Likewise, a researcher may have data on the cities but not the rest
of the United States. The investigators study one important aspect of this
problem: handling missing data in the analysis of a dataset organized as a time
series of cross-sections; a problem for which no adequate solution presently
exist. This problem arose as an important obstacle in two distinct areas of the
substantive research undertaken by the investigators, one involving data
comprising a series of presidential "trial heat" polls and, the other, a large
quantity of legilslative electoral data. In searching for a solution, the
investigators found that the problem is much more general and has arisen at
least implicitly in statistics, political methodology, and numerous areas of
substantive research in political science and elsewhere. The researchers plan to
generalize the existing statistical method of "multiple imputation," simulating
data mathematically, to deal with data such as these. ***