* 9223333
* Community College Faculty Development on Ethics, Values,    Science and Technology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Jere Jones, Raritan Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 12/31/1995
* USD 111,834.00

9223333 Jones Little attention has been paid to ways to engage students at
community colleges in the consideration of ethical and value dimensions of
scientific and engineering practice and the impacts of science and technology.
This faculty development project has at its core an intensive study group
program for eight faculty members from Raritan Valley Community College (RVCC)
and Somerset County Technical Institute (SCTI). The program will enable the
faculty to integrate into the standard curriculum attention to the ethical and
value aspects of science and engineering. To achieve its goals and to
disseminate results and provide a model for others to consider, the program
involves a collaboration among faculty at RVCC and SCTI, the New Jersey
Institute of Technology, and high schools, industries, and other consortia
involved in advancing science and engineering education in the region and the
nation. The project uses an across the curriculum methodology that involves the
faculty in the process of discovering ways of modifying their standard classroom
presentations in order better to prepare students for their careers. The
participants will meet with an expert on ethics and science and technology who
will provide advice and instruction on approaches to ethical decisionmaking
concerning science and technology and on developing classroom environments that
foster the analytical, conceptual and social skills necessary to encourage
ethical reflection in undergraduate students in scientific, engineering, and
technical courses. Individual core faculty, assisted by other experts if
appropriate, will conduct weekly seminars on particular issues of science,
engineering and ethics during the Fall semester. A day-long open workshop on
ethics and effective working relationships between industry and academia will
end the Fall semester program. The Spring program will recruit eight additional
group members for weekly seminars and monthly curriculum development activiti
es. At the end of that semester, faculty, students, and members of the
commuhnity will be invited to participate in a week-long program on "Technology
across the Curriculum," and a day-long program for high school faculty will be
designed to make them aware of opportunities to consider ethics issues in
science curricula. Program activities and results will be disseminated in a wide
variety of ways. Newsletters will keep faculty at the involved institutions
informed. Statewide, results will be made available through the New Jersey
Institute for Collegiate Teaching and Learning, which is a state funded project
to disseminate ideas through publications and faculty and staff development
workshops. In the state and more broadly, information will be made available
through the Statewide Systematic Initiative for Achieving Excellence in
Mathematics, Science, and Technology Education, through the NJ Mathematics
Coalition and the Academic Officers Association of the Community Colleges, and
through the MidAtlantic Consortium for Math and Science Education. Project
results will also be disseminated nationally at appropriate conferences and
through appropriate journals. ***