* 9223903
* Theodosius Dobzhansky in Russia and America
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* Mark Adams, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 09/30/1996
* USD 95,000.00

Evolutionary biology has always been controversial: in Darwin's time, there was
the famous debate in Britain between Bishop "Soapy Sam" Wilburforce and Thomas
Huxley; at the turn of the century, there was the Skopes "monkey" trial in the
US; and today, there have been efforts in, for example, Louisiana to require
that "creationism" be taught alongside the "theory" of evolution. Yet the most
serious attacks on Darwin's theory came not from religion but from science
itself. In the 19th century, physicists led by Lord Kelvin argued that the earth
was too "young" to have allowed enough time for evolution to have occurred. With
the discovery of natural radiation, however, the age of the earth was greatly
increased to several billions of years--old enough for evolution to occur. But
where physics failed, Mendelian and population genetics stepped in with a
scientific assault on Darwin's principle of natural selection. It wasn't until
the late 1930's and 1940's that evolutionary biology was reconciled with
genetics. The first person to propose this synthesis was Theodosius Dobzhansky
(1900- 1975) in his Genetics and the Origin of Species, (1937). With the
collapse of the Soviet Union and the opening of the Russian archives to Western
scholars, Dr. Mark Adams is undertaking the first full-scale study of this
founder of modern Western population genetics. Dr. Adams is focussing his study
of Dobzhansky on the period 1900 to 1937 when "Dobbie" published his book
launching the evolutionary biology synthesis. He is also pursuing the persistent
Russian dimension of Dobbie's work even after he moved to the United States
(1927). Dr. Adams aims to clarify the influence of the Kiev school of
cytogenetics on Dobzhansky's chromosomal work (1914-1924); the views of his
Petersburg mentor, Filipchenko, on his approach to micro- and macroevolution,
and on his social views (1924-27) the influence of Russian entomological
traditions on his approach to populations, species, and field practice; his
gradual assimilation of the conventions and practices of T. H. Morgan's
laboratory when he came to the United States; the influence of his Russian
background on the writing of his evolutionary classic; his role in supporting
Russian geneticists and opposing Lysenkoism during the period 1937-1960; and the
abiding influence of his formative Russian years in shaping the worldview that
informed both his research and writings on heredity, society, cosmology, and the
human conditions, 1960-1974.