* 9223098
* Science and the Origins of a National Historical            Consciousness
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1993,02/28/1994
* Myles Jackson, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 02/28/1994
* USD 34,000.00

The interaction of science, technology and national culture is a frequently
mentioned but too rarely examined phenomenon. Historians and social scientists
have long maintained that there is such a thing as a national style of doing
science and technology. The standard example is physics: the British required
mechanical models to facilitate understanding of physical forces while the
French disdained such models in favor of mathematical equations which allow
calculation of how forces act. But beyond this example, there have been too few
studies. Correspondingly, there have been too few studies of the influence of
science and technology on national culture. Dr. Jackson, working with Dr. Peter
Galison of Harvard University, is examining these relationships in the context
of the science and technology of optics in Germany, contrasting them with optics
in Great Britain. Under this grant, Dr. Jackson is analyzing the switch in
optical hegemony from London to Munich in the 19th century and how leading
German scholars retrospectively reconstituted this historical episode in order
to legitimize their scientific, social, economic and political interests. Among
other things, Dr. Jackson is examining how the advances in glass technology in
Bavaria made possible the creation of scientific disciplines such as
astrophysics, spectroscopy, photochemistry and x-ray technology. Glass
technology was to revolutionize the way scientists literally saw the world.
Bavarian optical instruments combined with Gaussian mathematics were to enable
German physicists and astronomers to surpass their British colleagues. Optics
was also crucial to the development of Germany as a political and economic
power, as evidenced by the rise of companies such as the Carl Zeiss Works. This
company not only produced superior optical instruments, but also provided
imperial Germany with instruments and technologies applicable to war. This
important history was incorporated into the German culture as an example of the
German superiority in technical, scientific research and development. An
examination of both the technical and the cultural history of German optics will
greatly contribute to our understanding of the interaction of science,
technology and society.