* 9223851
* Dissertation Research:  The Roles of Predation and Plant    Chemistry in the Evolution of the Host Plant Specialization
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1993,08/31/1995
* NONE NONE, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 08/31/1995
* USD 7,120.00

Predators may play an important role in the evolution of diet specialization in
phytophagous insects. This research will test the hypothesis that specialists
are chemically and morphologically better defended against predation than
generalists by offering both generalist and specialist lepidopteran larvae to
two different invertebrate predators, Apiomerus pictipes (assassin bug) and
Polistes carnifex (paper wasp) at Palo Verde National Park, Costa Rica. To test
separately for the importance of prey chemistry as a determinant of predator
rejections, we will also offer caterpillar extracts to the same predators.
Results indicating that prey chemistry is an important deterrent to predators
would only provide relatively weak evidence that plant chemistry is also
important. Therefore, to test the importance of plant chemistry we will also
rear specialist caterpillars on artificial diets containing varying amounts of
host plant and offer those caterpillars and their extracts to the predators.
Diet breadth of phytophagous insects is an important and current issue to
evolutionary biology and ecology, including the potential for herbivorous
insects to become serious agricultural pests. This project is the first to test
the combined importance of plant chemistry and predation in determining diet
breadth.