* 9223576
* Electronic Properties, Magnetotransport and STM in          Quasi-One-and-Two-Dimensional Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Robert Coleman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 06/30/1997
* USD 240,000.00

This research involves the study of electronic structure due to charge-density
waves (CDWs) and spin-density waves (SDWs) in lower dimensional metals,
semimetals and semiconductors. The research utilizes scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) to detect both the atomic and
electronic structure with resolution on the scale of individual atoms and
correlates the results with studies of the effects of high magnetic fields on
the electronic transport properties of the some materials. The materials to be
investigated include transition metal chalcogenides, as well as more complex
crystals such as tantalum nickel selenide. This combination of the above
techniques provides a unique characterization of the electronic modifications
associated with CDWs, SDWs and mixed density waves. They also provide extremely
sensitive detection of modifications in the CDW structure as induced by impurity
doping. Doping of trichalcogenides produces new electronic phases, metal-
insulator transitions and modified CDWs, all of which can be detected by STM
spectroscopy, AFM scanning and high magnetic field transport. Results should
provide a detailed understanding of the electronic properties of materials as
modified by the presence of density- waves in the electron gas as well as
changes in the electronic density waves due to impurity doping. %%% The highly
anisotropic metals being studied in this research and the unusual electronic
properties associated with density-waves provide insight into new electronic
modifications of materials. Studies of these properties on an atomic scale by
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM), combined
with macroscopic measurements of the associated electronic conduction phenomena
in high magnetic fields, lead to a unique understanding of the overall
electronic structure. The STM and AFM studies provide a picture of both the
crystal structure and the electronic structure at the atomic level. These
methods are extremely sensitive to modifications by impurities and defects and
can be used to systematically follow impurity atom locations, ordering and the
formation of new electronic phases in the crystals. The accompanying
modifications of the electronic and magnetotransport properties will correlate
the changes in atomic configuration and local electronic structure with the
overall electronic response of the material. The development of these methods
should be extremely useful for the design and testing of new electronic
materials.