* 9223844
* Dissertation Research:  Morphometric and Functional Analysisof Gasterosteus aculeatus
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1994
* NONE NONE, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1994
* USD 8,500.00

This study will examine patterns of variation in body form among populations of
an endemic radiation of threespine stickleback from Cook Inlet, Alaska to test
current models of phenotypic evolution. Stickleback along the west coast of
North America are of interest to the evolutionary biologist because of the
recent (&lt;22,000 years) colonization of diverse freshwater habitats from a
marine ancestral population and subsequent differentiation of trophic and
locomotor morphology among the populations. Body form will be measured using
two-dimensional (x,y) coordinates of anatomical landmarks that permit the use of
the most powerful methods available to describe and analyze shape. Three
hypotheses of a functional integration model will be tested: 1) patterns of
genetic and phenotypic correlations reflect functional integration (i.e. suites
of characters that function in concert should have higher correlations than
functionally unrelated characters). 2) patterns of phenotypic correlation are
similar among populations. 3) interlocality and intralocality patterns of
phenotypic correlations are similar. Biomechanical models and trophic and
locomotor performance measures will be used to construct a priori hypotheses to
test for functional integration. It is anticipated that results from this study
will provide some of the critical empirical data necessary to resolve
conflicting hypotheses on the role of constraints influencing phenotypic
divergence among closely related populations.