* 9223389
* Constituency Preferences and Representation: Evidence From  Voting On Ballot Propositions and Roll-Calls
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1993,03/31/1996
* James Snyder, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/1996
* USD 110,411.00

Understanding the relative importance of various influences on the behavior of
elected representives is one of the central concerns of modern political-
economy. Among the possible influences are the representative's constituency,
campaign contributions and lobbying efforts by special interest groups, the
representative's own preferences, and pressures from various party and nonparty
leaders, such as the president and committee chairmen. Although aggregated vote
data are often used to measure citizens' preferences in empirical studies of
representation, and are also analyzed in studies of direct democracy, there has
been little work carefully linking the statistical models to well-defined models
of voter choice. As a result, the behavioral assumptions underlying these
empirical studies are often vague. This is especially problematic for analyses
of voting data, because of past work showing that many widely used statistical
techniques are probably inconsistent with certain reasonable models of voter
behavior. The contribution of the project comes from developing a framework for
the statistical analysis of aggregated vote data of the sort that researchers
often encounter in the study of ballot propositions and candidate elections,
that is based on the standard spatial voting model. The framework is applied in
a number of empirical studies of voting data on ballot propositions in
California and other states over various periods since 1892. These studies
utilize not only voting data on ballot propositions, but also demographic
information, data on voting in presidential, gubernatorial and other elections,
and data on roll-call voting in state legislatures and the U.S. Congress. One
particularly important issue is the extent to which elected representatives act
in the interest of a majority of their constituents.