* 9223337
* Studying Changes in the Rules of the U.S. House of          Representatives:  Electorial Forces and Majority Control
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1996
* Evelyn Fink, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Rosalind Wilson
* 01/31/1996
* USD 33,972.00

This project investigates the relationship between changes in the rules of
legislative procedure of the U.S. House of Representatives and the electoral
environment. The genesis of rules changes in the Congress is of significant
theoretical interest. Many studies of Congress have chronicled the occurrence of
historic rules changes in the House while others have created theoretical models
of why institutional rules have an independent effect on the determination of
policy outcomes within the chamber. In addition, students of American political
parties, at the congressional level, have argued that party change was
responsive to changes in the American agenda. This project explores and tests
the degree to which the changes in the electorate also caused changes in the
rules of the House as a response to changing electoral demands. Specifically,
the project tests the following relationship between electoral influences and
institutional change: major rules changes will not occur directly after rapid
and major alterations take place in the coalitions that make up the two major
political parties and in the issues that divide them and dominate politics.
Testing this hypothesis requires the creation of a database on proposed rules
changes in the U.S. House. A major product of the project will be the creation
of a database concerning proposed changes of the rules in the House from the
First through the One Hundredth Congress. Data will not be collected on the size
and cohesion of the political parties in the House since that is available
elsewhere. The primary data source is the Journal of the House of
Representatives for each session of Congress. The Journals for the Sixteenth
through the Hundredth Congress are available at the host institution of the
Principal Investigator. The data collected will be archived with the Inter-
University Consortium for Political and Social Research at the University of
Michigan. This database should enable further research which will enhance
substantially our understanding of the topic.