* 9223912
* Dissertation Research: Comparative Foraging Psychology      of Golden Lion Tamarins and Wied's Marmosets
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 06/30/1994
* USD 8,120.00

A number of primatologists contend that primate and human intelligence evolved
in the context of exploiting "patchily" distributed, high quality food, such as
fruits, as against leaves. Among primates, species that rely on patchy resources
do exhibit larger brains relative to body size than those that rely on evenly
distributed foods. This relationship suggests that the distribution of food has
been important in the evolution of increased brain size and its presumed
cognitive correlates. However, the extent to which primates exhibit particular
cognitive skills adapted to specific foraging problems rather than a general
purpose intelligence suited to a broad range of tasks, is still open to
investigation. This dissertation project will investigate the relationship of
dietary preferences and spatial memory in two primate species. The graduate
student will compare a leaf eating and a fruit eating prosimian is a series of
sophisticated laboratory tests involving spatial memory - defined as their
ability to find and relocate objects in space (the fruit eaters should be
superior). Then, the species will be tested for non-spatial memory, where they
would not be expected to differ. Finally, experiments have been devised which
may examine the mechanisms underlying spatial memory in the different species.