* 9223183
* Operational and Equational Semantics of Process Algebras
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Bard Bloom, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/1996
* USD 255,112.00

Process algebras are a basic tool in the theory of concurrency: a mathematical
model simple enough to analyze and understand, yet complex enough to illustrate
many of the subtleties and problems of concurrency. They have been used for
theory, programming language design, and specification and verification
languages. For sequential languages, a few models of computation suffice.
However, there are a variety of forms of concurrency, and hence a variety of
process algebras. It if therefore essential to: (1) understand the connections
between the many schools of process algebra, (2) have theoretical and computer
tools for designing and analyzing process algebras, and (3) understand
commonalties and metatheory of process algebra, to avoid unnecessarily repeating
the same work in many settings. A general framework for investigating process
algebras in terms of their structured operational semantics (SOS) is formulated
and a surprising connection between SOS and equational definitions established.
In particular, operations that respect the most commonly-used process
equivalences are axiomatizable from their SOS specifications. It is believed
that this connection is theoretically fundamental and of substantial practical
value to researchers. An elaboration of this paradigm should unify two major
communities in process algebra, and provide valuable tools to researchers in
concurrency.