* 9223751
* Workshops on Science, Scientific Thought, and Science       Teaching:  Lima, Peru; July 30- August 10, 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Alberto Cordero, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 12/31/1995
* USD 15,680.00

9223751 Purnell This Americas Program award will partially support a series of
international workshops on science, scientific thought and science teaching, to
take place in Lima, Peru, July 30-August 10, 1993. The U.S. organizers are Dr.
Frederick Purnell and Professor Alberto Cordero, both of Queens College, City
University of New York (CUNY). The Peruvian organizer is Professor Francisco
Miro-Quesada, Director of the Institute for Philosophical Investigations, Lima
University (IDIF), in association with the National Council for Science and
Technology of Peru. The principal goal of the project is to improve scientific
thought and science education in Peru. The first part of the program will
provide advanced college undergraduates and high school teachers with an
overview of recent foundational developments in science, with emphasis on the
growing integration of separate disciplines and the methods and standards of
inquiry employed in today's natural sciences. The workshops are designed to
bring together Peruvian scientists, faculty, and scholars, with scientists from
the international community, for discussions on how to improve the teaching and
content of general courses in the natural sciences and mathematics at the
college level. The program also aims to promote research cooperation between
Peruvian and other Latin America countries and the international participants.