* 9223736
* Household Credit, Default Consequences, and Consumption in the 1930s: The Importance of Institutional Characteristics
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1995
* Martha Olney, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1995
* USD 75,000.00

In 1930, consumption fell more rapidly than is explained by income declines,
turning a bad recession into the Great Depression. Yet despite its importance,
this drop remains unexplained. This project offers an explanation. Household
indebtedness stood at an unprecedented high in 1929. Much of this was
installment debt. Default on an installment contract resulted in wealth-reducing
repossession without compensation. Although installment payments were up to 30
percent of monthly pay, households did not default when income fell in 1930.
This project suggests the unexplained drop in consumption was the means by which
households avoided default: when households anticipated wage cuts, they
immediately reduced consumption so they could pay off their debts and avoid
costly default. The project illustrates the importance of institutional
characteristics. Subsequent change in default consequences lessened the
sensitivity of consumption to current income fluctuations. This project pursues
the analysis of two existing household surveys of income and expenditure; coding
and analysis of a household survey covering the years 1928 and 1933 for the same
families; analysis of the pattern of wage cuts in the 1930s; and historical
analysis of the legal environment governing default consequences, the extent of
default, the prices of used durable goods, and the impact of the practices of
collateralization and securitization on a lender's ability to adjust existing
credit terms.