* 9223969
* Knowledge Shifts in the Study of Crime and Criminal Justice
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Joachim Savelsberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 02/29/1996
* USD 63,922.00

Over the past two decades the United States has experienced an exceptional 200%
increase in incarceration rates and other forms of criminal punishment. At the
same time crime rates were almost stable according to the National Crime
Victimization Survey. There is increasing evidence that the trends in criminal
punishment can only be explained if the production of knowledge and beliefs
about the causes of crime and effects of punishment is considered. Such beliefs
have also undergone radical shifts during this decade. They shifted, for
example, from an image of offenders as socially and psychologically conditioned
to an image of offenders as rational or innately bad, from reform and treatment
strategies to deterrence, retribution and incapacitation, and from discretionary
to mandatory judicial decision-making. The proposed study aims at the
measurement and explanation of knowledge shifts in criminology and criminal
justice studies between 1950 and 1992. This project tests the hypotheses that
the development of scientific knowledge about crime and punishment is a function
of: (1) the emergence of specialized institutions of criminology and criminal
justice studies (i.e., university departments, journals, and professional
associations); (2) extensive government involvement in these trends through
research funding programs; and (3) simultaneous changes in policy positions on
crime and punishment. The findings will improve our understanding of the
relationship between the construction of knowledge and ideology in criminal
justice policy. Data will be collected through content analysis of selected
journals, and validated through surveys of journal editors and interviews with
senior scholars. The source for the content analysis is a sample of 3,800
articles on crime and criminal punishment in scholarly journals. In-depth
analysis will be applied to a smaller subset of articles using the cognitive
mapping approach. The data sets so established will descriptively measure the
actual trends in criminological knowledge between 1950 and 1992 (time series
analysis using SPSS/PC+ Trends). The data set will further undergo multivariate
causal analysis to test the hypothesized impacts of institutional arrangements
on published knowledge, especially the impact of historic time, type of
researcher, research institution, funding source (if any), and place of
publication. This data set will later be combined with other data on knowledge
shifts in media, the political sector, public opinion, and trends in criminal
policy and punishment.