* 9223656
* Modeling the Chemical Activity of Hydrophobic Organic Com-  pounds in Water in the Presence of Co-Solutes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Chad Jafvert, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 08/31/1997
* USD 225,235.00

9223656 Jafvert This is an award to support research, the objective of which is
to determine the aqueous concentrations of select hydrophobic organic compounds,
solubility of is enhanced by the presence of specific co-solutes of intermediate
molecular weight. Research is expected to elucidate the mechanisms of
enhancement and lead to an assessment of the environmental impact this
characteristic has on the mobility and fate of the hydrophobic compounds
selected for study. The investigator plans on using fluorescence quenching
methods in his research to infer mechanistic information at and below the
solubility limits for the selected hydrophobic organic compounds. He expects to
formulate mechanistic and semi-empirical models that characterize the processes
leading to solubility, determine the constants associated with these models and
evaluate the quality of the models by conducting laboratory experiments. Results
of this work are expected to increase our understanding of processes that
control the movement and fate of a class of organic chemicals of limited
solubility in water when they are subjected to environmental conditions that
enhance their solubility. This enhanced understanding may be applied to
assessing and modeling the impacts of hydrophobic hazardous chemicals contained
in aquatic sediments as a step design of physical, chemical and biological
remediation processes.