* 9223109
* Investigating Automated Biomonitoring as Management Tool    Toward the Elimination of Polluants that Adversly Effect    Aquatic Environmental Quality
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* David Gruber, Biological Monitoring Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1995
* USD 249,991.00

This is an award to support Phase II of a research project, Phase I of which was
conducted under NSF Grant No. 91-61351. The research is on determining the
feasibility of using fish ventilatory response profiles in an automated
monitoring system that can continuously detect toxicity of effluents from
wastewater collection and treatment systems. This concept involves a process by
which ventilatory and locomotive behavior responses of fish are analyzed to
determine the presence of toxic substances in the wastewater to which the fish
are exposed and to aid in identification of the responsible substances. The
proposal leading to this award was submitted in accord with criteria in NSF 91-
20, Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR). Results of Phase I supported the
technical feasibility of using fish response as the basis for an automated,
real-time water quality monitoring system to detect the presence of toxics in
water. The objective of Phase II is to determine the commercial feasibility of
this concept which could be used to continuously monitor wastewater for toxics,
to screen water for presence of toxics and to locate their sources. A system
based on this concept could be used to manage operation of biological processes
used in treatment of wastewater.