* 9223131
* Gender Differences in Academic Career Paths Among Economists Scientists, Social Scientists
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Shulamit Kahn, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1997
* USD 34,994.00

The under representation of females among faculty in the fields of science and
engineering has been a concern and a topic of research of many committees,
institutions, and scholars. There seem to be a multitude of causes behind this
under representation of females in scientific academic jobs. Starting from high
school, women seem to drop out of the science/engineering pipeline at
practically every step along the way. This project focuses on the last stage in
this process - the low proportion of women at the associate or full professor
ranks. It is the first study to be based on a continuing panel of PhD's and to
use the panel nature of this data to follow people's careers as they develop
over time. This approach is superior to the cross sectional analysis in other
studies because it controls for the size of the entrant cohort, allows
covariants to have independent effects on the probabilities, and accounts for
people who leave academia. The panel data allow analysis of the entire time
pattern of the likelihood of promotion and comparison of the probabilities of
eventually receiving tenure. This project focuses on gender differences in
promotion in academic jobs in the fields of economics, the other social
sciences, science and engineering. It uses panel data collected by the National
Science Foundation in its biannual survey of Doctorate Recipients. The project
investigates whether women and men who enter academia with similar backgrounds
have the same likelihood of progressing in academic careers and progress at
similar speeds in their careers. Using hazard rate analysis, the project
estimates gender differences in the probabilities of receiving tenure. A similar
approach is used to study the promotion to full professorship. The first stages
of the research will consider the field of economics. Specifications and models
developed for the field of economics will then be extended to other fields with
the social sciences and to science and engineering. The final stage of the
analysis will perform similar on all fields together in order to be able to draw
conclusions about the overall promotion process in academia and on how
differences among fields in the promotion process can be explained by different
characteristics of the fields themselves.