* 9223030
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research:  Intelligent Distributed   Control for Power Plants and Power Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Kwang Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1997
* USD 36,564.00

This award provides funds to permit Dr. Kwang Y. Lee, Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, to pursue with Dr.Young
Moon Park, Department of Electrical Engineering, Seoul National University, for
36 months, a program of cooperative research on intelligent distributed control
for power plants and power systems. These scientists will collaborate in
research to achieve a highly automated control system which will maximize
safety, reliability, and efficiency; minimize pollution; and ensure a rapid and
cost-effective load following capability. The control systems to be developed
will be applicable to nuclear and fossil-fuel power plants. In the present
operating environment, system and controller failures or significant variations
in operating conditions are dealt with by a human operator who must initiate
appropriate control actions. Utility companies, therefore, rely on the
development of extensive and complicated operating procedures and operator
training to cope with the nearly continual changes inherent in normal power
plant operation. The intelligent distributed control approach offers an
alternative by providing fault-accommodating control algorithms and automated
reconfiguration of control strategies. The U.S. and Korean collaborators are
highly respected scientists with proven ability in this field. They have
collaborated successfully in related research under NSF Grant No. INT-8617329.
The present project will add an international cooperative dimension to Dr. Lee's
research under NSF Grant No. EID-9212132 and will allow the collaborators to
combine their talents and interests for mutual benefit. This project is relevant
to the objectives of the U.S.- Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean
participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF).