* 9224787
* Collaborative Research on Spending and Incumbency in        Congressional Elections: A Game-Theoretic Approach
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Thomas Palfrey, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rosalind Wilson
* 01/31/1997
* USD 106,151.00

This project investigates the relationships between campaign spending,
incumbency and electoral outcomes in U.S. Congressional elections. The approach
combines formal political/economic methodologies, statistical modelling, and
analysis of empirical data during the period 1970-1990. The theoretical models
are aimed at understanding the strategic factors underlying spending races
between challengers and incumbents. The game-theoretic approach employed
emphasizes the importance of looking at both causal directions in the vote-
spending connection. In one direction, campaign finance/spending activities
affect margins of victory and can be a deciding factor in who wins an election;
in the other direction, candidate and contributor expectations of how close the
election is likely to be affect campaign finance/spending decisions. Both
directons are important, and the jointness or simultaneity of spending decisions
and voting outcomes leads to difficult statistical problems of measurement and
estimation, as well as raising a number of challenging theoretical issues. Most
previous research focuses primarily on one direction (the first one mentioned
above), and attempts to fit a "vote equation" to measure the effect of spending
on electoral outcomes. The current approach explicitly combines this with an
estimation of "spending equations," where the reciprocal effect of anticipated
closeness is simultaneously estimated with the effect of spending on the final
outcome. This enables the investigators to disentangle some complex interactions
between the variables of primary interest: incumbent spending, challenger
spending, and the vote share of the incumbent. Preliminary results of this
investigation suggest substantial revisions to the central findings of several
prior studies, and point to interesting new directions for investigation within
the framework of this game-theoretic approach. Those new directions, both
theoretical and empirical, form the agenda of this research project.