* 9224722
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research on Molecular          Simulation of Phase Equilibria for Polymeric Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Athanassios Panagiotopoulos, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 08/31/1997
* USD 18,250.00

9224722 Panagiotopoulos This award supports Professor Athanassios
Panagiotopoulos of Cornell University to collaborate in chemical engineering
research with Professor Daan Frenkel of the FOM Institute for Atomic and
Molecular Physics in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Both of their research groups
have been very active in the field of molecular simulation of phase equilibria
and free energy calculations. The primary research objective of their
collaboration is the development of methods for the calculation of phase
equilibria for long-chain polymeric systems, and the application of these new
methods to simple physical models of multisegment molecules. They will use the
results of their calculations for systematic comparisons with statistical
mechanical theories of polymer thermodynamics. They will also attempt some
direct comparisons with experimental data where appropriate. The proposed
research will utilize the complementary skills of the two research groups in
simulations and algorithm development. The determination of the chemical
potentials and phase behavior of macromolecular systems from molecular
simulation is a long-standing problem in statistical mechanics with significant
potential theoretical and practical implications. The collaboration of the
Cornell and FOM groups is likely to contribute substantially to finding a
solution, due to a combination of the powerful new techniques they have recently
developed. ***