* 9224546
* U.S.-U.K. Collaborative Research:  Exponentiation and       O-Minimal Expansions of R
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1998
* C. Ward Henson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1998
* USD 16,249.00

9224546 Marker This three-year award for U.S.-United Kingdom cooperative
research in mathematics involves David E. Marker, C. Ward Henson, Lou van den
Dries of the Chicago and Urbana-Champaign campuses of the University of Illinois
respectively, and Angus Macintyre, Alex Wilkie, Kobi Peterzil of Oxford
University's Mathematics Institute. The objectives of the research is to apply
complex analytical methods to model theory in exponentiation and O- minimal
expansions of R. Model theoretical results obtained so fair show that subsets of
R definable exponentiation behave in many ways like semialgebraic and
subanalytic subsets. The investigators will study finer definability and growth
rate questions of R and extend their results to natural expansions allowing
further analytical structure. This collaboration takes advantage of the
complementary expertise of the Oxford and University of Illinois research
groups. Both have worked extensively on model theory and analysis interface,
exponentiation, and study of complex function defined in exponential terms.
Since exponentially defined semialgebraic and subanalytic sets arise naturally
in many mathematical and engineering fields, this research will advance
understanding of their uses in real algebraic and real analytic geometry,
dynamical systems, control theory, statistics and robotics. ***