* 9224102
* Chemistry Research Group:  Access in Nanoporous             Layered Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1993,11/30/1997
* Thomas Pinnavaia, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 11/30/1997
* USD 1,683,300.00

9224102 Pinnavaia This group award is made in the Advanced Materials and
Processing Program in support of the collaborative research of Professors
Pannavaia, Kanatzidis, Golding, Mahanti and Thorpe at Michigan State University.
Support is provided by the Chemistry Division. One major theme of the research
is access in nanoporous layered materials. Specific elements of the research
will be control of pore size, structural modification of the layers by pillaring
intercalants, and a study of structural and dynamical factors which govern
access in micro- and mesoporous systems. A full complement of synthetic,
characterization and theoretical approaches will be employed. Typical systems
which will be studied are smectite clays, layered double hydroxides and
nanoporous metal chalcogenides. A second major theme is the design, synthesis
and characterization of layered silicate and silicic acid heterostructures.
Layered silicates will be synthesized in which two ions of different solvation
energies are segregated into regularly alternating galleries by spontaneous
self-assembly. These ordered heterostructures containing hydrophobic alkyl onium
ions and hydrophilic inorganic cations will be well suited for acid catalysis
and guest-host chemistry. Another class of materials which will be synthesized
and characterized are layered silicic acid derivatives formed by templated
intragallery hydrolysis-condensation reactions of chiral silicates in the
presence of liquid amines. The nature of the amine will determine the pore
structure and size. These chiral materials will be suitable as catalysts for
asymmetric synthesis and for separation of optical isomers. %%% Nanoporous
layered materials are of high technological interest in catalysis and
separations and are potentially important in electronic, optical and structural
applications. ***