* 9224883
* Eighth and Ninth U.S. Conference On GaAs Manufacturing      Technology, May 16-19, 1993 in Atlanta, GA and May 2-5, 1994in Las Vegas, Nevada
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Daniel Rode, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Linton G. Salmon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 20,000.00

In 1992, the Seventh U.S. Conference on Gallaium-arsenide (GaAs) Manufacturing
Technology (Mantech) was held to provide a forum for the exchange of knowledge
concerning GaAs manufacturing science and technology relating to electronic and
optoelectronic devices and to high-speed integrated circuits. A two-day
presentation of technical papers was held. In addition, the 1992 Mantech
Conference was held in conjunction with a vendors' exhibition, an intensive
workshop on Statistical Process Control and Design of Experiments, an awards
luncheon, and it included a variety of invited presentations from leading
experts in the field The Conference was enthusiastically evaluated by the
attendees and, hence the Eighth and Ninth U.S. Conferences on GaAs Manufacturing
Technology have been organized and will be held May 16 to 19, 1993 in Atlanta,
Georgia and May 2 to 5, 1994 in Las Vegas. The affiliations of the Executive
Committee demonstrate broad industry participation in this effort. Due to the
overwhelmingly favorable response from the attendees, the intimate working
environment of the Conference will be preserved. It will again be targeted for
the U.S. audience and it is expected to consist of about 200 attendees in a
clustered arrangement centered on the presentation and exhibits areas so
participants can interact easily with speakers and other workers in the field.