* 9224726
* Computational Proxies for Genomic Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1993,12/31/1998
* Elizabeth Kutter, Evergreen State College
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 12/31/1998
* USD 97,672.00

9224726 Cushing SDB/RUI: Computational Proxies for Genomic Databases This is
the first year funding of a three-year continuing award. In a perfect world
output from one program could easily be used as input to another. The world of
scientific computing is far from perfect, however, and scientists are plagued
with the task of writing special purpose data conversion programs. Business data
processing are solving interoperability problems by using shared databases.
Unfortunately, current database systems do not serve scientific applications
well. This research addresses the problems of interoperability in the scientific
realm by interfacing databases to computational biology programs. It builds on
previous research in object-oriented databases for computational chemistry
conducted jointly by the Oregon Graduate Institute in Portland, Oregon; Battelle
Pacific Northwest Laboratories in Richland, Washington; Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratories, New York. Results of previous research are being extended to cover
genomic databases by using T4 bacteriophage data (perhaps the most nearly
complete representation of genetic information for any individual organism). The
genomic database is extended to include a "computational proxy mechanism", which
allows for parameterized interface of the T4 data to existing computation-
intensive distributed applications. The research has three objectives: (1) to
demonstrate that previous database work is generalizable to scientific domains
other than computational chemistry, and serviceable as a model for database
interface with so-called "legacy" applications; (2) to make computational
operations as well as genomic data available to the T4 researchers; and (3) to
demonstrate that previous genomic database work in yeasts is transferable to
other sites and organisms. The long term impact of this research is to transfer
the current computing environment that the computational scientists find too
complex to a data-centered approach that improves the interoperability of
scientific data and programs. ***