* 9224941
* U.S.-Iceland Cooperative Research on the Evolutionary       Response of the Plant, Nardus Stricta, to Naturally         Elevated Levels of Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Walter Oechel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1996
* USD 17,950.00

9224941 Oechel This award supports Professor Walter C. Oechel and a graduate
student from San Diego State University to collaborate in physiological ecology
with Professor Bjartmar Sveinbjornsson and others of the Institute of Biology of
the University of Iceland. They will study the long-term effects of elevated
carbon dioxide (CO2) on an arctic plant species (Nardus stricta) which is
thought to have evolved for thousands of years exposed to an elevated CO2
atmosphere near certain mineral springs in Iceland. They will characterize the
physical environment around the springs and measure a large number of
physiological, organismal, and community level features over time. The U.S. team
brings particular expertise in studying physiological and ecosystem-level
responses of plants to CO2, and Dr. Oechel has extensive field experience in the
arctic regions of Alaska. Dr. Sveinbjornsson is an expert in mosses and has
studied the effects of nutrient levels and water stress on plants in arctic
ecosystems. Environmental measurements will be a shared responsibility; studies
of Nardus stricta will be done principally by the U.S. participants, and
complementary studies of a moss species will be carried out by the Icelandic
scientists. The collaborative nature of this project is essential to its
success, since no single research group has the necessary site access and
biological expertise. The concentration of CO2 is increasing in the atmosphere
due to the burning of fossil fuels and deforestation. Experimental research to
examine its effects on plant growth suggest that short-term exposure to higher
CO2 can stimulate growth, which has encouraged a number of observers. However,
other more recent studies have demonstrated that long term exposure (over a
year) may have little or no positive effect, and may even accelerate the
depletion of other nutrients needed by plants. The mineral springs of Iceland
make an excellent and possibly unique model system for studying the long-term
effects of elevated CO2 on vegetation in a natural environment with minimal
manipulation. The proposed research has the potential to answer important
questions about how human-induced CO2 elevation will affect world vegetation and
carbon balance in the arctic. ***