* 9224304
* U.S.-Western Europe Workshop on Quantifier Elimination      and Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition; Linz, Austria;     October, 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1995
* Bobby Caviness, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1995
* USD 15,250.00

9224304 Caviness This award supports the participation of eleven U.S.
mathematicians and computer scientists (including seven graduate students) in a
small symposium about computer algebra to be held near Linz, Austria, in
October, 1993. The meeting is co-organized by Professors Bobby F. Caviness of
the University of Delaware, Jeremy Johnson of Drexel University and Bruno
Buchberger of the Research Institute for Symbolic Computation (RISC) at the
Johannes Kepler University in Linz, Austria. Though established only a few years
ago, RISC has become a major center in areas of mathematics and computer science
relevant to a process known as cylindrical algebraic decomposition (CAD). The
symposium will bring together many leading researchers from Europe and the U.S.
for the first time to review and synthesize current knowledge about (CAD). There
will be a one-day tutorial workshop in advance of the symposium to introduce the
fundamentals to the non-expert participants (principally U.S. and Austrian
graduate students and recent PhD's.) Proceedings will be published in a
forthcoming RISC series on symbolic computation that will be published by
Springer-Verlag. Cylindrical algebraic decomposition is a process devised to
obtain an improved quantifier elimination method for the theory of elementary
algebra and geometry. Many important mathematical problems can be stated in this
theory and solved through quantifier elimination. CAD is therefore a major
breakthrough in automating mathematics and it has important applications in many
recent technologies (e.g., robot motion.) As part of the broader field of
symbolic computation, requiring extensive training in both computer systems and
formal mathematics, it opens some of the most promising directions for future
software development. ***