* 9224846
* Workshops on the Future of Archaeological and               Ethnohistorical Investigation in Greater Nicoya;            Costa Rica/Nicaragua; May, 1993
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1993,02/28/1995
* Frederick Lange, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 02/28/1995
* USD 20,025.00

This Americas Program award will support three research oriented workshops in
Costa Rica and Nicaragua focused on "The Future of Archaeological and
Ethnohistorical Investigation in Greater Nicoya (Southwestern Nicaragua and
Northwestern Costa Rica)." The principal organizer of the workshops is Dr.
Frederick W. Lange of the University of Colorado, Boulder, in collaboration with
Professor Oscar Fonseca of the University of Costa Rica, Francisco Corrales of
the National Museum of Costa Rica and Lic. Rafael Gonzalez Rivas of the National
Museum of Nicaragua. The primary workshop will examine the data bases for
different parts of the Greater Nicoya subarea and address broad issues such as
patterns of social organization, cultural evolutionary continuity and other
themes. It will provide a forum to the participants for discussing the nature
and status of the cultures of the region and for coordinating future research in
the area. The two secondary workshops will provide diffusion of workshop results
among the larger professional communities in each country. This critically
important region is lacking in systematic studies with a regional focus. The
workshop will define research priorities in this area and explore the most
efficient means for meeting those needs. The conference, which will be hosted by
the Governor of the Province of Guanacaste, Costa Rica and receive some support
from the Nicaraguan Institute of Culture, should further international
cooperation and advance collaborative research between U.S. and Latin American
Scientists.