* 9224356
* FASEB Summer Conference on Chromatin and Transcription,     June 27-July 2, 1993, Copper Mountain, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1994
* Alan Wolffe, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 11/30/1994
* USD 10,000.00

This second conference on Chromatin and Transcription is to be held under the
auspices of the Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB)
June 27-July 2 in Copper Mountain, Colorado. Participation will be limited to
150 scientists (including speakers and moderators), selected on the basis of
their expertise and interest in this area and their expected contribution to the
success of the program. It will be the second meeting entirely devoted to
Chromatin and Transcription: the critical analysis of our current understanding
of how nuclear organization contributes to gene regulation and the evaluation of
the most fruitful avenues for further investigation. The Conference will consist
of nine sessions, each with three or four speakers and a discussion leader,
selected among investigators who have made seminal contributions to the field
and from younger investigators in the program. The participation of established
and promising female scientists and minority scientists will be actively
encouraged. This meeting on "Chromatin and Transcription" should serve as a
catalyst for stimulating the interest of scientists who may already have the
tools in hand to approach gene regulation in the context of nuclear structure,
with focus upon those young scientists who are yet to initiate a major area of
independent research. %%% This meeting of scientists will discuss how the
molecular structure of genes is involved in the cellular production of enzymes
and other proteins. It is important to know what is different in the structure
of genes that are actively producing blueprints for the production of proteins
versus other genes that are not active in this manner. Understanding the
chromatin structure is considered a key aspect in this field. This area of
genetics has rapidly progressed over the past few years and this conference will
bring the best talent available for the exchange of information.