* 9224648
* Aggregate Implication of Complementarities:  Machine        Replacement, Income Distribution, and Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* Russell Cooper, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 12/31/1996
* USD 183,612.00

The purpose of this project is to analyze three broad issues: machine
replacement and aggregate business fluctuations, team dynamics, and business
cycle behavior. The first topic involves the aggregate implication of machine
replacement which entails the replacement of old machines with new, more
productive ones. Previous work has focused on seasonal fluctuations induced by
retooling in the automobile industry during the both interwar and post WW II
periods. The extensions will involve looking more broadly over other industries
to focus on the connection between machine replacement and the business cycle
and to evaluate competing theoretical models of seasonal productivity
fluctuations. The second topic concerns the relationship between
complementarities in the production process and the distribution of income. Here
the assignment of individuals to teams (e.g. firms) is analyzed focusing on the
induced dynamics of the income distribution, paying particular attention to
persistent income inequality. The third topic continues previous work on net
business formation, bank runs, and the importance of technological non-
convexities for aggregate fluctuations. This research is important because it
will provide a better understanding of factors influencing economic fluctuations
and the distribution of income.