* 9224213
* Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Zeta Functions in      Number Theory and Geometric Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1993,04/30/1994
* Steve Zelditch, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 04/30/1994
* USD 8,000.00

Zeta functions play a well-recognized role in many areas of mathematics. In
1992-93, the Japan-US Mathematical Institute at Johns Hopkins University is
hosting a special year on zeta functions in number theory and in geometric
analysis. This award is for a conference to be held March 29- April 3,1993, to
bring together researchers in these subjects. Visitors to Hopkins during Spring
1993 in areas related to number theoretic zeta functions include A. Gyoja, T.
Kimura, D. Meuser, F. Sato, and T. Yano. Visitors in areas related to the
geometric analysis aspects include T. Adachi, A. Katsuda, Y. Petridis, and T.
Sunada. One connection between these two areas is the study of zeta functions
associated to quotients of symmetric spaces, e.g. in the spectral theory of
automorphic forms. Another is the study of the fine structure of the zeroes of
various L-functions, which resembles that of the eigen-values of various
Laplacians. A more informal connections is that the principal researchers in
these areas often have an intense interest in the strong analogies between their
work and that in areas not directly related. We will describe the two areas
separately below, but in the second part (zeta functions in geometric analysis)
we will try to indicate some of the overlap between number-theoretic and
geometric-analytic zeta functions. This project proposes a conference on zeta
functions in number theory and geometric analysis, with emphasis on the
following subjects: (i) zeta functions of prehomogeneous vector spaces and Igusa
zeta functions; (ii) the zeta functions which arise in the spectral theory of
the Laplacian. The proposed conference is planned so as to take advantage of the
concentration of experts in these areas present at Johns Hopkins in connection
with the concentration year held by the Japan-U.S. Mathematical Institute.