* 9224537
* Pre-Impact Preparedness and Post-Impact Restoration         Activities Following Hurricane Andrew
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1994
* Walter Peacock, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 09/30/1994
* USD 41,382.00

Preparation for and response to rapid onset physical events such as earthquakes,
tornadoes, and hurricanes test the ability of social systems to provide and meet
the survival needs of a human population. This research will examine household
pre-impact preparedness and post-impact restoration activities in South Florida
following Hurricane Andrew. The central focus will be an examination of the
ethnic differences in household response to warning and subsequent preparations
as well as specific restorative activities undertaken following impact.
Household preparation activities refer to potential loss of life and damage to
property. Household restoration activities include those actions undertaken by
households to deal with the emergency situation following impact and short-term
actions undertaken to restore some semblance of normal household function. The
multi-ethnic nature of South Florida will allow for a more complete examination
and assessment of ethnic variation in these activities. This research will
combine a field survey of approximately 300 households located in heavily
impacted areas and telephone surveys of approximately 1000 households serviced
by Miami media markets and in the hurricane warning zone to assess ethnic
variations in preparedness and restoration activities. While the literature has
often alluded to ethnic variations in disaster activities, the nature of these
variations has yet to be fully research. Social science literature is replete
with discussions of the importance of race and ethnicity for employment, income,
education, socioeconomic status, housing quality and ownership, access to
political power, family organization and structure, and the like. All of these
factors play critical roles in preparedness and restoration activities. In
addtion, there are often language and other cultural differences among ethnic
populations, such as those of South Florida. From both a theoretical and applied
perspective, it is important to understand the role of ethnicity in disaster
response and management.