* 9224538
* Psychological and Physiological Effects of a Natural        Disaster
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1993
* James Rotton, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 09/30/1993
* USD 14,179.00

The purpose of this research is to obtain post-disaster measures on the
psychological well-being of residents following hurricane Andrew. The
investigator has pre-disaster data on 313 South Florida students which includes
measures of demographics, distress, health, performance, cardiovascular and
biochemical indices, and other moderators such as dispositional optimism,
personal control, social support, and type of coping. Post- disaster data will
now be collected and analyzed using the same measures. Related variables will be
grouped together and then subjected to multivariate analyses of variance and
covariance. The analyses will be complemented by moderator variable regression
analyses aimed at identifying social and personality variables that have helped
residents cope following Hurricane Andrew. The pre- and post- design that is now
possible will allow more definitive conclusions to be drawn than the vast
majority of studies on natural disasters, which have employed retrospective
measures and static control group designs. The study should overcome several
other limitations of past studies in this area. First, other studies have
ignored important theoretical distinctions such as the difference between threat
and harm appraisal. This project will compare the reactions of students who live
in areas that sustained major damage from the hurricane with those of students
who were also threatened but did not suffer damage. Second, other studies have
done little more than classify respondents as being victims or not victims of a
disaster. In this study, one can see undamaged residences standing next to
totally destryed homes, and a questionnaire has been designed to assess actual
hardship. Third, other studies in this area have employed reactive procedures.
Respondents have known that they are being interviewed because they experienced
a major catastrophe. This will be avoided in this study by obtaining data from
students as part of the "standard" program of testing that goes on in psychology
departments. It is only after respondents have answered items on measures of
psychological distress that they will be asked to complete the Hurricane
Questionnaire.