* 9224386
* Group International Travel Grant to Attend Workshop in      Frankfort, Germany, May 1994.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1998
* John McGrath, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1998
* USD 23,925.00

9224386 McGrath This project provides support for a group of American
engineering faculty and industry partners to attend a workshop to be held in
Frankfurt, Germany, May 10-15, 1994. The workshop will focus on academic-
industry partnerships in relation to training American engineers to produce
goods and services for the world marketplace, thereby enhancing American global
competitiveness. The primary goal of the workshop is to develop a collaborative
program between universities and industry in which German companies as well as
American companies with German subsidiaries accept American engineering students
for summer industrial-academic experiences in Germany. The program will involve
chemical and mechanical engineering students. The workshop will be organized by
the German organization, DECHEMA, in cooperation with the National Science
Foundation and the DAAD (Deutscher Akademmischer Austauschdienst). Participants
will include US and German industry and academic representatives as well as
government and foundation representatives - all of whom will be selected on the
basis of interest and experience with such international engineering programs.
Support is requested for transportation costs and living expenses for workshop
participants. Industry representatives will be encouraged to cover all of their
own expenses if possible. ***