* 9224176
* Controlled Competitive Vulcanization of Rubber Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1996
* Jack Koenig, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/1996
* USD 300,000.00

This research proposal involves the controlled use of competitive vulcanization
to develop blended elastomeric systems with enhanced physical and mechanical
properties. The only presently viable technique which offers the opportunity to
study the chemical structure and distribution of crosslinks between the
components of the rubber blend is solid state 13C NMR spectroscopy. It is now
possible to obtain high resolution NMR spectra of these insoluble networks and
to use these spectra to determine the microstructures and the chemical nature
and number of the crosslinks in accelerated vulcanized elastomeric systems. The
role of differential solubility and reactivity of vulcanizing agents, coupled
with their diffusion from one polymer phase to another, in determining the
nature and extent of crosslinking in the individual phases of the blend has not
been determined. Our present knowledge of the specific chemical reactions during
vulcanization of rubber blends is insufficient to permit the design of optimum
accelerator systems, mixing processes and the appropriate cure cycles for rubber
blends which will lead to products with specific improvements in the physical or
mechanical properties. Competitive covulcanization of polymer blends is playing
an increasing role in rubber production. To optimize the vulcanization process
they must understand the microstructures and crosslinks developed separately in
the components of the blends during the vulcanization process. Techniques have
been developed for the study of the blend composition, blend microstructure and
distribution of fillers between the phases of a blend, but no technique has been
developed for estimating the chemical nature and extent of crosslinking in the
different rubber phases of the blend. Without a knowledge of how to control the
competitive crosslinking process, competitive vulcanization will continue to be
empirical in its applications to rubber.