* 9224173
* Metabolic Adaptations for Extended Fasting
* O/D,OPP
* 06/15/1993,11/30/1997
* Ian Stirling, Carle Foundation Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 11/30/1997
* USD 314,022.00

Seasonal food shortages constitute an important environmental challenge for many
mammals. Some of the longest fasts undertaken by mammals occur when bears enter
dens in autumn and remain there over winter without access to food or water.
During their winter fast, bears maintain near normal body temperature, recycle
nitrogenous wastes produced by metabolic processes associated with protein
turnover, produce no net urine, and thus, protect body proteins. Unlike other
species of bears, polar bears, can adopt these characteristic protein sparing
mechanisms at any time of the year, not just during winter. In consequence,
polar bears are one of the most proficient mammals at undertaking extended
fasts. In order to meet the challenge of seasonal fasts, many mammals accrete
energy as body fat during periods of food abundance, and draw on these stores
when food is scarce. The energetic costs associated with the sophisticated
protein sparing abilities of bears when fasting are presumably met from
breakdown of such lipid stores. Polar bears eat heavily from late April through
June, when recently weaned seal pups are available in large numbers. When prey
is abundant, polar bears may consume only the blubber of the seals and leave the
muscle mass untouched. During such feasting periods polar bears may have the
highest dietary intake of lipids of any mammal and their fatty tissue depots
expand rapidly. At times of maximal storage fat tissue depots may constitute
more than 50% of the total body mass, but after extended fasting these may be
reduced to less than 10% of body mass. The period of feasting may be only 6-8
weeks long; while fasting may exceed 8 months. Using stable-isotope labeled
metabolites as tracers, we propose to carry out detailed, long-term monitoring
of metabolic pathways in individual feeding and fasting polar bears throughout
their annual cycle. This study will be the first to use state-of-the-art
isotopic methodologies to investigate the means whereby free-ranging bears are
able to switch so rapidly into a physiological state whereby long-term fasting
is possible. This research will add significantly to our knowledge of the
metabolic capabilities of one of the most important predators in the Arctic
environment as well as advance our fundamental biochemical knowledge of feast
and fast cycles.