* 9224134
* Symmetrical Metal Alkoxides and Amides:  Reactivity and     Structural Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1997
* John Verkade, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 09/30/1997
* USD 255,000.00

Professor John Verkade of Iowa State University will investigate "atrane"
coordination compounds with support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organometallic Program. These are highly symmetrical compounds with polycyclic
alkoxide and amide-type ligands. One class of compounds will place the metal
center in a C3v environment with an axial amine. The other class will be
similar, but with a C2v (quasi-fourfold) environment. Both transition metal and
main-group metal centers will be used. The initial studies will focus on
synthesis of these interesting species. Verkade will also conduct mechanistic
studies of their transmetallations, axial ligand displacements, and other
reactions. An unusual technique to be employed will be 119Sn, 51V, and 73Ge NMR
spectroscopy. %%% "Atranes" are an interesting class of compounds in which a
central metal atom is bound symmetrically to three or four oxygen atoms in a
plane, while a nitrogen atom is bound axially. In such compounds the central
metal can be systematically varied, as can other features of the molecules.
Their high symmetry endows them with high volatility, which provides an unusual
mechanism for transporting the central metal atom. The synthesis of such
compounds, as well as a study of their reactivity is the subject of the present
grant.