* 9224474
* U.S.-Malaysia Cooperative Research: Bloom Dynamics and      Physiology of the Toxic Red Tide Dinoflagellate Pyrodinium  Bahamensa from Malaysia.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/29/1996
* USD 20,000.00

9224474 Anderson This proposal requests funds to permit dissertation improvement
research, in Malaysia, by Mr. Gires Usup, a Ph.D. student in the Boston
University Marine Program, Woods Hole, MA, under the direction of Dr. Donald M.
Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, within a 24-month period, on the
bloom dynamics and physiology of the toxic red tide dinoflagellate Pyrodinium
bahamensa. Recurring outbreaks of toxic red tides on the west coast of Sabah,
Malaysia, have caused serious public health and economic problems in that
region. Physiological and toxicity studies are currently underway on a
laboratory culture of an isolate from Sabah. The present study is the field
component of the dissertation project aimed at understanding the bloom dynamics
of red tide outbreaks on the west coast of Sabah. Sampling cruises and
monitoring programs will be used to quantitatively characterize the spatial and
temporal distribution of this toxic dinoflagellate, the movement of its
populations, and the biological events that take place during bloom development.
The relationship between bloom occurrence, the physical characteristics of the
water column, and meteorological conditions also will be quantitatively
analyzed. Harmful or noxious algal blooms are becoming increasingly common in
many coastal regions of the world. When the causative dinoflagellate is a toxic
species, suspension-feeding bivalves concentrate the potent neurotoxins in their
tissues. Consumption of these shellfish leads to paralytic shellfish poisoning
which can be fatal to human beings, especially, children. Dr. Anderson is a
recognized authority on red tide dinoflagellates. Mr. Usup, on leave from his
position as Lecturer, Marine Sciences Department, University Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Sabah Campus, also has research publications in this field. Mr.
Norhadi Ismail, a co-author with Mr. Usup in these studies at Universiti
Kebangsaan Malaysia, will collaborate in the present research. Th is project is
relevant to the objectives of the East Asia and Pacific Program which encourages
proposals for activities in regions such as Southeast Asia where interactions
between U.S. and foreign investigators have been limited. ***