* 9224157
* Symposium: Molecular Genetics of Plant-Microbe Interactions East Brunswick, New Jersey, April 21 - 24, 1993
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1993
* Barbara Zilinskas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 12/31/1993
* USD 6,000.00

This award provides partial support for a symposium entitled, "Molecular
Genetics of Plant-Microbe Interactions," to be held on April 21 - 24, 1993, at
Rutgers University. One of the topical areas of plant biology research involves
the molecular investigation of the interactions between plants and their
parasitic and mutualistice microbes. From these investigations, insights into
plant molecular biology and the molecular biology of many types of
microorganisms have been gained. The study of the molecular genetics of these
interactions moves at such a rapid pace that constant update is critical to
keeping pace with the field. This symposium is organized to provide a forum for
such an update. The symposium is divided into three types of sessions. Formal
presentations will be given by leaders in the field each morning and early
afternoon. Workshops covering specific topics will be held each afternoon,
allowing for interactive discussions among smaller groups of participants.
Finally, opportunity for other meeting participants to present their results
will be provided through poster sessions. This meeting is international and
multidisciplinary in scope, with authoritative speakers and workshop
participants drawn from seven countries. In addition to the invitees of
international stature, included in the program are speakers and workshop
participants who are more junior, but who have already established high quality
research programs. This symposium is also structured to interest many, and be
affordable for young investigators.