* 9224229
* Dissertation Research:  Brazil Nut Regeneration and Seedling Autecology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Mary Duryea, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1997
* USD 22,000.00

Global attention has focused on the recently created extractive reserves in the
Brazilian Amazon as a promising new land use strategy that encourages the
simultaneous use and conservation of the rainforest. Although the extractive
community has utilized and managed the forest for decades, this new mandate
coupled with increasing population densities demands a higher level of
management sophistication. The scientific community can play an important role
in the testing of various production strategies open to these rainforest
producers; however, research has been very limited. The proposed research will
assist extractivists in Acre, Brazil in evaluating technological options
designed to increase sustainable production of the native species, Brazil nut
(Bertholletia excelsa Humb. & Bompl.), valued for its many traditional uses and
great economic value. Study objectives are to examine: (1) Brazil nut seed
germination success comparing the effects of date of fruit fall, seed size, and
seed pretreatment. These data will provide practical information for seed
collection and storage as well as specific scientific data on the causes of the
observed slow and uneven germination. (2) Brazil nut seedling establishment
success in three areas within the reserves: (a) Forest gaps, (b) Shifting
cultivation plots, and (c) Pastures, employing two inexpensive planting
techniques and post-planting regimes. These experiments will determine how
Brazil nut responds physiologically to varied planting environments, and what
factors limit seedling establishment and early growth. (3) Role of Brazil nut in
the extractivist production system, comparing traditional uses and management of
the species with changes to the system created by the introduced Brazil nut
enrichment technologies. %%% Documentation of traditional management and uses
will assist in understanding indigenous techniques that have maintained the
species over generations and may yield valuable information for development of
potential market products. Understanding changes generated by the new
establishment technologies will facilitate critical evaluation on a socio-
economic and biological level.