* 9224776
* SGER:  Collaborative Research:  Hurricane Andrew Effects on Forest Composition in the Everglades
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1995
* Suzanne Koptur, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1995
* USD 15,000.00

When Hurricane Andrew slammed into Everglades National Park with wind gust over
170 mph, it deciminated the local forest while leaving areas of open wetlands
largely unharmed. Trees were stripped of al their leaves, most branches were
broken off, and m any trees were toppled or shattered. Only a few trees remained
standing in some mangrove forests. Evergreen woodlands were transformed from
lush forest to brown tangles of leafless debris. Bald cypress and slash pine
forest were also heavily damaged. Although Andrew was a natural disaster of
enormous scale, hurricanes in the region have been frequent in the past and must
have been an important force shaping these forests. As the first major hurricane
to directly strike the Park in over 25 years, Hurricane Andrew presents a rare
opportunity to investigate the speed and patterns of forest recovery. This
information is important because forests make up critical fish and wildlife
habitats and recreational areas with the Everglades, even though the Everglades
are commonly thought of as open wetlands. Both the degree of damage and the
speed with which trees can regrow will determine which species make up a post-
hurricane forest. The native tree species within the Park appear to differ
greatly in their abilities both to withstand hurricane-force winds and to regrow
after hurricane damage. The recovering forest should be composed of those tree
species that were damaged the least, those that can resprout the fastest, as
well as those that can invade open areas. Research will focus on the extent of
damage to the trees species within mangrove, tropical hardwood, pine, and
cypress forests in Everglades National Park. Data will also be taken on which
species recover from damage, how fast they recover, and which species colonize
open areas in the forests left by the hurricane. This information will help to
predict what the recovered forests should look like as well as understand how
hurricanes have affected these forests in the past.