* 9224079
* The Impact of Civil Rights Laws on the Economic Welfare     of Minorities
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1995
* James Heckman, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1995
* USD 171,946.00

The effectiveness of law in producing social change has long been a matter of
debate, and there is no more important focus for this debate than the impact of
civil rights laws on the economic welfare of minorities. Many have argued
recently that federal civil rights policy has been of little value in enhancing
the economic welfare of blacks in American society. With relative black economic
gains largely stalled since the mid-1970's, there is considerable policy
interest in determining whether and to what extent past governmental initiatives
have contributed to black progress. Given the complex and varied economic,
social, and governmental initiatives that were unfolding at the time, it will be
a work of major significance to sort out more precisely the factors that
generated large relative economic gains in the decade after 1964. This research
will apply a more comprehensive and rigorous research design to assess recent
claims that: 1) the Supreme Court's decision in Brown had no important impact on
the civil rights movement or on the evolution of black economic progress; 2)
employment discrimination law has served little function because virtually all
of black economic advance has come from long-term trends of migration and
improved education; and 3) the breakthrough of black employment in the textile
industry merely represents the removal of Southern segregationist legislation,
and that without such legal restrictions competitive markets quickly eradicate
any adverse effects of private discrimination. This grant will support a
comprehensive assessment of all aspects of the total federal effort directed
against a way of life that excluded blacks from many sectors of Southern society
in order to capture the impact of civil rights policy, including spillovers to
successful employment of challenges to school segregation and voting exclusion.
The research will demonstrate that a complex pattern of law - both
segregationist and antidiscrimination - emerged over time and in different
states and regions. The investigators will use this temporal and geographic
variation in the institutional structure confronting blacks as the basis for
explaining the different patterns of black economic growth in different states
and regions. In addition, the investigators will compile a significant data set
on school quality by state and race (where possible) going back to 1890. Once
the investigators have documented the evolving patterns of the educational
attainment of blacks and whites and the legal environments promoting or
restricting black opportunities, they will append this information to the data
on income and education found in the decennial Census tapes from 1940-1990. This
will permit the investigators to undertake a comprehensive econometric
assessment of the factors that have contributed to black economic advance.