* 9224559
* A Cooperative, Spatial, and Evolutionary Medical Database   System
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Wesley Chu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/1997
* USD 405,000.00

9224559 Chu SDB: A Cooperative, Spatial, and Evolutionary Biomedical Database
System This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award. The
objective of this research is to develop a distributed knowledge-based
multimedia database system for biomedical applications with cooperative query
answering capabilities. The system will be able to access data in image
databases by content (features, objects, etc.). In particular, the proposed data
model captures spatial and evolutionary semantics and thus greatly enhances
high-level query capabilities. The image objects and their features are obtained
from segmentation software and are stored in the database. Using rules derived
from domain knowledge, approximate and conceptual queries may be answered.
Additional information relevant to a query cay be provided by associating
different hierarchies of subjects. Type abstraction hierarchies (TAHs)
generalize a query's scope while the relaxation control, based on user profiles
and query context, trims the TAHs and keeps the generalizations manageable and
appropriate. An explanation system tracks the relaxation path and provides a
measure of the nearness of the approximate answer to the exact one. These
concepts are validated in a testbed linked with radiology image databases. The
joint research between the UCLA Computer Science Department and the School of
Medicine assures that the prototype systems are of direct interest to radiology
research and practice. The results of this research are extensible to other
multimedia database applications. ***