* 9224513
* RUI:  Radiative Transfer Modeling and Cloud Optical PropertyRetrievals in 3-D Cloud Fields
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1997
* Ronald Welch, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/1997
* USD 433,700.00

The primary thrust of this investigation is the development of radiative
transfer codes for cumulus and stratocumulus cloud fields which simulate
realistic 3-D cloudiness. To date almost all studies of inhomogeneous cloud
fields reported in the literature have assumed cubic clouds arrayed in
checkerboard patterns. However, real cumulus clouds can be approximated as
parabolic ellipsoids in shape with the cloud surfaces approximated with a
fractional Brownian (fractal) model. Furthermore, cloud fields are clustered
rather than regularly distributed. The intent of this investigation is to model
cloud field radiative properties with these realistic cloud properties. There
are three components to this study: 1) Cloud will be modeled using realistic
cloud 3-D parameters. 2) Radiative transfer models will be constructed to
simulate real cumulus and stratocumulus cloud fields over 30 km x 30 km regions.
3) Cloud optical property retrievals will be made for selected cumulus and
stratocumulus cloud fields using FIRE field Observations. The basic premise
guiding this research effort is that effective cloud radiative parameterizations
can be constructed as we gain a more complete understanding of the impact of
brokenness upon the cloud radiative properties. This research is important for a
fundamental understanding of climate and climate feedback processes.