* 9224333
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Robert Alford, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1994
* USD 7,500.00

The socialization of lawyers is an important factor in shaping the legal
profession, both with respect to the behavior patterns that characterize legal
practice and with respect to the attitudes that underlie the role of lawyers in
society. Since lawyers have a powerful and pervasive influence on the social
fabric, it is important to understand their professional development. It is well
known that the techniques used by law schools in training students to "think
like lawyers" have a formative effect on the ways in which law school graduates
then approach their professional tasks and obligations. The socializing effects
of different kinds of law firms have received far less scholarly attention, in
part because of the difficulty of gaining access to firms in order to observe
and interview attorneys at work. Since law firms, like all organizations,
develop their own occupational cultures, it is argued that cultural expectations
and pressures will vary depending on how different professional perspectives
dominate from firm to firm. It is also likely that these perspectives fall into
a few distinct patterns that will lead to a systematic way to categorize the
socialization of lawyers in firms. This doctoral dissertation will be based on
interviews with 25-30 first- through third-year associates at each of the 30
largest law firms in New York City, where structural variables such as size,
rates of growth, span of control and type of work done are similar. The study
hypothesizes that these firms will exhibit one of two distinct types of
organizational culture, termed collegial-driven and market-driven. Six measures
of differences in organizational culture will be employed: date of formation,
external and internal spacial relations, professional hierarchy, recruitment and
promotion styles, division of professional labor, and command and control
regimes. Additional interviews will include partners responsible for hiring,
junior associate oversight and training, practice administration, and firm
mamagement, as well as former associates of each firm. The research will make
important theoretical contributions to our understanding of the processes
affecting professionalization in general, and specifically of the development of
professional identity and values among lawyers. The latter has important
implications for the design of legal practice and organization, as well.