* 9224039
* Molecular Collision Dynamics: State-Resolved Studies by     "Half-Collision" Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* William Stwalley, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 08/31/1996
* USD 285,300.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professors P. Kleiber, K. Sando, and W. Stwalley of the University of
Iowa will continue their investigations of the chemical dynamics of the reaction
of hydrogen molecules with excited metal atoms, especially energy transfer
collisons by means of state-selective half-collision techniques. Also continued
are studies of the near threshold photodissociation dynamics of alkali diatomic
molecules. %%% The proposed experiments on reactions between excited metal atoms
and molecules will serve to test theoretical models for such processes.
Significant deviations from the theoretically predicted behavior will require a
revision of a model or at least place limits on its range of validity.
Theoretical models also exist for the photodissociation of alkali diatomic
molecules. In these models a dissociation is often viewed as a "half-collision"
analog of a full collision process, the latter consisting of two incoming and
two emerging particles. Such theories are, however, often not amenable to simple
physical interpretation and can not easily be applied to complex dissociation
processes. In some cases of current interest, such as collisions between ultra-
cold atoms, the underlying physics is not understood well enough to allow
application of any of the theoretical methods with confidence. The experiments
done in this research will provide information that will assist in the
clarification of many questions in the domain of collision and photodissociation
dynamics.