* 9224602
* Discovering Motifs in Scientific Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1997
* Jason Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Program Director
* 01/31/1997
* USD 166,952.00

9224602 Wang SDB: Discovering Motifs in Scientific Databases This is the first
year funding of a three-year continuing award. This research is carried out in
collaboration with Bruce Shapiro, National Institutes of Health. Scientific
progress often results from discovering structural commonalities that explain
similar behavior. For example, in molecular biology, a set of proteins or DNA
sequences may express similar functionality in nature. This project aims to help
scientists discover common sequence or topological patterns that explain the
similarity. Pattern discovery entails generating pattern guesses in a systematic
way and testing them. The tests are based on approximate pattern matching
algorithms that yield distance metrics. Thus, commonalities may be approximate.
The main research milestones are a family of algorithms for pattern discovery,
query processing, data organization and index manipulation. The algorithms are
to be tested on data drawn from the National Institutes of Health and from
public genome databases. Whereas some of the algorithms are specific to the
combinatorial structures present in biology, many of the techniques should
generalize to any application that seeks to find patterns in databases. This
project will help scientists discover patterns in large databases that determine
natural behavior. Such patterns may lead to new drug design or to new
treatments. ***