* 9224235
* Dissertation Research:  Effects of Elevated CO2 on Soil     Carbon Dynamics:  An Isotope Tracer Study
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1995
* NONE NONE, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 07/31/1995
* USD 14,900.00

Increasing atmospheric CO2 may have profound effects on ecosystem carbon
dynamics that could feed back to mitigate or exacerbate climate change. Through
some studies have examined the effects of elevated CO2 on whole system carbon
balance, few, if any, have examined its effects on soil respiration and soil
carbon storage; these ecosystem processes will likely control whole-system
feedbacks to climate change. Furthermore, it is important to understand how
elevated CO2 affects the oxidation of different pools of soil carbon (relatively
recent photosynthate, litter, and old soil organic matter), because if these
pools respond differently, whole-system carbon storage and carbon allocation
could be dramatically altered. In this proposal, the student request funding to
examine the effects of elevated CO2 on the importance of rhizodeposits (carbon
deposited belowground by plant roots), a single plant litter cohort, and
remaining soil organic matter, in contributing to soil respiration in an annual
grassland ecosystem. He will also investigate the effect of elevated CO2 on
carbon storage in soil organic matter pools with longer turnover times. The
proposed research offers a novel method of partitioning soil respiration into
contributions of roots and microorganisms using a stable carbon isotope tracer,
will contribute to a mechanistic understanding of the effects of elevated CO2 on
soil carbon cycling, and will help refine his predictions of biological
feedbacks to global climate change.