* 9224067
* Dissertation Research:  The Ecological Implications of HabitFragmentation:  A Field Manipulation of Patch Size and      Connectivity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* NONE NONE, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1995
* USD 6,600.00

The phenomenon of habitat fragmentation, when remnants of native vegetation are
reduced in size and separated from adjacent, continuous habitat, is extremely
widespread and poses one of the most serious threats to the earth's biological
diversity. Ecological observations of habitat fragments have shown that in
general, species diversity decreases as patch size decreases. Vegetated
connections between fragments are often used by animals, and are presumed to
increase the probability of species' persistence in fragments. However, studies
published to date have several major limitations: Patches are typically not
measured prior to isolation; it has rarely been shown that animals
preferentially use connections between patches; and organisms' basic life
history characteristics are often not examined in relation to their numerical
response to habitat fragmentation. No studies are published which have
experimentally manipulated both fragment size and connectivity under field
conditions and compared species' responses in the manipulated plots to those in
adjacent control plots. The research proposed here, to be done in native mixed-
grass prairie near Boulder, Colorado, USA, involves experimentally creating
habitat patches of three sizes and manipulating presence or absence of
connectivity to adjacent, continuous habitat. The research will also simulate
the spatial configurations in four basic sequences of land transformation and
fragmentation: edge strip sequence, corridor sequence, dispersed patch sequence,
dispersed patch sequence and four nuclei sequence. The four sequences will
simultaneously convert equal areas of grassland from intact to cleared habitat,
but the spatial configuration of the intact habitat will vary among sequences.
By studying insect dynamics, he will be able to examine the extent to which
animal populations are impeded or enhanced by fragmentation processes. In
addition to examining overall patterns of plant and insect species richness and
diversity in experimental and control plots, he will compare the movement
responses of three focal insect species which exhibit different degrees of
vagility and modes of feeding. The results will contribute to their
understanding of the ecological implications of particular spatial
configurations, and will potentially guide ecologists as well as designers and
planners in their decisions regarding land use projects.