* 9224541
* Mathematical Sciences: Minimal Order Dynamic Pole           Assignment Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1995
* Xiaochang Wang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* John Lagnese
* 06/30/1995
* USD 31,925.00

9224541 Wang This project addresses the problem of pole assignment by output
feedback with dynamic compensation. Its goals are to find the minimal order
among real dynamic compensators needed for arbitrary pole assignability and to
derive a formula for the degree of the Rosenthal compactification of dynamic
compensator space. Techniques involving the Schubert calculus developed by the
principal investigator in solving the static output feedback pole assignment
problem are expected to be important in the study of the minimal order dynamic
compensator problem. The poles of a linear system determine its frequencies and
amplitudes of vibration, and their locations determine whether or not the system
is stable. Therefore, in control design for a physical system such as an
airplane or robot arm, a major objective is to move the poles of the plant into
its stability region, i.e., a region where the principle modes of vibration die
out at a prescribed rate, using output feedback. Output feedback usually
involves a dynamic compensator and the higher the order of that compensator, the
more complicated the controller needed to shift the poles becomes.Therefore, it
is important to be able to design minimal order dynamic compensators. This
project will brings the method of algebraic geometry to bear on this problem.
***