* 9224290
* Theory of Quantum Antiferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1997
* Subir Sachdev, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/1997
* USD 227,000.00

A comprehensive theoretical study will be made of the novel properties of
frustrated, doped, and random quantum antiferromagnets. Recent inelastic neutron
scattering measurements have provided us with a wealth of information on the
spin dynamics of the doped cuprates: a successful unraveling of the nature of
the spin fluctuations is clearly important to a deeper understanding of the
novel properties of these high temperature superconductors. With the aim of
understanding these measurements, we will study the universal properties of two-
dimensional antiferromagnets in the vicinity of a zero temperature phase
transition at which the long- range magnetic order vanishes. The effects of
doping, quenched randomness, incommensurate spin fluctuations, and incipient
phase separation on this phase transition and the quantum disordered phase will
be examined. Other frustrated, layered antiferromagnets have also been studied
in recent years: in particular, the kagome lattice is a strong, experimentally
realizable candidate for displaying a disordered ground state. We will undertake
a theoretical study of these systems: the nature of quantum phase transitions
and the quantum disordered phases of antiferromagnets on frustrated two-
dimensional lattices will be studied by a duality analysis and mappings to dimer
models. Finally, the low temperature magnetic propoerties of the metallic and
insulating phases of doped semiconductors will be studied: these materials are
well described by a strongly random Hubbard model which will be examined by
numerical and analytic approaches. %%% Theoretical research will be conducted on
magnetic models which are at the core of problems related to strongly
interacting physical systems such as the high temperature superconductors. These
problems are at the forefront of present research in condensed matter physics.