* 9224587
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Mechanistic Insights   into Chemodenitrification Utilizing 15N-NMR.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Michael Mikita, California State University Bakersfield Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1995
* USD 13,292.00

9224587 Mikita This award supports Professor Michael Mikita of California State
University at Bakersfield to collaborate in environmental chemistry research
with Professor H.-D. Ludemann of the Institute of Biophysics and Physical
Biochemistry of the University of Regensburg, Germany. The goal of their
research is to gain a better understanding of how soil organic matter affects
the nitrogen cycle in soils, by studying the organic reaction mechanisms
underlying chemodenitrification. Specifically, they propose to study the
reaction of selected humic substances and models with Nitrogen-15 (15N) enriched
reagents under conditions expected in soils. In addition, they will seek to
improve methods for the 15N-NMR analyses of these reaction products and work to
discover the mechanisms of these reactions. Although preliminary studies suggest
novel insights into this complex chemistry, further work has been limited by the
NMR facilities available to Dr. Mikita. His German collaborator, Professor
Ludemann, is a recognized authority in this area and has a world class
laboratory with all the instrumentation necessary to carry out the proposed
research. The natural chemistry of nitrogen in soils and air remains very poorly
understood. Anthropogenic sources of nitrogen oxides include the burning of
carbon-based fuels and the use of nitrogenous fertilizers, both of which have
been increasing rapidly in the past century. In the presence of soil organic
matter, these nitrogen compounds undergo reactions (known generally as
chemodenitrification) that release gaseous forms into the air. Now, there is
growing concern over the influence of these nitrogen oxides on ozone depletion
and global atmospheric processes. Through the combination of expertise,
facilities and interests brought to bear by this U.S.-German collaboration,
progress will be made in understanding soil-based reactions of nitrogen
compounds which are potentially relevant to climate change. ***