* 9224127
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Polar Diradicals in    Cycloaddition and Polymerization Reactions, using Electron- Spin Resonance
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Henry Hall, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 02/28/1997
* USD 13,510.00

9224127 Hall This award supports Professor H. K. Hall, Jr. and two postdoctoral
research associates from the University of Arizona to collaborate in polymer
chemistry research with Dr. H. G. Korth and Professor R. Sustmann of the
Institute for Organic Chemistry of the University of Essen, Germany. They are
interested in the mechanism of initiation of spontaneous polymerizations that
occur when electron-rich and electron-poor olefins are mixed. Theoretical work
and kinetic studies on polymers by the U.S. group suggest that there is an
intermediate form which may be a diradical. This in turn initiates the formation
of bonds and produces the polymer. The missing link to confirm the theory is the
direct observation of the initiating diradicals; this would be possible with
electron-spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy. The German participants in the
project contribute substantial expertise in ESR that will make it possible to
observe and identify these elusive diradical species. This research addresses a
fundamental question in polymers research. The U.S. investigator has made
important and ground-breaking contributions toward understanding what initiates
certain types of polymerization reactions. The proposed collaboration with
German investigators will produce new information on this complex process and
enhance his productive and innovative research program. ***