* 9224817
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Urban Energy Use and       Greenhouse Gas Emissions in the Asian - Pacific Region
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1993,05/31/1996
* Robert Harriss, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 05/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9224817 HARRISS Attention on the human dimensions of global change in developing
countries has tended to focus on changing rural land- use patterns, but profound
changes in human activities that impact on natural environmental conditions also
have occurred in urban places. Changes in energy use in rapidly growing cities
of Asia may have especially strong impacts on future emissions of greenhouse
gases into the atmosphere. This doctoral dissertation research project will
assess the ways that human activities alter chemical and energy flows to and
from the landscape and atmosphere in Cebu City, a rapidly growing industrial
center in the southern Philippines. A household energy-use study will be
conducted in about 600 households, with particular attention focusing on
transitions from use of biomass to fossil fuels. The data from these surveys
will be analyzed in concert with data on commercial fossil fuel use in order to
better assess the socio- economic factors that influence fuels used for
different kinds of activities. These analyses will contribute toward development
of integrated energy and trace-gas emissions models for Asian- Pacific cities.
This project will provide valuable new information about a representative
industrial city in the Philippines, focusing special attention on changing
patterns of energy use that impact on biological and atmospheric systems. In
addition to providing a useful case study dealing with an important topic, the
add dissertation end statement. ***