* 9224949
* Dissertation Research:  Genetic Effects of Extinction and   Recolonization in a Host-Parasite System
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1995
* Gunter Wagner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1995
* USD 8,000.00

The study will determine the roles of a number of population-level processes,
including genetic drift, migration, and local population extinction and
recolonization, in determining the patterns of genetic differentiation among
populations in nature. Population demographic data will be compared with genetic
data to test theories concerning the effects of these various factors. The study
animal is the swallow bug Oeciacus vicarius an ectoparasite exclusively of cliff
swallows in Nebraska. Populations of swallow bugs undergo regular cycles of
local population growth and extinction due to the ephemeral use of colony sites
by the cliff swallow host. They are thus ideally suited for studies of the
population genetic effects of dynamic factors such as extinction and
recolonization. A longterm (10-year) database is available which details colony
site usage and migration patterns for the cliff swallow hosts. The east with
which important population parameters for these bugs may be estimated makes
possible a population genetic unusual in both its precision and broad scope. The
study will expand basic understanding of the fundamental process of genetic
differentiation in natural populations, and will empirically test classical
static (equilibrium) theories of population genetic structure against more
recently proposed dynamic models. At a practical level, the study will provide
general insights into the importance of various natural effects, such as local
population extinction, in determining the overall level of genetic diversity for
a species. This information is of considerable importance to conservation
biologists as a guide in formulating effective strategies for maintaining
species genetic diversity in the wild.