* 9224083
* Macromolecular Organization of the Contractile Ring
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Joann Otto, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 10/31/1996
* USD 283,287.00

Cell division in animal cells culminates in cytokinesis, the separation of two
daughter cells. The force generating apparatus for this cleavage is the
contractile ring, a transient actin-myosin organelle that is attached to and
exerts tension on the plasma membrane. Many facets of cytokinesis remain to be
elucidated. These include the source, composition, and interaction of
contractile ring components, the regulation of contraction, and the spatial
positioning of the contractile ring. The proposed experiments address several of
these aspects. Monoclonal antibodies, which were prepared against actin-
associated proteins, have allowed identification of several protein components
of the contractile ring in sea urchin eggs. These proteins will be purified and
characterized in vitro, particularly with regard to the proteins with which they
interact. The functions of the proteins in vivo will be investigated in
microinjection experiments with the antibodies prepared against them. The
regulation of contraction will be examined by investigating whether changes in
myosin phosphorylation occur at cytokinesis when the amount of myosin in the
cytoskeleton increases. The results of the proposed experiments will allow a
molecular description of the functions of several components of the contractile
ring and thus increase our understanding of this dynamic structure. %%%
Reproduction is the most fundamental aspect of all living things. Cell division
is an intrinsic part of this phenomenon for all cellular organisms, both
prokaryotic and eukaryotic. For Protistans (single-celled organisms),
reproduction is, simply, cell division. For multicellular organisms, cell
division is key to reproduction, not only for generating germ-line cells
(gametes, spores) but also for regenerating whole organisms from spores or
zygotes (development). In multicellular organisms, tight regulation of the
mechanism whereby daughter cell cytoplasms are partitioned from each other
during cell division, including the precise position of the cleavage furrow, is
invariably crucial for subsequent development of the organism. Thus, this
project addresses one of the most fundamental aspects of animal life on earth.
The cleavage mechanism is known to involve an actomyosin based contractile
apparatus, the contractile ring, which girdles the cell at the cleavage furrow
at the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane. The goals of this project are to
discover what other proteins, besides actin and myosin, are in the ring, how the
ring components function to cause the constriction of the membrane at the
cleavage furrow, and how all this is regulated. The approaches to be used will
combine rigorous in vitro biochemical analysis with experimental manipulations
and observations in vivo.