* 9224141
* Systematics of the Synthesis and Reactivity of              Heteronuclear Cluster Compounds
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Richard Adams, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 09/30/1995
* USD 190,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program provides
continued support for the research of Dr. Richard D. Adams of the Chemistry
Department, University of South Carolina, on the synthesis and characterization
of metal cluster compounds. Carbonyl compounds containing platinum and iron,
ruthenium or osmium will be prepared and characterized by IR, NMR, and X-ray
crystallography. The usefulness of the compounds as petroleum reforming
catalysts will be tested, especially with regard to selective catalysis that
might be associated through the cooperativity of different types of metal atoms.
Some of the models include compounds in which metals have segregated to
particular layers within the structure, and the effect of this effect on
catalytic activity will be investigated. Alkyne substitution reactions will be
used to test the reactivity of sites within the clusters. %%% Mixed-metal and
metal-alloy catalysts are employed industrially to promote hydrogenation
reactions, but a molecular model of these compounds which can be used to
understand the beneficial effects of the mixed-metal materials has not been
synthesized. In this project, molecular models of mixed metal compounds will be
prepared and their reactivity in various catalytic reactions determined. The
research could provide insights into the detailed mechanisms of catalytic
reactions and aid in the development of selective hydrogenation catalysts.