* 9224574
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Theoretical Investigation  of Nonlinear Waves in Magnetic and Magneto-optic Layered    Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Alexei Maradudin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1997
* USD 13,079.00

9224574 Maradudin This two-year award supports U.S.-U.K. cooperative research in
condensed matter physics. The investigators are Alexei Maradudin and Richard
Wallace of the University of California at Irvine, and Alan D. Boardman of the
University of Salford in the United Kingdom. The research encompasses
theoretical investigations of the propagation of nonlinear electromagnetic waves
in magnetic and magneto-optic layered structures. Emphasis will be placed on
layered structures that exhibit effective nonlinearity. The study of nonlinear
waves has important applications in optical computing and signal processing,
particularly in the development of improved magnetic and magneto-optic
materials. The proposed collaboration will advance our knowledge of the role of
nonlinear waves in a range of materials and their use as waveguides. The project
integrates the theoretical and experimental approaches. The U.S. investigators
bring to this collaboration expertise in nonlinear physics, surface magneto-
plasmonpolaritons, surface acoustic waves and waves in magnetic materials. This
is complemented by the British investigator's expertise in guided waves. The
project also takes advantage of British experiments on the properties of
magnetic and magneto- optic materials. ***