* 9224875
* U.S.-Bulgaria Cooperative Research on Contemporary Issues inNuclear Structure Theory
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Stuart Pittel, Bartol Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 08/31/1996
* USD 20,536.00

This U.S.-Bulgaria research project between Dr. Stuart Pittel, Dr. Jonathan
Engel, Mr. Roland Larsson, of the Bartol Research Institute, and Dr. Peter
Raichev, Dr. Roussy Roussev, Dr. Ana Georgieva, Dr. Mario Stoitsov, Dr. Lilia
Mariova, Dr. Borislav Slavov, Dr. Vessilin Dimitrov, Tsetsa Dankova, Nikolai
Minkov, of the Bulgarian Institute for Nuclear Research &amp; Energy (INRNE) and
Sofia University in Bulgaria, will focus on "Contemporary Issues in Nuclear
Structure Theory." The researchers will (1) develop mapping methods to use in
quark descriptions of finite nuclei; and (2) use some new many-body methods
developed in Sofia to study galactic dark matter detection by 73Ge. Access to
the Bulgarians' new approach to odd-mass nuclei should prove useful in future
studies. Understanding the dark matter in galaxies and in the universe as a
whole represents one of the greatest challenges facing contemporary physics. An
enormous experimental effort is underway to search for galactic dark matter with
terrestrial detectors and in particular with a 73Ge detector. %%% This project
in theoretical physics fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading experts in Bulgaria and the United States to
combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.