* 9224259
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Limitation of Transpiration by XylemCavitation and Hydraulic Conductance in Riparian and        Non-riparian Woody Vegetation of the Sonoran Desert
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1996
* NONE NONE, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 14,118.00

This project examines how desert plants avoid exceeding the limits of their
water transport system. Water is lost by evaporation when plants capture carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere during photosynthesis. To support continued growth,
such losses must be replenished by water pulled from the soil via the roots to
the leaves in a manner not unlike drinking from a straw. If the suction driving
water movement becomes to great, as can happen when the evaporation rate from
leaves is too high or the soil is too dry, the plant's water transport system
can become non-functional. This condition, known as cavitation, results from the
entry of air into the vascular system producing an air embolism and interrupting
the movement of water. The limits of the water transport system, and hence the
plants maximum drought tolerance, are determined by the structure of its
component conduits. The proposed research will determine the limits on water
transport in plants from habitats with different patterns of water availability.
The ability of each species to maintain water transport by remaining within the
limits of its vascular system or controlling the loss of vascular function under
harsh conditions will be evaluated. The results will advance our understanding
of whole plant responses to water stress.