* 9224628
* Research on Extreme Ultraviolet Microscopy and Holography
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1993,06/30/1997
* James Young, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 06/30/1997
* USD 264,085.00

9224628 Young Microscopy using extreme ultraviolet and soft x-ray radiation
offers high resolution, high contrast, and chemical sensitivity. Holographic
imaging, now possible because of advances in short wavelength lasers, is unique
in its potential to achieve true wavelength-limited resolution because it
eliminates optical elements and their imperfections. In addition, holography
records valuable phase and depth information. This program focuses on developing
imaging techniques that can achieve wavelength-limited resolution regardless of
the illuminationg wavelength. Such flexibility will enable application to many
problems using a variety of sources, and the imaging capabilities will advance
along with new short wavelength source developments. The scientific information
necessary for imaging at wavelenths shorter than about 200m, and particularly
for developing a holographic microscope, will be pursued in a three phase
research program. First, laser-produced plasma sources and lasers will be used
to measure the optical properties of recording films and typical object
materials in the 200nm to 30nm region, where little information is currently
available. This information is required to guide the development of new films,
to choose optimum illuminating wavelenghts, and to interpret images. Next,
techniques for high resolution contact microscopy will be developed, using the
new films and atomic force microscope readout. Images of test objects at various
wavelenghts will be used to asses and verify film performance and image
interpretation algorithms. Contact microscopy is a proven high resolution
technique, and it will be extended to imaging real objects. Finallly, with this
background, the problems of reading high resolution holograms and numerically
reconstructing faithful images will be investigated. *** v s t _ 0 , , c ) 0 , ,
Õ # _ 0 , , ) 0 , 9224628 Young Microscopy using extreme ultraviolet and soft
x-ray radiation offers high resolution, high contrast, and chemica { $ $ $ ( F /
= = / 1 Courier Symbol & Arial 5 Courier New = " h E E E 8 I
R:\WW20USER\ABSTRACT.DOT Cassandra Queen Cassandra Queen