* 9224566
* RUI: Group Value Versus Self Interest Concern in Fairness   Judgements:  A Test of a Contextual Priming Model
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1996
* Samuel Margulies, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,245.00

Perceptions of justice are a critical factor in citizens' responses to judicial
decisions, legal institutions such as juries, and other governmental activities.
Lay perceptions of justice judgments carry important implications for the
legitimacy of institutions and for citizen compliance. Sociolegal researchers
have found evidence for two different but related theories of justice, both of
which emphasize that fair procedures and respectful treatment are more important
to citizens than particular outcomes. The Procedural Justice Theory holds that
fairness judgments are dependent on the extent to which participants have
control over the process and/or the ultimate decision. The Group Value Theory
holds that fairness judgments are influenced by the trustworthiness and
neutrality of authorities and whether authorities treat individuals with
respect. A recent study showed that group value concerns are considerably more
important for fairness judgments than control concerns. The present study will
contribute to theoretical advance by testing the relative validity of these
hypotheses under different conditions. Four studies will be undertaken to
investigate the conditions under which individuals' fairness judgments will be
influenced by control versus group value concerns. A contextual priming model is
proposed to explain the conditions under which the two kinds of concerns will
influence fairness perceptions. Because the model suggests that self-interest
concerns are more important prior to the resolution of conflict, two field
studies examine procedural fairness perceptions before settlement. Similarly,
because the model suggests that self-interest concerns are more important in
disputes, both field studies sample exclusively from populations of individuals
in disputes (divorce and workplace disputes). In addition, two laboratory
experiments will test the propositions that (a) situational factors influence
the importance of control versus group value concerns, and (b) both
accessibility and deservedness judgments are central to procedural fairness
perceptions.