* 9224825
* Multi-Disciplinary Investigation of Guyamas Basin Using     Manned and Unmanned Vehicles Via Shore-based Satellite      Network
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1994
* Robert Ballard, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 06/30/1994
* USD 150,017.00

A multidisciplinary effort will augment a major, multi-media, educational
expedition planned for the Guaymas Basin off the coast of Mexico scheduled for
late February and early March 1993. The educational aspects of this program are
being funded by the JASON Foundation for Education and the Deputy Chief of Naval
Operations. Scientists will be using a manned submersible and a remotely
operated vehicle system to explore the seafloor and conduct experiments.
Investigators at sea will transmit live video from cameras mounted on the
underwater vehicles via satellite to other scientists and students at several
sites across the country. Concurrently, scientists ashore in their laboratories
will also be able to control several functions of the remotely operated undersea
vehicles while they are submerged. The expedition amounts to a significant
undersea test of telepresence using modern oceano- graphic and satellite
communications technologies. The NSF funds will permit the extended use of these
undersea systems and communications links beyond that required for the JASON
Project's educational purposes. NSF-sponsored ocean scientists will be able to
test and assess the effectiveness of these modern undersea capabilities for
controlling submerged vehicles and making seafloor observations remotely and for
manipulating certain basic ocean science research experiments.