* 9224764
* 11th International Symposium on Flavins and Flavoproteins,  Nagoya, Japan, July 27-31 1993.
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1993
* Vincent Massey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1993
* USD 10,000.00

The area of flavins and flavoproteins is a broad, but clearly and simply defined
one. It covers all aspects of work pertaining to the chemistry and biology of
compounds based on the isoalloxazine nucleus and on a very few closely related
structures. Because of the extraordinary versatility of flavins as a prosthetic
group and its involvement in a variety of important biological oxidation and
reduction processes, this area continues to expand rapidly. Interest in flavins
ranges from theoretical chemistry to medical aspects. %%% The 11th International
Symposium on Flavins and Flavoproteins will be held in Nagoya, Japan in 1993 as
one of a series which has been organized at 3 year intervals since 1965. Because
of the continued and increasing pace of research in this area, it is important
that regularly scheduled meetings be held. The attempt has been to plan such
symposia at three year intervals in order to maximize communication of the
rapidly acquired new knowledge, allow timely adjustments on best directions to
follow and stimulate new research. Review lectures will cover the entire field
and the meeting will bring together scientists from all over the world from a
wide variety of disciplines and promote valuable discussion and exchange of
information.