* 9224958
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  An Integrated  Approach for Producing Detailed Thermal and Fluid Histories of Hydrothermal Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1993,12/31/1994
* William Burnett, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1994
* USD 13,400.00

This award is under the International Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research at foreign centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a four-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Carter D. Hull of
Florida State University to work with Dr. Gudmundur Palmason at Orkustofnun
(Icelandic National Energy Authority) in Iceland. This research project takes an
integrated approach for producing detailed thermal and fluid histories of
hydrothermal systems. Fluid, vein mineralization, and reservoir rock samples
from geothermal systems will be collected, identified, and analyzed during the
four month period. Chemical geothermometers will be applied and multicomponent
chemical equilibrium models developed with the fluid analyses. Light-stable
isotopic ratios and the activities of radionuclides in the 238U and 232Th decay
series will be measured for selected fluids and minerals. Light-stable isotopic
data can be used to characterize fluids and applied in studies of water-rock
interaction. The ages of hydrothermal minerals, redistributions of
radioisotopes, and residence times of fluids in the reservoir can be calculated
from disequilibrium in the U-Th series. U-Th disequilibrium and the distribution
of radionuclides in hydrothermal systems can be very useful as natural analogs
for the transport and sorption of radionuclides in repositories. This award
recommendation provides funds for a stipend of four months, international
travel, an allowance for in-country travel, chemicals, and excess baggage and an
administrative allowance for Florida State University.