* 9224165
* Raman Scattering of Solid and Liquid Clusters and Ultrathin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1996
* Jeffrey Lannin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 10/31/1996
* USD 285,000.00

Enhanced Raman scattering methods will be used for in situ ultra- high vacuum
studies of clusters and ultra-thin films deposited on surfaces. Information
about the phonon states and their changes with cluster size and temperature will
be obtained. Emphasis will be places on the semiconducting and semimetallic
group IV (C and Sn) and V (Bi and Sb) elements in amorphous or nanocrystalline
states. Raman scattering will also be applied to liquid clusters from this group
to obtain dynamical information on the phase transformations from the solid to
liquid state. Sputtering and laser assisted deposition methods will be employed
for cluster and ultra-thin film growth. Photoemission and high resolution
electron energy loss methods will provide complementary information on changes
in electronic and vibrational states and the role of atomic hydrogen bonding on
surfaces. %%% This research will focus on both near surface and bulk properties
of ulrathin and thin films with different nanostructures. Emphasis will be
placed on studies of semiconductor or semimetal cluster structures in which both
the relatively small number of atoms and the large surface to volume ratio allow
modified material properties to be achieved. Both solid as well as liquid state
cluster properties will be explored. The preparation of these materials will
employ a diverse range of ultrahigh vacuum deposition methods, including
magnetron sputtering, evaporation and laser assisted deposition. The physical
properties and characterization of these materials will employ a range of in
situ ultrahigh vacuum spectroscopic methods. This will provide information on
the electronic state and vibrational dynamics of disordered amorphous and
nanocrystalline solids and will explore the role of bonding and structural
disorder changes in the processing of ultrathin films. Additional ex situ
transmission electron microscopy studies of cluster size distributions will be
obtained and related to synthesis methods. Laser assisted deposition of
amorphous carbon and other diamond-like materials will involve university-
industry collaborations.