* 9224280
* Eddy Correlation Measurments of Snow-Atmosphere Exchange of N0y and Water Vapor at Summit (Greenland)
* O/D,OPP
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Song-Miao Fan, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 01/31/1997
* USD 359,457.00

This is one of four coordinated projects that will make use of the camp
facilities established on the ice sheet in the interior of Greenland as part of
the GISP-2 ice core drilling effort, in order to investigate how atmospheric
trace elements are deposited on the ice and what kind of changes they undergo as
they are being incorporated into the ice. An understanding of such processes is
necessary in order to properly interpret the proxy climate data that can be
recovered from ice cores. While significant progress has been made recently in
extracting and analyzing ice cores, progress in understanding the air to snow
transfer process for reactive chemical species has lagged behind. The goal of
this project is to determine the vertical fluxes of reactive nitrogen oxides,
water vapor, sensible heat, and momentum. through a field measurement program in
1994 and 1995. A specific objective is to define the transfer function between
reactive nitrogen oxide concentrations in the atmosphere and in the snow, thus
allowing the interpretation of the nitrate record in ice cores in terms of
changes in atmospheric photochemistry and in the biogeochemical cycling of
nitrogen. Other objectives are to determine the environmental variables
regulating the exchange of reactive nitrogen oxides between air and snow, to
assess the relative importance of dr and wet deposition and reevaporation in
controlling the nitrate accumulation, and to analyze the meteorological
conditions controlling the supply of nitrates to the ice sheet.