* 9224150
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Quantum Transport in      Si/SiGe Nanostructures
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Sean Washburn, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 02/29/1996
* USD 19,830.00

Technical Narrative: This U.S.-Egypt collaborative research project involving
the University of North Carolina (UNC) and Cairo University is in the general
area of Si-SiGe heterostructures. Project funding will enable the team from
Cairo University to work for various periods of time in the laboratory of Dr.
Sean Washburn at UNC as well as the IBM Watson Research Center. Additionally,
Dr. Washburn will spend one week visiting the laboratory of Dr. Khalid Ismail of
Cairo University. The investigators will perform a series of transport
experiments on small point contacts, lateral resonant tunneling devices, and
interferometers. The proposed experiments will (1) extend the study of ballistic
transport to new materials systems, (2) provide a broader base of experimental
data to test theoretical predictions on ballistic transport, (3) provide the
first system for experimental data for testing recent predictions of conductance
quantization in one-dimensional Luttinger liquid, and (4) allow testing of new
predictions for electrostatic interference effects. This project in materials
research fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling leading experts in the United States and Egypt to combine complementary
talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence.