* 9224123
* Support of IAPSO Secretariat
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Robert Stevenson, International Association of the Physical Sciences of the Ocean
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 06/30/1996
* USD 150,000.00

Continued funding is being provided to partially support specific activities of
the International Association of the Physical Sciences of the Ocean (IAPSO)
Secretariat. IAPSO is one of seven Associations of the International Union of
Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG) which in turn is constituted within the
International Commission of Scientific Unions (ICSU). The United States is a
Member of these Unions and the NSF is a Representative agency. The Office of the
Secretary General performs the day-to-day functions of IAPSO, involving
communications within and external to IAPSO, the execution of policies and
directives, and it has fiscal responsibilities for the Association's operation.
Much of the Secretariat's work involves preparation for, conduct of, and
reporting on assemblies, meetings, symposia, and workshops. Since its founding
in 1919, the primary goal of IAPSO has been to "...promote the study of
scientific problems relating to the oceans and the interactions taking place at
the sea floor, coastal, and atmospheric boundaries insofar as such research is
conducted by the use of mathematics, physics, and chemistry." IAPSO activities
are scientifically relevant and seek to encourage participation of young
scientists and scientists from developing countries by providing opportunities
to develop working relationships with established U.S. oceanographers. Partial
support is also being provided by Office of Naval Research and NOAA.