* 9224224
* Dissertation Research:  Population Genetic Structure of     Aspergillus nidulans
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* William Timberlake, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 6,000.00

Research will focus on how genetic variation is distributed in natural
populations of a filamentous mold, Aspergillus nidulans, and how it propagates
itself in nature. Molds like A. nidulans can produce clonal propagules called
spores that are genetically exactly identical to their single parent. Or, they
can produce spores that are a genetic mixture of the two parents. This research
distinguish will between these two events by surveying genetic variation in
natural populations. Genetic markers have been identified that are variable
between individuals in nature. If only distinct combinations of markers are
observed in any given individual, then reproduction is clonal. However, if some
individuals have markers that are combinations of those seen in others, then
sexual reproduction occurs. The Aspergilli are an important group of organisms.
Many Aspergilli and their relatives are used to produce a variety of useful
substances, such as antibiotics. Aspergillus flavus commonly grows on stored
grain products, producing a powerful carcinogen called aflatoxin, a threat to
livestock and humans. Aspergillus fumigatus and Aspergillus parasiticus can be
human pathogens, commonly lethally infecting immune- compromised individuals.
While Aspergillus nidulans isn't a pathogen, it is a well-developed research
organism, with tools for genetic analysis available that are not developed in
other species. Information about its population structure and how it propagates
in nature should provide useful clues about the life histories of other molds.