* 9224946
* Discrete Numerical Modeling Techniques: Advance Methods withApplications to Optical Pulse Propagation in linear and     Nonlinear Media
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Andreas Cangellaris, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 10/31/1995
* USD 64,998.00

9224946 Cangellaris Numerical techniques for the modeling of electromagnetic
wave interactions in linear and nonlinear photonics devices will be developed.
These numerical techniques are for the solution of the full wave vector
Maxwell's equations coupled with microscopic and macroscopic materials models
and will emphasize massively-parallel computing environments for any actual
calculations. The techniques to be developed includespectrall and hybrid
spectral/finite difference time domain (FDTD) schemes, aimed at the rigorous,
efficient and accurate modeling of time-harmonic and pulsed wave propagation
over long distance in linear and nonlinear media. More specifically, emphasis
will be placed on two specific topics: a) the use of spectral techniques for the
solution of the scalar and vectorial Helmholtz equation in inhomogeneous,
anisotropic domains with applications to time-harmonic wave propagation in
integrated optics waveguides and diffraction by two-dimensional gratings; b) the
use of hybrid spectral/FDTD techniques for the numerical integration of the
nonlinear time-dependent Maxwell's equations in two dimensions with application
to optical pulse propagation in nonlinear Kerr media. These numerical techniques
will be benchmarked against analytical theory in simple geometries and
experimental results involving more complicated configurations. The direct
products of this project will be the numerical methods and associated computer
codes, validation analyses, and supporting document. The anticipated results
will lay a foundation for a more rigorous and more efficient set of numerical
methods that will be used eventually to create realistic numerical simulators
for the engineering design of integrated optics devices and systems.