* 9224480
* SGER:  Geologic Modification to Coastal and Shallow Marine  Environments of South Florida Resulting from Hurricane      Andrew
* GEO,EAR
* 10/15/1992,03/31/1994
* Lenore Tedesco, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 03/31/1994
* USD 8,933.00

The purpose of this project is to document coastal and shallow marine response
to Hurricane Andrew in south Florida. Hurricane Andrew was a major catastrophic
event that impacted a well- studied area. This proposal requests funding to
quickly document critical sedimentologic modifications that we have recognized.
Each need sampling and documentation before evidence is lost. The effect of
Hurricane Andrew was brief, intense and with constantly shifting wind patterns.
There was little or no wind more than 100 miles in advance of the storm. This is
in contrast to previously documented Hurricanes Donna (1960), Betsy (1965) and
Inez (1966) that affected similar regions. Andrew provides the opportunity to
assess geologic response to this storm, as well as contrast responses to the
different types of storm conditions of each of the storms. Geological
modifications to the subtropical, prevailing low energy environments of south
Florida were extensive. Hurricane Andrew caused major modifications to land and
coastal wetland vegetation and expectable changes to shallow marine and coastal
environments. Three observed changes from our reconnaissance warrant careful
documentation, as they are not well recognized in the scientific literature but
are of recognized significance in ancient deposits. These changes are: (1)
reprofiling of quartz/carbonate barrier island beaches and dunes; (2) gravel
saltation in inland regions; and (3) tabular and tubular tempestite
stratification on carbonate mudbanks.