* 9224072
* Dissertation Research:  Molecular Systematics of Cornus     L. sensu lato and Putative Relatives
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* NONE NONE, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 7,000.00

The taxonomic circumscription and relationships among members of Cornaceae
dogwoods have long been controversial. From one to 15 genera have been ascribed
to this family by various authors. Furthermore, little agreement exists
regarding the composition, taxonomic rank, and relationships of subgroups within
Cornus. To resolve relationships at several taxonomic levels in this enigmatic
group, nucleotide sequences of both chloroplast and nuclear genes will be
obtained. Comparative sequencing of the chloroplast gene rbcL, which evolves
slowly, will be used to test traditional concepts of circumscription of
Cornaceae and to identify close relatives of Cornus. The rbcL sequence data
obtained to date reveal that Cornus and 11 other genera form a cornaceous clade
that differs from all previously proposed cornaceous groups and also indicate
that some genera traditionally placed in Cornaceae are only distantly related to
Cornus. To understand better the closest relatives of Cornus, rbcL sequence data
are needed for additional key genera. Within the cornaceous clade, comparative
sequencing of the chloroplast gene ORFK, which evolves three times faster that
rbcL, will be used to elucidate relationships among Cornus and its close allies.
Within Cornus, our analysis of chloroplast DNA restriction site data has already
yielded a phylogenetic hypothesis based on 24 species. Comparative sequencing of
the internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS-1 and ITS-2) of the nuclear
ribosomal RNA genes (rnDNA) will facilitate a direct comparison of the
concordance of nuclear and chloroplast DNA phylogenies with Cornus. In addition
to elucidating relationships within a notoriously problematic group, this study
will be of broad systematic importance because it represents one of the first
attempts to employ chloroplast genes other that rbcL in phylogenetic
reconstruction and compare nuclear and cytoplasmically based phylogenies.
Lastly, the evolution of certain morphological, cytological, phytochemical,
phytochemical, and embryological characters will also be examined in light of
the molecular phylogenies obtained.