* 9224430
* Iwawi Ceramic Study
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1994
* William Isbell, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1994
* USD 49,997.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. William Isbell and his colleagues
will conduct an archaeological excavation at the site of Iwawi, a small deeply
stratified mound located at the mouth of the Tiwanaku River on the Lake Titicaca
shore in Bolivia. Preliminary work by Dr. Isbell suggests that the site spans an
approximately 2000 year period. Excavation through the habitation levels will
yield faunal and floral remains as well as stone tools and abundant ceramics.
The team's focus will be on this last class. The primary goal of the research is
a refined stylistic sequence for ceramics, employing computer assisted
descriptions as well as more standard analyses. A suite of radiocarbon dates
will add absolute chronology. Four 10 x 10 meter excavations will be conducted
on different sections of the mound. In addition to chronological data, house
floor contexts from these large excavations will provide an excellent record of
economics, household organization and social differentiation within a changing
regional sphere. The Lake Titicaca basin saw the rise of one of the earliest
civilizations in the New World. In this formidable high altitude region Native
Americans formed an empire marked by monumental architecture and control of an
area which extends over much of present day Bolivia and Peru. Many
archaeologists have worked in the basin to trace the rise, spread and eventual
decline of this Tiwanaku culture. They have focussed on such topics as the
agricultural techniques which allowed the support of large populations. The main
problem which researchers face however is the lack of a good ceramic chronology.
Because ceramic styles change over time, they can provide a sensitive dating
technique which allow individual sites and levels within sites to be accurately
placed. In the Titicaca region however the sequence currently employed is far
from adequate and in need of revision. Dr. Isbell's project will accomplish this
goal. This research is important for several reasons. It will increase our
understanding of how civilizations arise and decline. It will also provide a
tool of use to many archaeologists.