* 9224179
* Large Diameter Fiber Optic Tapers
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1995
* Richard Jeskey, Incom Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/1995
* USD 300,000.00

Fiber Optic Tapers are used in many applications including: Intensified Low
Light Level Cameras, Night Vision Systems, UV/IR Spectroscopy and Medical,
Industrial and Scientific X- Ray Imaging systems. In these applications, the
taper is coupled to a CCD imager in order to increase the area that can be
imaged. With rare exceptions, the tapers are under 85mm diameter, the majority
being 50mm diameter or less. There is, however, a need for tapers in the 150mm
to 200mm range, in Medical and Scientific application, where larger and higher
resolution images are required. Progress, however, has been restricted due to
the relatively small size of CCD's and non-availability of large tapers. To
overcome this, smaller tapers have been built into arrays and coupled to
multiple CCD's. this is a costly and inefficient arrangement. Prior to Phase I,
limitations of existing taper technology had restricted the size attempted to
115mm. Only a few of these costly units had been made, many manufacturing
problems remaining unsolved, especially optical distortion and thermal damage to
the glass. New technology developed at INCOM was applied to these problems
during Phase I demonstrating that many existing limitations can be overcome.
Given additional research, the development of a completely new manufacturing
process enabling the fabrication of Large Tapers is possible. Thus, we propose
to continue to advance the state of the art by conducting additional research on
the more complex and larger tapers required for the advancement of this element
of Electro-Optical Imaging Technology.