* 9224365
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1994
* Deborah Stone, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1994
* USD 8,103.00

Social Security disability's standardized measures and procedural safeguards are
intended to ensure that applicants with similar injuries or illnesses will be
treated similarly in the eligibility determination process. These form the basis
on which the U.S. Government can promise its citizens that the Social Security
System will be fair and equitable to all who apply. It has been argued, however,
that eligibility determination is biased by virtue of the existence of
"gendered" concepts in the official Listings of Impairments, in the medical
judgments made for the record by physicians, and in the hearings and decisions
of Administrative Law Judges. It is suggested that these "gendered" concepts
result in some applicants being ignored, categorized or stereotyped based on
gender. If this argument is correct, the standardized measures may be biased and
the procedural safeguards ineffective. It is important, therefore, to determine
whether or not such "gendered" biasing occurs. This doctoral dissertation will
examine the application of the Listings of Impairments and concomitant medical
judgments to 150 closed cases that were denied and then appealed to the federal
courts in order to identify any unstated assumptions and norms influencing the
process. Cases will be selected from federal courts in Dallas, San Francisco and
Boston (representing three different geographical regions). The proposed
analysis will include full transcripts of administrative hearings and judicial
decisions as well as the criteria in the Listings of Impairments and the
internal rules and regulations of the Social Security System. These texts will
be subjected to various forms of qualitative analysis, including computerized
content analysis based on appropriate coding categories. This research will make
an important contribution toward enhancing fairness and equity in the Social
Security System. It will also contribute to our theoretical understanding of how
possibly biased (but conventional) assumptions affect judicial and quasi-
judicial decision-making.