* 9224813
* Miniemulsion Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1996
* F. Joseph Schork, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/1996
* USD 209,323.00

Miniemulsion polymerization is used to describe heterogeneous polymerization in
those systems in which monomer droplets are substantially smaller than found in
a typical conventional emulsion polymerization. These polymerizations exhibit
some characteristics of suspension and emulsion polymerization systems. In each
type of polymerization, monomer droplets are dispersed in a continuous aqueous
phase in which the monomer is insoluble or only slightly soluble. Surfactants
and other colloidal stabilizers are used to stabilize the droplets and prevent
particle agglomeration. While both suspension and emulsion polymerizations are
free radical reactions, each proceeds by a unique mechanism. Initiators for free
radical suspension reactions are oil-soluble. The monomer droplets are
approximately 1 mm in diameter and each behaves as a small batch reactor, with
the monomer reacting to produce polymer. Since the number of free radicals per
particle is quite high, the kinetics are those of a bulk free radical
polymerization. In conventional emulsion polymerization moderate shear in the
presence of surfactant leads to the formation of a stable emulsion containing 10
micron monomer droplets and surfactant micelles about 0.01 micron in diameter.
These micelles are formed from excess surfactant in the continuous phase and
contains a small amount of monomer. Because of their relative size and number,
the total surface area of micelles is much greater than the total surface area
of the droplets. Thus free radicals in the aqueous phase enter micelles much
more frequently than droplets, resulting in particle nucleation primarily from
micelles. The primary locus of polymerization is the polymer particles thus
formed. The particles eventually grow to a size of about 0.10 micron forming a
final product, referred to as a latex which is a stable dispersion of polymer
particles in the continuous aqueous phase. In miniemulsion polymerization, high
shear is used in combination with surfactants and cosurfactants to produce a
fine emulsion of monomer droplets. The monomer droplets are substantially
smaller than those found in a typical emulsion polymerization. Reduction of the
monomer droplet diameter causes a corresponding increase in the total droplet
surface area. This has the effect of making the monomer droplets competitive
with the micelles for radical capture since radical absorption is competitive on
the basis of relative surface area. The objective of this research is to
investigate applications of miniemulsions to: (i) produce current latex products
with a higher level of efficiency and uniformity, and (ii) develop new latex
products based on miniemulsion technology. Specific areas which will be
investigated are: (1) the use of polymer as a cosurfactant; (2) the use of
droplet nucleation to effect more robust particle nucleation in systems in which
micellar nucleation tends to be unstable with respect to impurities; (3) the use
of the miniemulsion process to produce polymers of narrow copolymer composition
distribution from monomers which are highly water-insoluble; (4) the use of
simultaneous micellar and droplet nucleation to produce lattices with unique
particle size distributions; and (5) the impact of "accidental" cosurfactants
such as dodecyl mercaptan on conventional emulsion polymerization processes.