* 9224384
* RUI:  Study of the Structure and Dynamics of Great          Lakes Winter Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1993,01/31/1998
* Gregory Byrd, SUNY College at Brockport
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/1998
* USD 355,800.00

9224384 Byrd Precipitation from winter storms in the form of snow and freezing
rain are among the most disruptive of meteorological phenomena. Under a previous
award, the Principal Investigators have used observational data and a numerical
model to study the extremely heavy snowfalls that occur on the lee side of the
Great Lakes. Accomplishments have included identifying critical boundary layer
and atmospheric parameters that are conducive to producing locally heavy
snowfalls. The Principal Investigators in cooperation with the National Weather
Service will continue this research. Planned activities include developing a
more sophisticated numerical model and expansion of their investigations to
include the local influence of the Great Lakes on cyclonic winter storms.
Research objectives include: 1. Documenting the spatial and temporal variability
of meteorological fields within and upwind of lake-effect snow regions,
focussing on the role of boundary layer stability, depth, moisture and wind
shear in modulating these disturbances; 2. Investigating the role of dynamical
forcing mechanisms in the formation and maintenance of mesoscale lake-effect
snow bands and mesoscale precipitation structures associated with winter season
wave cyclones of the Great Lakes region; 3. Studying the effect of multiple-lake
interactions on the formation and maintenance of lake-effect snow bands; 4.
Investigating the effects of orography on the distribution and behavior of lake-
effect snow bands; 5. Determining the importance of the Great Lakes and the
surrounding topography in the distribution and behavior of mesoscale
precipitation features associated with winter season cyclones in the Great Lakes
region. ***