* 9224171
* Dissertation Research:  Frequency, Distribution and         Maintenance of t Haplotypes in Mus domesticus
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* NONE NONE, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 8,000.00

With increasing genetic knowledge of a wide range of organisms, there has been
a surge of interest in the potential for conflicts of interest within the
genome. Examples include 'imprinted genes', whose expression depends on whether
they were inherited from mother or father, transposable genes that can "jump"
around the genome, and increase their representation by inserting copies of
themselves in other genes, and "selfish" meiotic drive genes that can increase
their own inheritance by destroying their homologous counterparts. Little is
known of how common such conflicts are, or how strong a role they play in the
dynamics and evolution of the genome. t haplotypes in mice are one of the best
studied examples of meiotic drive. Much is known about how drive occurs
genetically, yet very little is known about its ecological or evolutionary
dynamics in wild mice populations. This study will contribute significantly to
this knowledge by (1) surveying how widespread t haplotypes are in wild mice,
and (2) examining the role that population structure and gene flow play on the
persistence and spread of t haplotypes, through experimental introductions of t
haplotypes to an island and barn population of mice. Knowledge gained from such
detailed studies of mice populations may additionally be useful to studies of
the biological control of mice. Mice are still an expensive pest animal in most
farming regions of America, particularly in fed storage and in large scale
automated operations such as poultry farming. Moreover, in some countries, such
as the cereal growing regions of Australia and China, they still show periodic
outbursts reaching plague proportions. Biological methods of control that have
been attempted to prevent these outbursts include introducing t haplotypes,
which carry lethal alleles, to mice populations, and through introductions of
parasites to mice. The effectiveness of such methods often depends on knowledge
of the rates of transmission and on knowledge of social structure and gene flow.