* 9224185
* Dissertation Research:  Systematics and Biogeography of     Mentzelia (Loasaceae): A North and South American Desert    Disjunct
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1995
* NONE NONE, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1995
* USD 10,000.00

Mentzelia, one of the few New World amphitropical plant disjuncts proposed to
have originated in North America, will be examined for genetic divergence and
phylogenetic relationships by graduate student Alice Hempel, under the
supervision of adviser Robert Jansen at the University of Texas. Examination of
such New World disjunctions using DNA restriction site information has not been
done previously. The use of chloroplast DNA, nuclear ribosomal DNA and
morphological data will generate three independent data sets to investigate the
potential processes leading to the current distribution such as long distance
dispersal, vicariance events, relict distributions and convergent evolution.
Disjunct species and genera have been comparatively well documented between the
arid lands of North America and South America, but no robust phylogenies exist
for these taxa to interpret the biogeographical processes. This project is
designed to answer systematics questions such as the relationships between the
three Loasaceae subfamilies, the sections in Mentzelia and species within sect.
Mentzelia, which contains the majority of South American species. A revision of
sect. Mentzelia, including molecular, chromosomal and SEM seed coat data is
needed to complete a modern revision of the genus. Morphological and molecular
data will be analyzed both separately and integrated, using parsimony methods.
The resulting phylogenetic trees and measures of genetic divergence will be used
to evaluate the hypotheses regarding the present distribution of Mentzelia.