* 9224974
* Workshop:  Assessing the Science of Inland Aquatic          Ecosystems:  Research, Education, and Applications
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1994,02/28/1997
* Stephen Parker, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1997
* USD 75,000.00

9224974 Dwoskin The Water Science and Technology Board (WSTB) of the National
Research Council (NRC) will assess the science of inland aquatic ecosystems,
especially as it relates to interdisciplinary education and research and its
application to the management of aquatic ecosystem. The study results from an
increased awareness by the water science community that there is a growing need
for fundamental advances in interdisciplinary water science, particularly of the
ecosystem perspective the interactive role of physics, chemistry, and biology in
the support of living communities. Continued development of this knowledge base
calls for review of the educational and research issues in this area. The study
would be carried out by a committee of approximately 15 scientists and engineers
from various fields including limnology, environmental engineering, ground water
science, ecology, aquatic , chemistry, hydrology, environmental fluid mechanics,
fisheries biology, landscape ecology, and geomorphology. The committee will use
case studies to consider how the application of the ecosystem perspective
improves the management, protection and restoration of inland waters. The study
would take two years to complete and would result in a report laying out
recommendations for future improvements in research and education in the science
of inland aquatic ecosystems and its application to protection, management, and
restoration of aquatic ecosystems. %%% Society needs to predict how aquatic
ecosystems change as a consequence of human activities such as physical
manipulation of water bodies, flow manipulation, changes in land use, chemical
inputs, introduction of exotic species, climate changes, and restoration
efforts. These activities will affect water availability and quality, habitat
conservation, and aquatic ecosystem integrity. The ability to make these
predications rests on continued progress in the science of inland aquatic
ecosystems.