* 9224486
* REU: Natural History of the Hispaniolan Herpetofauna
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1997
* Robert Powell, Avila University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 04/30/1997
* USD 105,235.00

The award provides Avila College with funds to continue an exciting summer
program providing 9 undergraduates with research experiences in tropical
studies. Participants will learn and develop skills by interacting with faculty
as they work on projects dealing with herpetological communities on Hispaniola.
To foster student development, a 3-phase program is planned: orientation--
introducing students to research methodology and ecological studies in the West
Indies; apprenticeship--developing skills; and individual research-- resulting
in publication-quality reports. Seminars on research and graduate studies are
included to facilitate applications of acquired knowledge and skills to
participants' future academic pursuits. Presentations will be made by scientists
in both the United States and Dominican Republic. Evaluation will be by
participants, their academic advisors, and one outside faculty. This program is
designed to induce participants to consider graduate studies favorably and to
increase the likelihood of their choosing careers in science. The faculty will
"coach" students, instilling a vision of research by explaining the rules and
delivering a feeling of the excitement that comes with addressing questions with
conceptual orientations. A focus on frog and lizard communities provides
opportunities to apply theories and methods used in ecological research while
working with organisms that are abundant, accessible, and remarkably well and
visibly adapted to their environment. Investigations may address aspects of
niche dimensions or parasite infections. Students may choose projects within
these topics or develop investigations of their own, including, but not limited
to, physiological or ethological studies of selected taxa.