* 9224749
* Dissertation Research:  Mating Behavior and the Per Locus in the Drosophila willistoni Group
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1995
* NONE NONE, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1995
* USD 7,920.00

Reproductive isolation is important for the maintenance of species as distinct
entities. Since reproductive isolation is often predominantly maintained through
behavioral traits, it can be affected by changes in courtship patterns. The
period (per) gene of Drosophila, because it is species-specific and regulates an
aspect of courtship song, provides an opportunity to examine change in a
courtship behavior, as related not only to reproductive isolation but also amino
acid and nucleotide level changes. An ideal group in which to study these
relationships is Drosophila willistoni and its sibling or closely related
species. The group exhibits different degrees of reproductive isolation among
its species, semispecies and subspecies. Specifically the project will examine;
1) the molecular variation in per and behavioral variation in courtship song for
several populations of D. willistoni; 2) the variation in the gene locus and in
song for the D. willistoni sibling species; 3) if there is evidence for
reproductive character displacement among populations of D. paulistorum living
together vs those living isolated from each other and 4) relationships of the
sibling species as determined by the per sequence. This project should help
explain the relationships of genetic variation, behavioral change, and
reproductive isolation in the formation of species.