* 9224493
* U.S.-Portugal Cooperative Research between INESC Portugal   and Cornell ISIS:  Group-Oriented Distributed Computing.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Kenneth Birman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

9224493 Birman This award will support collaborative research between Kenneth
Birman and Keith Marzullo, Cornell University, and Paulo Verissimo, Technical
University of Lisbon. Professor Verissimo is associated with INESC, the
Institute for Systems and Computer Engineering, and its Navigators Group, whose
research focuses on robustness of distributed systems. Professor Birman is
associated with the Isis Project at Cornell; its central idea is to encourage
programmers to develop distributed software using a collection of routines that
presents a simple network execution model, virtual synchrony. At present, the
two teams hold state-of-the-art knowledge which is in some points complementary.
Both groups have concluded that by integrating independently developed
technologies, a substantial advance in the ease of use and power of the next
generation of distributed computing systems could result. The investigators
propose to collaborate on an effort that will integrate a diverse collection of
high reliability distributed computing technologies under the general framework
of a new system for group-oriented computing. The collaboration will deal with
three subjects: an object-oriented methodology for integration of varied
technologies into a group computing environment; a focus on system architecture
issues drawing on the microkernel architectures that are gaining in importance
within the operating systems community; and such protocol and algorithmic
enhancements as are needed to realize that vision. ***