* 9224286
* Dissertation Research:  The Role of Selection in Diversifi- cation of Herbivorous Insects:  An Analysis of Mechanism
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1996
* Douglas Futuyma, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

Species proliferation must occur through the evolution of reproductive
isolation. However, few studies of evolutionary radiation explore the mechanisms
by which biological innovations may facilitate speciation. The high diversities
of the relatively few herbivorous insect taxa suggest that herbivory represents
an innovation fostering radiation. Host-plant specialization, furthermore, may
plausibly promote reproductive isolation, as host plants: 1) are patchily
distributed, yielding geographic isolation, and 2) exert strong selection
pressures, yielding adaptive divergence. The student will investigate speciation
in the leaf-feeding beetle genus Neochlamisus. Three geographically isolated
populations of N. bebbianae, two sharing the same host, will be the focus of
microevolutionary study. The degree of reproductive isolation exhibited by the
same-host population pair will be compared to that for a different-host pair for
a variety of potential components of isolation. Greater observed isolation
between the different-host populations would support the hypothesis that
speciation is driven by selection rather than by random genetic drift. A DNA
sequence-based phylogenetic study will be performed and use to infer host-
associations of ancestral ferns.