* 9224362
* Searching Maps
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Robert Lloyd, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 06/30/1995
* USD 39,959.00

Recent decades have seen considerable progress in geographic information
processing, particularly the application of computer methods to mapping. Less
attention and fewer resources have been devoted to the final part of the
cartographic communication process, the transformation of information from map
to map readers. Theories that explain how humans visually process spatial
information can lead to future geographical information systems that not only
display maps, but also perform visual processing of information such as
searches, identifications, comparisons, classifications and generalizations.
This research project seeks to examine the cognitive processes that underlie
visual search by map readers, and it will model components of those human search
processes through computer simulations based on neural net principles. A series
of experiments will be conducted wherein subjects perform search tasks using
maps as stimuli. These experiments will document the search behavior of human
map readers and uncover the cognitive processes that were the basis of their
search behavior. Experimental objects will be constructed using color, shape,
size, and orientation. This will allow for testing of the hypothesis that the
spatial distribution of objects on a map affects a person's ability to suppress
information that is not critical in reading the map. Symbols on maps attempt to
accurately reflect selected information about the environment, and they are
constructed to present information in an aesthetically pleasing way. Research on
how people read maps will ultimately assist cartographers to construct more
efficient maps and enhance the communication process. Cognitive experiments are
important because they can extend theory developed with laboratory stimuli to a
level that is closer to real world environments. This theory can then be the
basis of visual processing capabilities in more intelligent geographical
information systems.