* 9224370
* Mathematical Sciences: Custom-Designed Confidence Set       Construction
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1996
* Anthony Hayter, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 11/30/1996
* USD 60,000.00

The objective of this project is to improve the quality of statistical
inference methods available to an experimenter through the use of improved and
custom-designed confidence sets. While it is clear that confidence bounds on a
set of parameters are more informative to an experimenter than the answer to a
hypothesis test formulation of the problem, there are many essentially basic
statistical inference problems where current techniques for confidence set
construction are either crude, inefficient or nonexistent. This may be because
of a complicated distributional set-up, because the real parameters of interest
are functions of other basic parameters, or because the experimenter has chosen
to emphasize certain kinds of information such as directional decisions. In many
settings, the experimenter has some clearly defined objectives which can rightly
and sensibly be used to determine a sensitive and powerful inference method, yet
will find out that confidence sets are currently only available for standard
less specific inference approaches. The construction of custom-designed
confidence sets associated with these specific inference procedures will enable
the experimenter to make a fuller and more complete inference than is often
currently possible. It is important to develop these techniques and to make them
widely available since many decisions type inference are currently being made,
such as in comparative drug trials, in which the decision results are being
reported (e.g., drug A is more effective than drug B) and where, in fact,
additional free information (such as a confidence interval for the difference in
the efficacies of drugs A and B) is also available but is not being utilized.
This research will consider ways to improve current data analysis techniques.
The measurement of data and the subsequent analysis of such data inevitably
involves some uncertainty, and the objective of this research is to develop
improved ways of dealing with this uncertainty through the science of
statistical inference. This investigation will consider both the design of
experiments or data collection schemes, together with the analysis of the data.
The main thrust of the research will be to develop new ways of presenting the
results of statistical analyses which are designed to be clear and intiutively
comprehensible to the lay person. Moreover, these methods must be accurate and
they must efficiently summarize all the available information. These new
techniques will be useful for researchers and experimenters in areas such as
engineering, quality control, clinical trials, medical studies and other
important fields.