* 9224234
* Dissertation Research:  Applied Ecological Model of the     Multipurpose Tree Species Leucaena leucocephala (Lam.) de   Wit (Leguminosae) and its Major Pest, Heteropsylla cubana...
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1994
* NONE NONE, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 02/28/1994
* USD 6,900.00

Agroforestry has bound new popularity in many less- developed countries as
farmers and farm researchers rediscover its potential for conserving tropical
soils while boosting long-term farm production. However, pest control in
agroforestry has received little attention. The importance of such research was
underscored recently when stands of the popular agroforestry tree species
Leucaena leucocephala (Lam) de Wit in Asia were decimated by an invasion of the
introduced psyllid pest Heteropsylla cubana Crawford (Homoptera: Psyllidae). The
project proposed herein offers to outline the scientific basis of the L.
leucocephala/H.cubana problem by linking tree growth and psyllid population
dynamics to energy allocation at each trophic level. Central to this effort is
the development of a strategic simulation model. Data on energy allocation and
maximum age-specific growth rates for tree and herbivore will be collected under
varying nutrient regimes, primarily using simple dry matter measurements. Other
growth parameters will be determined experimentally or drawn from the extensive
literature on Leucaena leucocephala. The model will then be validated against at
least one year's worth of data not used in the original parameterization,
obtained from several sites in Thailand. Sensitivity analyses will be conducted
on mortality factors, weather and other variables to deduce those most likely to
promote psyllid outbreaks. Thailand has had significant problems with the
psyllid epidemic, and the proposed research will be conducted incooperation with
that country's national biological control program. The resulting model will
find immediate application in estimating yield losses due to the herbivore,
planning leucaena psyllid biological control programs, delineating high-risk
areas for leucaena cultivation, and developing improved cultural controls for
the pest in less-developed countries. The effort could also lay the groundwork
for analyzing pest problems in other agroforestry tree species.