* 9224475
* Economic Chaos and the Fragility of Democracy and Capitalism
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Raymond Duch, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1994
* USD 49,693.00

The last two decades will be noted in history as a period in which many nations
have abandoned authoritarian institutions and command economies, replacing them
with fledgling liberal democracies and market institutions. As has been evident,
the transition to free market economies can put a significant burden on
citizens. Many scholars have argued that the economic chaos that accompanies
these changes seriously undermines the successful transition to democracy and
free markets. This investigation explores whether in fact there is a linkage
between economic performance and support for these fledgling democratic and
capitalist institutions. The challenge of transition to democracy and free
markets is one faced by many nations in the last couple of decades. The Latin
American countries have been confronted with the dilemma of institutionalizing
democratic reforms while simultaneously confronting the serious problems
associated with reform of their economic sectors. Additionally, the former
Communist regimes of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and Eastern
and Central Europe have faced the simultaneous challenges of economic chaos,
market reform and democratization. Hence, many scholars have argued that nascent
democratic regimes falter when the mass public is burdened with a deteriorating
economic situation. The major impetus for the proposed investigation is the fact
that this broadly held presumption does not fit with the limited empirical
evidence that we have at the individual level. Recent exploration of the link
between economic deterioration and support for democratic and free market
institutions suggests no consistent relationship. Individuals in the European
portion of the former Soviet Union do not seem to ground their support for
democratic institutions on the assessments of the government's economic
performance and the economy seems to be only weakly related to support for free
market institutions. The purpose of this project is to expand the analysis
beyond this specific context in order to determine how general the Soviet
findings actually are. The goal is to test these propositions in a number of
different national contexts where the society is confronted with the
simultaneous challenges of implementing radical economic plans that threaten the
well-being of the average citizen and also of building democratic institutions.
The project will be composed of the following four components: a) to assemble
recent public opinion survey data from Eastern and Central Europe and from Latin
America that include questions on support for the free market and for democratic
institutions; b) within each nation to explore the link between individual
assessments of economic performance and support for democratic institutions; c)
to investigate whether these relationships vary in any systematic way from one
nation to another; and, d) to promote closer cooperation among the world
academic communities interested in these issues.