* 9225078
* Formulating National Research Policies Within an            International Context
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1993,05/31/1998
* Gary Dwoskin, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* William Blanpied
* 05/31/1998
* USD 140,000.00

WPC 2 B V V Z Z #| w le) 8 w C ; , WX w P 7 X P " m ' ı ^;C dd CCCd
CCCCddddddddddCC Y ~ ~w CN ~ s k~ CCCddCYdYdYCdd88d8 ddddJN8dd ddYYdY C dd
dddCCCC dddddd ddd8 Y Y Y Y Y Y~Y~Y~Y~YC8C8C8C8 d d d d d d d d d d Y d d d d
dsd Y Y Y Y Y Y Y d~Y~Y~Y~Y d d d d d d d dC8C8C8C8 oN d~8~8~8~8~8 d v d d d d J
J JkNkNkNkN~8~8~8 d d d d d d d Y Y Y d~8 d JkN~8 d d d d d C dd C CC/ N d
ddCYQQdd ddd dFdddd F CC hhd 44 ddzz d d d w oo dCh d F" d h dÕ dCC z xC d dod
dCd Yds z Uw d Y Y C C C C z~o zo Y~N Y d YC8 Y o o Y d Y zsdzd d~Y Y z o
zzzzNd88YYYzYz z zz CCddddd dd zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzNNNNNNNdddddddddddddddddddd888
888888888YYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzC s ~ C zC d dYC xHP LaserJet
III HP_LJ_3.PRS X w P 7 , \ , X P 2 V Z CG Times (Scalable) 8 w C ; , WX w P 7 X
P " m ' ı ^;C dd CCCd CCCCddddddddddCC Y ~ ~w CN ~ s k~ CCCddCYdYdYCdd88d8
ddddJN8dd ddYYdY C dd dddCCCC dddddd ddd8 Y Y Y Y Y Y~Y~Y~Y~YC8C8C8C8 d d d d d
d d d d d Y d d d d dsd Y Y Y Y Y Y Y d~Y~Y~Y~Y d d d d d d d dC8C8C8C8 oN
d~8~8~8~8~8 d v d d d d J J JkNkNkNkN~8~8~8 d d d d d d d Y Y Y d~8 d JkN~8 d d
d d d C dd C CC/ N d ddCYQQdd ddd dFdddd F CC hhd 44 ddzz d d d w oo dCh d F" d
h dÕ dCC z xC d dod dCd Yds z Uw d Y Y C C C C z~o zo Y~N Y d YC8 Y o o Y d Y
zsdzd d~Y Y z o zzzzNd88YYYzYz z zz CCddddd dd zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzNNNNNNNddddddd
ddddddddddddd888888888888YYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYYzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzC s ~ C zC d dYC
x 2 Z : R HP LaserJet III HP_LJ_3.PRS X w P 7 , \ , X P #| w 2 INT 9225078:
"Formulating National Research Policies Within an International Context"
Abstract This award to the National Academy of Sciences will support a 20 month
project by the Government University Industry Research Roundtable to articulate
a reasoned approach to developing guidelines for politically workable national
research policies within an increasingly complex international environment.
During the first, year long phase of the project will bring together
representatives of universities, industry, the executive and legislative
branches of the Federal Government, and key representatives of State governments
in a series of intensive workshops to explore differing perspectives on
substantial international trends and their likely impacts on the ways that
national research policies are formulated and implemented. The second phase of
the project will be a major international conference involving a sampling of
participants from the workshops and leading experts from the public and private
sector research establishments in Europe and Asia. The result of the project
will be a volume published by the National Academy of Sciences, with conclusions
expected to be relevant to a range of national interests, including research
talent, international information flows, and financial resources for research.