* 9225074
* CRB:  Molecular Genetics of Historical Tiger Beetle         Populations for Conservation Biology
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Alfried Vogler, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1995
* USD 31,030.00

Historical information that dates back to a time before endangered populations
were affected by human disturbance could be used to design specific conservation
strategies. However direct observation of changes in the population structure
are difficult because they necessitate long-term surveillance and sampling. The
advent of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) makes it possible to extract
genetic information from museum specimens. Thus, the time range that is
accessible for the study of genetic parameters in endangered species is
substantially extended. The potential of this approach for its application in
conservation genetics by addressing concrete management problems involving the
endangered tiger beetle, Cicindela dorsalis will be examined. %%% The polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) will be used to examine variation in mtDNA of specimens
from museum collections. Changes in genetic structured over time will be
assessed by comparing data from the historical specimens to an extensive data
base on mtDNA variation in extant populations. Three main conservation questions
will be addressed concerning (a) the choice of a source population for
reintroduction into historical habitat, (b) the importance of the metapopulation
for the management of the species, and (c) the loss of genetic variation after
bottlenecks.