* 9225080
* Surface Electromigration on Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1995
* Theodore Einstein, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

9225080 Williams This project will apply a range of modern surface science
techniques to investigate the effects of applied electrical currents on the
surface migration of atoms on metal surfaces. The phenomenon is known as surface
electromigration (EM). Interestingly, EM on surfaces is rather poorly
understood, though it is considered to potentially be of substantial
technological interest. In the past it has been studied, but not in depth, with
modern surface structure tools. Surface mass transport will be investigated
experimentally by studying the changes of step structure under an applied
electrical current using low-energy electron microscopy. %%% This project will
investigate how surface atoms move or do not move under the influence of an
applied electric field. The changes in surface morphology will be followed with
a new surface microscope that allows real-time data collection of surface
structure images. This is a low-energy electron microscope. The phenomenon of
surface electromigration is surprisingly poorly understood. It has been studied
for many years, but not with the modern techniques of this project. The
objective is to obtain definitive data about surface electromigration, which is
acknowledged to be potentially of great technological significance, particularly
in the microelectronics industry. ***