* 9225109
* FASEB Summer Conference:  "Control of Transcription         in Prokaryotes", to be held July 24-29 at the Vermont       Academy, Saxton's River, Vermont.
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1994
* Gisela Storz, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 10/31/1994
* USD 4,000.00

This application is for partial funding for the 1993 FASEB Summer Conference on
"Control of Transcription Initiation in Prokaryotes", to be held July 24-29 at
the Vermont Academy, Saxton's River, Vermont. The conference is under the
auspices of the Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology
(FASEB). There will be nine major sessions and poster sessions. The topics to be
included for discussion are biochemistry of transcription, control through
different sigmas, activation and repression mechanisms, activator-RNA polymerase
interactions, and control by multiple protein-DNA complexes. The purpose of the
meeting is to bring together geneticists and biochemists to exchange
information. The field of transcription initiation in prokaryotes is progressing
rapidly, providing information on mechanisms at the molecular level. %%% This
conference deals with the means by which bacteria produce the messenger RNA
blueprint from which proteins from proteins are produced. This involves where
the replication machinery begins on the gene as well the role of the cellular
factors which work to regulate the production of the RNA blueprints. The
conference brings together scientists that study this area with biochemical and
genetic techniques to exchange information. This meeting brings basic science
and biotechnology people together.