* 9225134
* Investigation of the Surface Chemical Physics of Light-     Enhanced Epitaxy on II-VI Semiconductor Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1993,07/31/1997
* Richard Osgood, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1997
* USD 220,000.00

9225134 Osgood Investigations of fundamental surface-chemical mechanisms
important in light-enhanced MOCVD (or MOMBE) epitaxy of specific II-VI compound
semiconductors will be conducted. The research will utilize time-of-flight mass
spectroscopy and total-internal-reflection infrared spectroscopy as well as a
variety of standard UHV surface probes to determine the as-yet-unknown
mechanisms for photo-induced reactions on II-VI surfaces. In addition, reaction
cross-sections, yields, and products will be measured, and in the course of
these measurements, consideration will be given to techniques for proper
preparation of atomically clean surfaces. The primary surfaces for study will be
those on ZnSe and CdTe. The study is expected to give insight into the processes
initiating reactions and to guide selection of light-source wavelengths,
precursor molecules, and general growth conditions for epitaxy of II-VI
materials. %%% This research is expected to provide deeper fundamental
understanding of photo-assisted chemistry on surfaces and its relation to photo-
assisted epitaxy of compound semiconductor materials. From an application point
of view, the results will provide guidance for the use of lasers and other light
sources to do patterning in an MOCVD epitaxy chamber, and will be important to
the general advancement in the technology of II-VI optoelectronics leading to
improvements in the performance of advanced devices and integrated circuits used
in computing, information processing, and telecommunications. ***