* 9225059
* CRB:  Target Taxon Analysis:  A Biogeographical, Systematics Approach to Conservation Inventories
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1993,03/31/1995
* Robert Wayne, Xerces Society
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1995
* USD 33,125.00

9225059 Kremen Target taxon analysis: a biogeographical, systematics approach to
conservation inventories. Little distributional data on plants and animals is
available to guide conservation decision-making to maximize the protection of
biological diversity. That which does exist rarely represents the most diverse
component of biodiversity, the insects. Insects make up 95% of animal life, and
are the mainstay of ecosystems, participating in myriad essential ecological
interactions. More information on insect distributions is needed so that
conservation strategies can both protect the bulk biodiversity and ensure the
long-term viability of ecosystems. However, many insect species are undescribed,
a factor which limits including them in inventory programs for conservation
evaluation. To obtain better data for conservation planning, a method (target
taxon analysis) has therefore been proposed for choosing and utilizing
informative insect indicator groups in conservation inventories. %%% The present
proposal requests funds to support further testing and refining if the method.
The work will be carried out in Madagascar, whose endangered rain forests
constitute an international conservation priority. The project will use an
established butterfly target taxon (Lepidoptera: Satyrinae: Henetosia) to: (1)
continue testing the method by comparing Henotesia distributions with those of
both insect and vertebrate groups, (2) assess the effectiveness of target taxon
analysis at different spatial scales, and (3) extend target taxon analysis from
a method for rigorously selecting and evaluating indicators, to one which can
also be used for designing optimal reserve networks. iences 4 Division of
Environmental Biology 4 l : Washington, DC 20550 y x d d d y 4 M ~ J M X D 4 X J
0 Systematic and Population Biology ` (#d phone: (202) 357 9588 ` (#f fax: (202)
357 1191 `$ (#\ e mail: rhoneycu@note.nsf.gov X &amp; ( m r ( ! ! ! F ( ( (
Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial 5 " h v ev e - Gayle Edmonds Gayle Edmonds