* 9225123
* Theory of Tethered Polymer-Solution Interfaces and Quantum  Impurities
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1993,06/30/1996
* Thomas Beck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Lesser Blum
* 06/30/1996
* USD 207,000.00

9225123 Beck Dr. Thomas L. Beck is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to perform research in the following two areas:
1) computer simulations and statistical mechanical theory of a tethered alkane-
polar solution which is a model for reversed phase liquid chromatography; and 2)
calculation of chemical potentials in quantum systems with applications to
solubilities. Beck will apply a combination of computer simulation methodologies
such as Stationary Phase Monte Carlo and Coherent State Path Integration as well
as statistical mechanical theory to these theoretical problems. %%% Polymers
adsorbed or chemically bonded to surfaces form the basis for several
technologically and biologically important processes, e.g., molecular
electronics, polymer coatings, and model membranes. Reverse Phase Liquid
Chromatography (RPLC) is an important chemical separation technique which
depends on such an interface. Dr. Beck's research will help to understand the
detailed mechanism for this separation technique at the molecular level. In a
second set of studies, Beck will examine the fundamental theory behind the
unusual quantum behavior of of light elements at low temperatures. This has
important implications with regard to the solubility of various atoms and
molecules in liquid helium, and the storage of hydrogen isotopes in metals. ***