* 9225145
* Mathematical Sciences: Semiliner Partial Different EquationsCurve Shortening in Minkowski Geometry and Branching        Processes in Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Yi Li, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 40,000.00

Li 9225145 This project concentrates on three areas of research in mathematical
analysis. The general theme is that of determining existence, regularity, local
and global behavior and symmetry properties of solutions of nonlinear equations
and systems. In particular, work on semilinear elliptic partial differential
equations will continue, examining the Lane-Emden equation and Matukuma equation
of astrophysics. This includes a complete classification of positive solutions,
and to determine whether all solutions are radial with limiting values of zero
or infinity. A second line of investigation considers anisotropic curve
shortening. This has a more geometric flavor in which embedded plane curves
evolve according to a rate proportional to the normal vector. The present work
focuses on a generalized setting of curves on manifolds in a Minkowski geometry.
Efforts will be made to determine when such flows can shrink to a point when
standing symmetry hypotheses are not present. The ideas represented by this work
can be viewed as models for the evolution of phase boundaries such as the
boundaries of growing crystals. The third direction this works takes involves
measure-valued branching processes, including the model on the evolution caused
by point catalysts. *** The work has its roots in stochastic partial
differential equations arising in the study of spatially distributed birth and
death processes. A particular goal is to analyze nonequilibrium reactions in the
presence of multiple catalysts.