* 9225051
* Quantitative Role of Glycine Betaine and DMSP in the        Cellular Nitrogen and Sulfur Budgets of Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Ronald Kiene, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1997
* USD 133,862.00

Marine phytoplankton produce a variety of organic osmolytes including the
nitrogenous compound glycine betaine (GBT) and its sulfur analog,
dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP). We believe that GBT and DMSP make large and
hitherto unrecognized contributions to the cellular nitrogen and sulfur pools in
many species of marine phytoplankton and to particulate organic nitrogen (PON)
and particulate organic sulfur (POS) pools in surface seawater. Very little is
known about the production, distribution and cycling of these labile biogenic
compounds. Information from the literature and from our own preliminary studies
suggests that many species of phytoplankton produce both GBT and DMSP
simultaneously and that nitrogen availability may affect the relative
proportions of GBT and DMSP. We therefore will conduct laboratory and field
studies to test the following hypotheses: 1) GBT makes up a significant (5-20%)
fraction of cellular nitrogen in certain species of marine phytoplankton.
Likewise, DMSP is a major constituent of cellular sulfur; 2) As with DMSP, there
is a relationship between taxonomy and GBT production; 3) The levels of GBT and
GMSP in phytoplankton are a function of nitrogen availability, with use of DMSP
favored under N-limitation: 4) phytoplankton take up GBT and DMSP from their
surroundings and release them under certain conditions; 5) In the field
production of GBT over DMSP, or selection of species which produce GBT, will be
favored in high nitrogen environments. Our study will provide new and important
data on the quantitative role of methylated nitrogen and sulfur osmolytes to the
cellular nitrogen and sulfur budgets of phytoplankton and to PON and POS in the
sea. This information will lead to a better understanding of the biological
cycling of nitrogen and sulfur in the ocean. ***