* 9225060
* CRB:  Breeding Behavior and Reproductive Seasonality of     Nicaraguan Cichlids:  An Endangered Fauna
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Kenneth McKaye, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 12/31/1996
* USD 110,000.00

In Nicaragua a relatively unique situation exists in which the freshwater fish
resource is being underutilized as a protein source. Exceptional opportunities
are present to develop this resource and increase the protein consumption of the
rural inland population of Nicaragua. However the recent introduction of African
tilapia threatens the entire natural ecosystem where they appear to be spreading
and dominating the local cichlid fauna. Their presence could collapse the
fisheries valued at over 10 million dollars. This study will examine the
expansion of the introduced African tilapia in Lake Nicaragua and continue long-
term studies on the ecology, reproductive biology and recruitment of Nicaraguan
cichlid fishes. %%% Numerous studies have documented the disappearance of one or
more species from bodies of water following exotic introductions. These studies
have taken place after the species have been eliminated and the precise
mechanisms or causes for elimination remain hypothetical. This study will
examine, document, and understand the actual process of fish invasions before
native species, many underscribed, disappear. The results will be used to
coordinate management of the cichlid fish resource with the goal of maintaining
the genetic diversity of the fisheries while at the same time maximizing the
sustainable economic return to the people of Nicaragua.