* 9225144
* Haldane Centenary International Conference on Human GeneticsCalcutta, India, December 1992, Group Travel Award in U.S.  and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1992,04/30/1994
* Robert Elston, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/1994
* USD 29,500.00

Description: This project provides support for a U.S. delegation to an
international conference in India, the"Haldane Centenary Conference on Human
Genetics, Calcutta, India, December 1992". The five days meeting will mark the
birth centenary of J.B.S. Haldane with the aims of: reviewing Haldane's
contribution to the various areas of human population genetics, focusing
especially on their impacts on current quantitative thinking; deliberating on
recent advances in quantitative human genetics, evolution, population structure
and genetic epidemiology; presenting applications of recent advances in
theoretical aspects of human genetics; and, deliberating on some current issues
concerning the interaction of genes and environment with a view to delineate
some thrust areas that deserve immediate scientific attention of human
geneticists. The meeting, which will be held at the Indian Statistical Institute
(ISI) in Calcutta, is expected to be attended by scientists from the U.K.,
Japan, the Netherland, Germany, Australia, Brazil and Canada in addition to the
U.S. and India. Scope: This activity commemorates Haldane, a pioneer in the
field of human genetics who established his reputation in England, before moving
to India in the later part of his life, where he continued his work at the ISI
in Calcutta. The ISI is considered one of the foremost centers in the world for
training and research in statistics, both theoretical and applied, including
biostatistics. The conference will have the effect of promoting biostatistic
research in India especially in devising statistical methods for analyzing
molecular genetic data on human populations and families. It should increase the
awarness of the visiting scientists to the social structure of the endogamous
populations of India, the environment they live in and the resulting spread of
genes within the populations. Initiation of collaborative research proposals
between Indian and scientists from outside India, especially in the quantitative
aspects of human genetics, is likely to result.