* 9225062
* Scheduling with Multiple Objectives and Machine AvailabilityConstraints
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Michael Pinedo, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 02/28/1997
* USD 195,494.00

WPC= 2 B V T W Courier 10 pitch z N x x x , x @ ; HP LaserJet IIIP HPLASEII.PRS
x @ h 0 @k 2 3 ; #| x 9225062 Pinedo This research focuses on several classes of
scheduling problems which arise in the design, development and implementation of
scheduling systems currently being used in manufacturing. the project has both
theoretical and applied aspects. One class of problems concerns multi objective
scheduling. In the real world a scheduler usually has a number of objectives to
take into account. In order to develop a schedule he has to know the trade offs
between the various objectives. The research aims at developing algorithms for
solving such multi objective problems as well as developing procedures for
parametric analyses. A second class of scheduling problems concerns problems
with machine availability constraints. In practice, machines are usually not
continuously available for the jobs to be scheduled. At times they may not be
available because of preventive maintenance or other reasons. The theoretical
side of the research aims at developing scheduling algorithms which take machine
availability constraints into account. The project focuses on a number of issue
on the applied side as well. A prototype scheduling systems has been developed
at Columbia University during the last three years. A number of companies have a
version of this system (including the source code) in their laboratories.