* 9240261
* Interactions in Time and Space Variability in a Chihuahuan  Desert Ecosystem:  Jornada LTER
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1995
* William Schlesinger, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 03/31/1995
* USD 1,314,390.00

This research project will examine the general hypothesis that desertification
has altered a previous, relatively uniform distribution of water and nitrogen by
increasing their spatial and temporal heterogeneity, leading to changes in
community composition and biogeochemical processes in Chihuahuan Desert
ecosystems. The Jornada Experimental Ranch (southern New Mexico), with a 75-year
history of rangeland research, has documented extensive changes in vegetation
cover - from perennial grassland to several kinds of shrublands - which are one
result of desertification. The work will include measurements of net primary
production, root growth, decomposition, soil water dynamics, surface hydrology,
dynamics of animal populations, animal-produced soil disturbance, nitrogen
cycling processes and stable isotope distributions of nitrogen and carbon in
widespread ecosystems, ranging from black grama (Bouteloua eriopoda) grassland,
to desertified, persistent shrublands of chreosotebush (Larrea tridentata),
tarbush (Flourencia cernua) and mesquite (Prosopis gladulosa). A conceptual
model of desertification will be tested by long-term water augmentation and
mechanical homogenization of water and nutrients. Data from these studies will
be used to parameterize process models. Measurements of water, wind, and gaseous
transport and run-on diversion experiments will provide data for a desert
landscape model. Data derived from satellite remote sensing of vegetation and
soils will be incorporated into a dynamics geographic information system model
of the Jornada Basin. Institutional support remains excellent for the
continuation of this project. Facilities are very good. The three-institution
collaborative arrangement involving several investigators has been well thought
out and should prove to be highly beneficial and productive. Results from this
research project should yield major finding that are fundamental to the broad
field of ecology. Additionally, results should be important to the future,
better enlightened management of arid land resources.