* 9247006
* Environmental Issues in the Science Classroom Management of Hazardous Substances
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1993
* Howard Kimmel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 11/30/1993
* USD 104,165.00

This supplemental award will fund a one year program titled, "Environmental
Issues in the Science Classroom: Management of Hazardous Substances", at the
NJIT Hazardous Substance Management Research Center (HSMRC), an NSF I/UCRC. This
project is designed to improve the teaching of science at the junior high/middle
school level (grades 6-8) through an integration of professional development
activities for teachers. Sixteen (16) junior high/middle school teachers will
participate in a 6-week summer (1992) program which will consist of a 3-week
intensive, content based workshop followed by a 3-week internship in a HSMRC
affiliated industrial laboratory. During the following 1992-1993 academic year,
teachers will integrate their experiences into their science curriculum, with
the assistance of NJIT faculty involved in curriculum improvement activities at
these grade levels. This project is a continuation of a highly successful
program undertaken by NJIT in the summer of 1991. This project will be funded
for one year at $104,165. The Education and Human Resources Directorate, Teacher
Enhancement Program will provide one-half of the total funding for this project.
The Program Director recommends that NJIT be awarded a total of $104,165 for one
year. Of this amount the I/UCRC program will provide $5,208, the Engineering
Infrastructure Development Division will provide $48,874, and the Teacher
Enhancement Program in the Education and Human Resources Directorate will
provide $52,082.