* 9250110
* VPW:  Computer Literacy in Workgroups (Information          Technology)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1993
* Barbara Gutek, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 07/31/1993
* USD 200,000.00

This research assesses the effect of learning resources (e.g., presence of a
local expert in a work group, information centers, corporate-sponsored courses)
on computer literacy. The assessment will be accomplished through a follow-up
study of 30 of 89 work groups studied in three waves from 1987 to 1989. Computer
literacy was first assessed in these groups in late fall 1989, with the
development of an instrument for measuring computer literacy. The main question
now to be addressed is: in work groups in which computer use is already well-
established, will computer literacy of the work group show an increase,
decrease, or no change from 1989 to 1992? The researcher anticipates finding
instances of all three, so generally will focus on the conditions which foster
increased and decreased computer literacy over time. The researcher will do this
by collecting data from 30 work groups which vary in the mean computer literacy
score of the group. The researcher will select 15 groups that perform primarily
clerical functions and 15 groups which perform professional functions, from the
large set of work groups which have previously been studied. Everyone in each of
the selected work groups will fill out a short questionnaire and a two-week log
of their interactions with others in the work group. In addition, the researcher
already has substantial data about each work group from the following: two
interviews conducted with the head of each work group conducted about 10 months
apart, two questionnaires filled out by each person who was working in the work
group in summer 1988 and fall 1989. Analyses will focus both on the individual
and work group predictors of individual computer literacy and the predictors of
group computer literacy as well as factors which are associated with higher
computer literacy scores in 1992 than 1989 and those associated with lower
computer literacy in 1992 than 1989. This research focuses on the workplace as
an environment for increasing the computer literacy of American society. The
proposed research will explore the factors associated with computer literacy and
computer expertise in ongoing work groups. The project furthers VPW program
objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
science or engineering through research, and to encourage other women to pursue
careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced visibility as a role
model on the host campus. The proposed activities which contribute to the second
objective include: teaching a course, "Women and Men at Work;" giving lectures
in other courses and/or public lectures; meeting with women's groups (students,
faculty, and staff); and mentoring students.