* 9250086
* Significance of Exosporium Enclosure of Parasporal          Inclusions of Bacillus thuringiensis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1992,04/30/1994
* LaJoyce Debro, Jacksonville State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/1994
* USD 11,994.00

Bacillus thuringiensis is a Gram-positive sporulating bacterium that produces
large amounts of sporulation specific proteins. These proteins accumulate as
parasporal inclusions and are protoxins with selective activity for insect
larvae. Generally, the inclusion is deposited outside the exosporium and is
released into the environment separately from the spore. In subspecies
finitimus, however, the inclusion and the spore share the common exosporium and
are released together. The exosporium is more hydrophobic than the spore
(Koshikawa et al., 1989), and exosporium enclosed inclusions are expected to be
more hydrophobic than free inclusions. The availability of protoxins to
susceptible larvae may be dependent upon the hydrophobicity of the inclusions.
Subspecies israelensis produces inclusions composed of protoxins active on
mosquito larvae. The inclusions of israelensis are released separately from the
spore and are probably hydrophilic and not readily available to these larvae in
nature. If the inclusions of israelensis were enclosed within the exosporium,
then the protoxin should be more accessible and thus a more effective biological
control agent. The aims of the preliminary planning study are to determine the
effects of the exosporium on the hydrophobicity of parasporal inclusions, and to
determine the feasibility of engineering, by genetic techniques, the protoxin of
israelensis inside an exosporium. %%% This is a planning study to determine the
feasibility of developing a biological insecticide effective against mosquito
larvae. The approach is to take advantage of natural antilarval proteins
produced by a bacterium in the course of sporulation. Mosquito- borne diseases
of man and other animals represent an extremely significant world health and
economic problem, particularly in the third world; one alone, malaria, is the
number one cause of childhood mortality in the world. Chemical insecticides are
not only unattractive because of their toxicity to animals and the environment,
but they are becoming less and less effective as insects increasingly develop
resistance to them. This research on biological pest control is therefore of
great significance to both human health and the environment.