* 9250974
* Undergraduate Telecommunication Network Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1994
* Joseph Hui, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1994
* USD 61,000.00

This project will integrate the teaching of telephony, data, and optical
communication for undergraduates. The graphical object-oriented software CANeT
will be used to facilitate an intuitive and experimental understanding of
difficult networking concepts and analysis. The experiments will be performed on
nine SUN IPX workstations served by a SUN SPARC II GX workstation. The
workstations will be networked by an ethernet network and an optical FDDI
network. The ethernet network will provide basic low-speed communication among
the workstations, while the FDDI network will serve to demonstrate traffic
measurements and high-speed networks for transporting graphics, data, and video.
The network, besides being the Tool for experimentation, also is the Object of
experimentation. Students will acquire hands-on experience on a real network by
implementing and testing elementary network protocols using UNIX sockets.
Special projects following the course will train students to handle real network
problems.The course emphasizes the skill of analyzing a complex system into its
components, solving the component problems, and then synthesizing the component
solutions to meet system objectives. Engineering iterates is a key feature of
the CANeT tool for meeting system objectives. System modeling is also
emphasized, whereas sophisticated mathematical analysis is facilitated by CANeT.
Programming exercises allow students to learn communication protocol by
experimentation, rather than by deciphering acronyms of standards.This project
will establish a modern network laboratory, with numerous exercises and
projects, and plans for disseminating the laboratory software are incorporated.
An undergraduate textbook based on a new framework rather than the usual OSI 7
layer framework will be completed.