* 9250109
* VPW:  Management of Manufacturing Knowledge for a ConcurrentEngineering Paradigm (Engineering)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1992,10/31/1994
* Vilma Irizarry-Gaskins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 10/31/1994
* USD 45,986.00

The area of research being proposed involves the management and exchange of the
knowledge required to facilitate Concurrent Engineering (CE). A large element of
CE involves the integration of separate, specialized disciplines. Each
engineering or business group has its own valuable knowledge that it uses to
accomplish its task. In a CE environment, the communication of this knowledge is
of primary concern. This project proposes investigation in the interaction,
communication, and integration of specialized knowledge. Each body of
specialized knowledge is viewed as a knowledge source, and it is of particular
interest to understand, simplify, and formalize ways for sharing this
engineering/business knowledge. The project furthers VPW program objectives to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or
engineering through research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in
these areas through the investigator's enhanced visibility as a role model on
the host campus. The proposed activities which contribute to the second
objective include: visiting five northeastern universities to give technical
seminars; leading a seminar series at the host institution, tentatively titled,
"Intelligent Systems in Manufacturing and Concurrent Engineering;" teaching one
course per semester at the School of Industrial Engineering, namely, Computer
Integrated Manufacturing, and Expert Systems; and mentoring students.