* 9250289
* Laser Demonstration and Experiment Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Louis Beyer, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 06/30/1995
* USD 47,559.00

The purpose of the proposed laboratory is two-fold: 1) to enhance and enrich the
content of the existing curriculum through the demonstration of physical
principles by optical and laser techniques; and 2) to enable the introduction of
two new laboratory courses focusing on laser fundamentals and their various
applications. A well equipped laser laboratory with supporting optical equipment
is being used to provide hands-on experience in many existing courses, ranging
from the basic concepts of interference and diffraction in optics courses to
measurements of hyperfine structure in modern physics courses. The new courses
are designed to enhance the understanding of and appreciation for applied laser
techniques. One course, Laser Physics was initiated earlier without laboratory
support and is aimed at upper-level physics and engineering physics majors. This
course is one step in the establishment of an area of specialization in electro-
optics in our engineering physics program. The second proposed course is
designed to provide students in science-related fields other than physics with
an overview course in laser types, operating principles, and applications. The
proposal includes items to equip six workstations with the optics and low power
lasers for fundamental investigations. Versatile general purpose equipment and
more sophisticated data gathering devices to support any work station or
demonstration are requested in single quantity.