* 9250082
* The Teachers Academy for Mathematics and Science in Chicago/Staff Development
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Jon Thompson, Teachers Academy for Mathematics and Science in Chicago
* Continuing grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 07/31/1995
* USD 7,150,000.00

This grant supports the continuation of the teacher enhancement project of The
Teachers Academy for Mathematics and Science in Chicago. Elementary schools in
the city of Chicago are participating in this school-wide program which provides
meaningful in-service to every teacher, K-8, from a participating school. These
teachers come to the Academy for an Intensive Program for two days per week
every week for sixteen weeks. Cooperating teachers replace these participants
during their absence from the classroom. Implementation Specialists remain in
the school for a year following the Intensive Program to provide resource help
and information for the teachers. Since the schools in Chicago are mandated to
have a Local School Council (LSC) to manage the learning and teaching
environment, the LSC and the school administration must choose to participate in
the program and accept the responsibility of continuing and ongoing support for
it. This project has been designed to complement the education reform in the
city. The Academy staff and curriculum reflect the philosophy of experiential
science and mathematics that is consistent with current literature. The project
has supported 29 schools and over 400 teachers to effect these changes in their
schools. This grant will enable an expansion of that effort. The project is also
being funded by the Department of Energy, the city of Chicago, the state of
Illinois and by private foundations and industry.