* 9250069
* MAINE:  A COMMUNITY OF DISCOVERY
* EHR,ESR
* 09/01/1992,11/30/1997
* Thomas Keller, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Cooperative Agreement
* Celestine Pea
* 11/30/1997
* USD 10,000,000.00

MAINE Governor: John McKernan Principal Investigator: Jacqueline Mitchell Maine
Department of Education Augusta, Maine 04333 207/289-5918 Five-Year Award
Request: $10,000,000 "Maine: A Community of Discovery" will change fundamentally
opportunities, performances, and aspirations in mathematics and science for all
of Maine's students, pre-school through college. Educational, political,
business, and community leaders joined in the initiative to coordinate changes
in: 1. Curriculum. 2. Teacher preparation programs. 3. Teacher enhancement
programs. 4. Alignment of curricular goals with assessment. The vehicles for
change will include Beacon Schools, schools selected to be laboratories for
testing new curriculum materials and teaching methods and, later, as models and
dissemination centers for all schools in Maine. Fourteen mathematics and science
facilitators will be responsible for dissemination of instructional materials,
methods, and technology developed at the Beacon Schools. At the postsecondary
level, Maine will establish a Beacon College, a consortium of institutions of
higher education that will reform their teacher preparation programs consistent
with the Beacon Schools' needs. In addition, the State will mount community
awareness programs, progressive institutes and workshops for teachers, and
efforts to increase the use of technology. Mathematicians and scientists will
participate throughout the project's components.