* 9250858
* Modernization of Gamma Ray Physics Laboratory Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Stephen Yerian, Xavier University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 02/28/1995
* USD 20,095.00

The project is to update and substantially upgrade the gamma ray spectroscopy
component of the nuclear physics laboratory program for physics/applied physics
majors and physics concentration education majors at Xavier. By acquiring a high
purity, high-resolution germanium (HPGe) detector and by assembling modern
computer based multichannel analyzer systems, significant improvements in gamma
ray spectroscopy experiments will be achieved. Two such systems are proposed,
one for germanium and one for sodium iodide. Each system are comprised of state-
of-the-art hardware and software. Each system makes significant and appropriate
use of two recently acquired IBM PS/2 Model 80 computers in the nuclear
laboratory. Student experiments and research projects are enhanced and improved
by the increased resolution of the HPGe detector and by the powerful analysis
and library features of the software. Instruction in the principles of photon
detection, gamma ray physics, and nuclear physics is being enhanced and
increased and training in modern computer-based nuclear data acquisition and
analysis techniques is being provided. Such training is important for
undergraduates who will later work in high technology industries or graduate
research laboratories. The spectroscopy systems also provide opportunities for
more meaningful undergraduate student research projects.