* 9250051
* Georgia Statewide Systemic Middle School Program
* EDU,ESR
* 09/01/1992,07/31/1998
* Michael Padilla, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gerald E. Gipp
* 07/31/1998
* USD 10,000,000.00

GEORGIA Governor: Zell Miller Principal Investigator: Michael Padilla
University of Georgia Boyd Graduate Studies Research Center University of
Georgia Athens, GA 30602 404/542-1763 Five-Year Award Request: $10,000,000 The
Georgia Initiative in Mathematics and Science (Project GIMS) focuses on teacher
education, adopting improved curricular materials and instructional techniques,
and using appropriate assessment techniques. Five university-based regional
centers, geographically located throughout the State, will link schools with
university faculty, current instructional material, new pedagogies and other
resources to support Georgia's vision of science and mathematics education. In
addition, policy revisions, public awareness, and parent support will be
developed to support the following goals: 1. To increase the successful
participation of underrepresented groups in mathematics and science. 2. To
develop teachers with strong content and pedagogical foundations in mathematics
and science. 3. To recruit and retain the highest quality teaching force. 4. To
develop and implement curriculum based on a set of comprehensive principles that
is application-based, interdisciplinary in nature, and requires active learner
participation. 5. To design innovative assessment techniques that reflect
curriculum goals and instructional strategies appropriate to mathematics and
science. 6. To initiate fundamental changes in the state educational structure
to empower students, teachers, parents, administrators, and the community toward
achieving greater scientific literacy.