* 9250338
* Diode Laser Spectroscopy
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Paxton Wilt, Centre College of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 12/31/1995
* USD 12,575.00

This project will enhance the education of Centre's physics majors in the
related areas of lasers, atomic spectroscopy and modern optics. Students and
faculty are fabricating a laser spectrometer and using it to study some details
of the atomic structure of rubidium and possibly cesium. Many of the system
components (mirrors, detectors, diode lasers, a digital oscilloscope system)
were purchased. For pedagogical purposes, however, undergraduates construct and
test the laser controller and detector circuits. We are using the system in
upper- divisional courses in modern physics, optics, and quantum mechanics.
Special student projects and research are conducted in two areas: computer
enhancement of laser spectra, and the effect of an external magnetic field on
atomic spectra (Zeeman Effect).Our undergraduates gain experience in fabricating
and using rather sophisticated optical, laser and electronic systems. Students
observe several important physical phenomena in atomic spectra: line broadening
due to thermal motion of gaseous atoms (Doppler effect), Zeeman splitting,
isotopic effects (85Rb, 87Rb), and nuclear hyperfine effects (interaction of
electrons with nuclear spin, or magnetic dipole effect, and effects caused by
the finite size of the nuclear charge, or nuclear quadrupole effect). Finally,
it is expected that this project will better prepare and motivate our physics
students for graduate study.