* 9250111
* VPW:  Functional Cytomorphology and Phylogenetic Signifi-   cance of the Coelomic Heart-Kidney Complex in the Lesser    Molluscan Classes, Aplacophora and Polyplacophora(Sys Biol)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* M. Patricia Morse, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1994
* USD 105,075.00

It is proposed to investigate two lesser classes of molluscs, the Aplacophora
and the Polyplacophora, using electron microscopy to ellucidate a new set of
characters for the heart- kidney complex to use in the analysis of molluscan
phylogeny. Both classes have been placed near the roots of the various
phylogenetic trees that depict the origin of the molluscan classes. Studies
proposed will include anatomical relationships not yet determined, as well as
patterns of new characters. With access to living organisms and ultrastructural
fixation of the heart-kidneq complex, identified specific characters to be
studied will be: 1) heart musculature, 2) ultrafiltration sites, 3) pericardial
epithelium and its contractility, 4) hemocyanin blood pigment, 5) pore cells in
the pericardial tissues, 6) relationships of the coelomic body caviites with the
coelomducts (kidneys), and 7) secretory and absorptive cells in the kidneys. The
patterns found in representatives of these two phyla will be compared to what is
known in the better-studied classes of molluscs to establish character polarity
between primitive and derived states. These findings, along with what is known
in the out group phyla associated with the Mollusca (especially the phylum
Sipuncula) will contribute to the eventual formulation of a parsimonious
phylogeny of the phylum Mollusca. This research will focus on the systematic
biology of molluscs, reflecting new techniques and new thinking in approaches to
investigations of the evolution of molluscs. These include analyses of data by
looking for relatedness between taxa, understanding and weighing whether a
character is primitive (plesiomorphic) or derived (apomorphic), establishing
shared characters between large and small groups of organisms, utiliizing
electron microscopy to investigate characters at the cellular and tissue level,
and seeking relatedness as expressed in the genetic code. The effort furthers
VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their
careers in science or engineering through research, and to encourage other women
to pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced visibility
as a role model on the host campus. The proposed activities which contribute to
the second objective include: lecturing in two undergraduate courses (an
advanced undergraduate course in invertebrate zoology, and a field course in
natural history of the Washington coast), and interacting in the laboratory
component of each class; offering a seminar on Marine Biodiversity for graduate
students; organizing faculty/student "bag lunch" meetings to highlight issues
facing women in science; helping to establish a visiting woman scientist
program; and working with students on research projects.