* 9250052
* Puerto Rico Statewide Systemic Initiative in Science and    Mathematics Education
* EDU,ESR
* 09/01/1992,05/31/1998
* Julio Lopez Ferrao, University of Puerto Rico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gerald E. Gipp
* 05/31/1998
* USD 10,000,000.00

The Puerto Rico Statewide Systemic Initiative in Science and Mathematics
Education is a joint venture between the Puerto Rico Department of Education,
the Resource Center for Science and Engineering, and the Puerto Rico General
Council of Education to revise its science and mathematics curriculum in grades
K-12. This collaboration provides a method to link expertise in science and
mathematics education, institutions of higher education, and policy initiatives
to systemically alter Puerto Rico's educational system. The project will: 1.
Revise science and mathematics curriculum focused on students' cognitive skills
and depth of scientific understanding. 2. Revise teacher preparation curriculum
to upgrade subject matter understanding and instructional methods. 3. Promote
parent and community involvement in school improvement efforts. 4. Develop,
pilot, and adopt new assessment methods consistent with revised curriculum
materials and instructional practices. 5. Establish and measure island-wide
standards of excellence in science and mathematics education. Twenty-one model
schools (one elementary, middle, and secondary school in each of the
Commonwealth's seven geographic regions) will be the vehicles for testing and
disseminating the reforms. They will serve as regional centers for ten
additional schools. By the year 2000, all 1,600 schools in Puerto Rico will have
restructured their science and mathematics education programs.