* 9250102
* VPW:  Unofficial Markets for Foreign Currency & Goods in theFormer Soviet Union and Eastern Europe (Economics)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Linda Goldberg, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 07/31/1994
* USD 134,893.00

This research focuses on the black markets for foreign currency and goods in
the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. Parallel markets in goods and
currency are influenced by developments in the official and unofficial markets
for foreign- currency trade and by economic-reform initiatives. The objective of
the research is to trace, both theoretically and empirically, the implications
of anticipated and unanticipated policy reforms for hoarding of consumption
goods, inflation, the black-market exchange rate, and black-market trade volumes
in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. The methodological approach is
drawn from the theory of exchange-rate determination, with the portfolio theory
of asset demands and exchange-rate determination agumented to show that when
there are shortages in goods markets and individuals tend to hoard goods as a
form of investment, with black-market exchange rates biased predictors of the
post-reform equilibrium exchange rates. Announcements of reform can lead short-
run exchange rates to overshoot or undershoot (depending on the announcement)
long-run equilibrium levels. The empirical work will examine black-market
exchange rates (buy and sell rates) between the rouble and the dollar, as drawn
from bi-weekly sampling of Moscow black-market currency dealers. The
determinants of black-market exchange- rate movements will be identified
empirically, as will be the determinants of the spread between the bid and ask
prices in this market. If appropriate data is available, black-market prices for
goods also will be studied. Exchange rate and price data for the Baltic nations
also may be examined. This research will provide insights into the distortions
caused when governments use black-market rates to choose levels of official
exchange rates. The project furthers VPW program objectives to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or engineering
through research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas
through the investigator's enhanced visibility as a role model on the host
campus. The proposed activities which contribute to the second objective
include: teaching a course in International Finance; presenting independent
research on "Exchange-Rate Regimes in Transition Economies" in departmental
seminars in International Economics and Comparative Economic Studies; regularly
participating in the International Economics seminar program; and working to
promote the achievement of women in economics by active involvement with female
graduate students through the established support group "Women in Economics."