* 9250468
* Integration of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrophotometry Into the Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Charles Fox, Saint Ambrose University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 12/31/1994
* USD 14,125.00

The Departments of Chemistry and Biology are purchasing a Fourier Transform
infrared spectrometer (FTIR) for use in chemically oriented instruction in both
departments. Students learn the use of computer controlled FTIR
spectrophotometry for the elucidation of organic structures as well as data
manipulation and analysis. The high sensitivity and analysis speed of the FTIR
allow use for a greater variety of experiments than was possible with prior
instruments. The computer search capabilities provide students with an
understanding of the identification process inherent in infrared analysis and
demonstrate the usefulness of computer database interfacing to instruments. In
the organic chemistry laboratory, students use the instrument to identify the
key chemical compounds involved in the multi-step synthesis of lidocaine from
2,6-dimethylnitrobenzene. In the instrumental analysis course, students study
both the theoretical and practical aspects of FTIR. In the physical chemistry
course, an experiment is performed to study the rotational fine structure of the
infrared vibrational spectra of hydrogen chloride and deuterium chloride. In
addition, a general education course in introductory chemistry for non-majors
provides students with experiences in FTIR analysis involving such procedures as
the purification of aspirin.