* 9250114
* VPW:  Pattern Formation Phenomena in the Spreading of       Fluids (Materials Science)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Jane LeGrange, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 02/28/1994
* USD 142,312.00

Pattern formation phenomena occur universally in nature. The proposed work
focuses on one dimensional pattern formation which occurs in wetting, with the
objective of understanding the spreading of a fluid meniscus coated by a
surfactant monolayer. Wetting dynamics are to be studied by microscopic imaging
of a vertical meniscus to view the motion of the three phase contact line as it
moves in response to an applied thermal gradient. Quantitative analysis of
patterns forming in the spreading front of the pure fluid and in the monolayer
is used to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the instabilities in the wetting
process causing the pattern growth. The work proposed on the spreading of a
fluid contaminated by a surfactant is relevant to technologies such as oil
recovery, chemical spraying, and coating processes. In addition to contributing
to the understanding of a complex wetting problem, this work may further the
understanding of the deposition of an organic layer on an inorganic substrate,
as is done in the Langmuir-Blodgett process. This project furthers VPW program
objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
science or engineering through research, and to encourage other women to pursue
careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced visibility as a role
model on the host campus. The proposed activities which contribute to the second
objective include: the development and teaching of a new course in the Princeton
Materials Institute; initiating a program to introduce lower level
undergraduates to scientific and/or engineering research as a career option; and
a seminar series on organic materials which includes several women speakers.