* 9250435
* Applied Artificial Intelligence amd Robotics Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1994
* Sam Thangiah, Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1994
* USD 19,955.00

There is a need to expose students to practical problem solving methods taught
in computer science classes. This project will create an Applied Artificial
Intelligence and Robotics Laboratory for teaching undergraduate students the
theory and application of artificial intelligence methods to solve large scale
real world problems. The laboratory will consist of four NeXT stations, a NeXT
cube, a NeXT dimension, a B12 Mobile Robot and artificial intelligence software.
The software to control the B12 Mobile robot will be developed and downloaded
directly from the NeXT systems, allowing students to concentrate primarily on
the practical aspects of problem solving. The laboratory will be integrated into
the course work by dividing the lectures into class and laboratory sessions. The
class lectures will concentrate on the theoretical aspects of artificial
intelligence methods and the laboratory sessions will consist of experiments
that allow the students to experience the theory and its interaction with the
real world. The main objectives and salient features of the laboratory are: 1)
providing at least 40 students a year the opportunity to solve large scale real
world problems using state-of-the-art systems and artificial intelligence
software; 2) exposing students to theoretical and practical aspects of
artificial intelligence methods for problem solving; and 3) providing a
laboratory facility for interdepartmental use of equipment, independent projects
and future course development.Since all the equipment and software used in this
laboratory are commercially available, these experiments can be duplicated by
other institutions. The results from this project will be reported in
professional journals.