* 9250935
* Development of an Automated Process Control and             Instrumentation Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* James Wood, Tri-County Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1995
* USD 99,552.00

Tri-County Technical College is establishing an automated process control and
instrumentation laboratory as part of a integrated, multi-level curriculum
reform. The state-of-the- art laboratory will consist of a Hampden
Instrumentation and Process Control System to include the four major
instrumentation and control functions: flow, level, temperature, and pressure;
plus computer interface, calibration, pneumatic utilities, and troubleshooting
support modules. This allows the College's Industrial &amp; Engineering
Technology (I&amp;ET) Division to move from a series of islands of expertise to
an integrated approach enabling students to gain the broadened perspective
required in today's high tech manufacturing marketplace. Curriculum reforms for
the project include: (1) to develop and implement comprehensive automatic
process control and instrumentation curriculum courses within the General
Engineering Technology, Electronics Engineering Technology, and Industrial
Electronics Technology programs; (2) to reconfigure course content in current
I&amp;ET and Business division offerings to reflect a
multidisciplinary/interdisciplinary CIM approach; and (3) to develop process
control and instrumentation curriculum modules which other academic disciplines,
at both the post-secondary and secondary levels, will be able to draw upon for
illustrative and/or hands-on applications. A clear connectivity between theory
and real-world application will be achieved through this project.