* 9250118
* VPW:  Ethical Issues in the Use of Computer Decision Models (Ethics/Computer Science)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Deborah Johnson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1993
* USD 147,992.00

Computerized decision models are increasingly being used in the public and
private sector for decisions that affect everyone. Pension funds are invested on
the basis of computer models; medical student interns are matched with hospitals
on the basis of a computer model; air traffic is controlled on the basis of a
computer model; income tax laws are changed on the basis of models; and so on.
Yet, often those who make decisions on the basis of a computer model do not
understand the algorithms used, or the assumptions made, in the model. They
cannot critically assess the model's output. Moreover, decisions made using
computer models are often not accessible to the public that is affected by them.
Hence, increasing use of, and dependence upon, computer models raises important
ethical questions. The most serious issues center on the effects of the use of
models on the democratic process, the responsibilities of the model designers to
their clients and to the public, and the treatment of risk that is often buried
in a model. While a good deal of research has been done in recent years on the
social impact of computers and on the ethical issues surrounding computers, only
rarely have the ethical issues arising from the use of computer decision models
been addressed. The investigator will collaborate in identifying and analyzing
the ethical issues surrounding the use of computer models. The analysis will
lead to recommendations for change in the way models are designed and used, and
in the way modelers function in their professional roles. This project furthers
VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their
careers in science or engineering through research, and to encourage other women
to pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced visibility
as a role model on the host campus. The proposed activities which contribute to
the second objective include: presenting seminars; arranging informal discussion
groups for women faculty and students; and teaching/co-teaching a course.