* 9250062
* Statewide Systemic Initiative in Science, Math and          Technology
* EHR,ESR
* 09/01/1992,12/31/1997
* Robert Prigo, Vermont State Department of Education
* Cooperative Agreement
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 12/31/1997
* USD 9,696,493.00

The Vermont Statewide Systemic Initiative in Science, Math and Technology is a
collaborative project between five sectors: education, business, higher
education, government, and the community at large to increase the mathematics,
science and technology performance of all students. In order to carry out this
project, the Vermont State Board of Education and the Agency for Development and
Community Affairs will jointly establish the Vermont Institute for Mathematics,
Science and Technology. A two-pronged approach will couple school-based change
efforts with state policy initiatives. Major components include: 1. A statewide
Science/Mathematics/Technology (S/M/T) working curriculum framework to guide
local curriculum development, professional development, and assessment. 2.
Intensive professional development for teachers through summer institutes, year-
round support and a variety of other professional development strategies. 3.
Redesigning college science, mathematics and technology courses to strengthen
practical training for new teachers, and developing alterative pathways for
second career S/M/T teachers. 4. Developing a statewide, integrated strategy for
Science/Mathematics/Technology performance assessments that build on Vermont's
existing assessment of student work through mathematics and writing portfolios.
5. Creating a statewide S/M/T telecomputing network linking schools,
representatives from business, and higher education.