* 9250659
* A Comprehensive and Coherent Integration of Computing       Throughout the Physics Core Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* William Titus, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1994
* USD 100,000.00

Advances in computing technology continue both to bring marked changes in the
skills needed for physics research and to present new opportunities for physics
teaching. A two-fold problem faces many physics departments today: (1) how to
give their undergraduate majors the computing tools and skills they will later
need, such as proficiency in programming, using spreadsheets and computational
packages like Mathematica, technical word processing, data acquisition and
analysis, and networking; and (2) how to make room to learn these new tools and
skills by rethinking the educational use of computing and the content of the
courses required for majors. This project sets out a program to attack this
problem to find a solution that can serve as a national model for other physics
departments. With three NeXT workstations and release time provided by this
grant, the entire faculty of the department will spend portions of a 15-month
period working on a comprehensive and coherent integration of workstations and
computing in the core physics curriculum, one that will not add to the number of
courses required for the major nor increase student workload. Each of the
faculty will focus on one or two courses they have recently taught and for which
they will be responsible the following year. They will explore computer-based
pedagogical opportunities for themselves, and devise ways to build on and extend
the computing skills learned by students in prior courses. Faculty will also be
assisted by students, visit other institutions, attend workshops and conferences
on curricular computing, and bring consultants to campus. At the end of the
project, the department will sponsor a one-week workshop to share what has been
learned with colleagues at other institutions.