* 9250646
* Development of Flight Controls Design Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Daniel Biezad, California Polytechnic State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 6,092.00

This project involves enhancement of the Flight Controls Design Laboratory
(CONLAB) to facilitate undergraduate experiments related to flight control
design and testing in the general area of aeronautical engineering. The flight
control design is for a small hovercraft and consists of integrating motion
sensors and propulsive control with a computer so that the hovercraft is capable
of autonomous flight. The first experiment will stabilize the hovercraft using a
gyro, the second will give the hovercraft directional control in heading, and
the third will provide navigation capability via satellite positioning. The
satellite positioning will be provided by Global Positioning System sensors
which are now available at low cost to universities. The grant is for the
acquisition of major instrumentation : sensors, interface hardware, and systems
software required for simulation and test. Emphasis in the experiments is on
systems design and integration. The hardware interface and software algorithms
required are open- ended, iterative design tasks. Students will work in teams
and observe the differences between system simulation on a computer and system
test using a prototype vehicle. The purpose of the experiments is to apply the
theory in a team oriented fashion allowing considerable creativity in the
process. This also will give the students exposure to the systems integration
problems that they will meet in industry.