* 9250104
* VPW:  Bio-Behavioral Processes in an East African Pastoral  Population (Anthropology)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Rada Dyson-Hudson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 01/31/1996
* USD 140,214.00

Data for an analysis of pastoral population dynamics from more than two years
of field research (anecological) on the Karimojong of Uganda will be analyzed
and prepared for publication, as part of a long-term research project. The study
group is a major social and territorial division (Ngisonyoka) of the quarter
million Turkana, nomadic livestock herders in northwestern Kenya. The sample,
which totals about 10,000 individuals, is based on descent. The data will be
organized into 62 master files (all the interview information for each descent-
set) and 62 analysis files (only the information amenable to quantitative
analysis). The latter will be coded and aggregated into a single PARADOX file.
This program will be used to ascertain changes through time in birth rates,
mortality, and frequencies of in- and out-migration, and in the sex and age
distributions of the pastoral population; to determine the frequency
distribution by age, sex, cause, and year of post-infant mortality; to improve
estimates of female fertility; and to determine variations in both male and
female fertility and reproductive success. The database can be used to model
population dynamics over a 50-year period, because it provides quantitative
information about changes through time in all four population parameters--birth
rates, mortality, in-migration and out- migration. Pastoralism, an adaptive
strategy used by tens of millions of people, allows human use of land where low
precipitation precludes reliable agriculture. Human ingenuity, together with
environmental variability, leads to a range of pastoral strategies which are
variably successful. At their core are the inter-related dynamics of human and
livestock populations. This effort is part of the South Turkana Ecosystem
Project, a long-term, multi-disciplinary study which attempts to apply the
research standards established by evolutionary biologists, ethologists, and
ecologists in a study of the ecology and behavior of a pastoral population. By
providing information on social and personal as well as environmental factors
which affect population parameters, this study also will allow predictions about
the effects of social and environmental changes, and enable people to devise
humane and ecologically wise development policies. The project furthers VPW
program objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers
in science or engineering through research, and to encourage other women to
pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced visibility as
a role model on the host campus. The proposed activities which contribute to the
second objective include: lecturing/teaching anthropology classes, participating
in a seminar series, working with persons from different departments through the
Populations Issues Research Center, and involving both undergraduate and
graduate students in research through the study's data analysis.