* 9250323
* Enhancement and Integration of Resources for Elementary     Physics Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* John Hubisz, College of the Mainland
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 02/28/1995
* USD 24,379.00

For over 20 years College of the Mainland has been supportive of experimentation
and innovation in the physics laboratory, leading to a wide variety of
experiences for students in eight physics course offerings ranging from strictly
conceptual-based courses to calculus-based modern physics, rather than the
traditional set of experiments. All courses may be taken in a traditional or
individualized, self-paced mode. The laboratory is open throughout the day and
at least two evenings per week; laboratory work is worth 50% of the student
grade.For over 30 years the PI has developed, modified, utilized, built, bought
and tried out software and hardware from a variety of sources. There are now
over a 1,000 experiments that students may select to meet their laboratory
requirement. This has resulted in a tremendous bookkeeping and inventory problem
because resources are utilized from several areas on campus that do not always
meet the specific demands of the particular experiment.Support has been obtained
for updated, uniform, particular hardware and software that is being maintained
in the Physics Learning Center and thus is being made available to more students
in an immediate teaching environment. The essential equipment consists of eight
microcomputers, two laser printers, four CD- ROM drives, four Labview 2s, four
Universal Lab Interfaces, and associated sensors and probes.