* 9250341
* New Experiments to Revitalize the Upper-Level Undergraduate Physics Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Bascom Deaver, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1994
* USD 46,705.00

Five new experiments on three topics--muon magnetic moment and lifetime,
precision laser spectroscopy, and macroscopic quantum effects: quantized Hall
effect, Josephson effects and the flux quantum--are being developed to
revitalize the upper-level undergraduate physics laboratories. In these
experiments students explore very general concepts, demonstrate important
phenomena, measure several fundamental constants, and learn experimental
techniques using modern instruments in three areas of physics. Because of
continual funding constraints over the past 20 years, the upper-level labs at
the University of Virginia have degenerated, and there has been a corresponding
decline in student interest and participation in them. The experiments are a
part of a major effort to revitalize these labs so that they become again one of
the most stimulating and informative parts of the curriculum. When the project
is completed, the experiments could be adapted for use at many institutions.
This equipment will have a dramatic impact on our undergraduate program for
several reasons: (1) The revised curriculum initiated this fall will again have
essentially all of the more than 40 third and fourth year physics majors taking
the labs for at least three semesters; (2) in the summer the equipment will
serve undergraduate students participating in the Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program; (3) with the completion of a 20,000 sq. ft.
addition to the physics building in the spring of 1992, the department has
doubled the space designated for the upper-level labs; and (4) there is an
increase in the number of physics majors that correlates with aggressive new
efforts by the University to recruit undergraduate students with unusual ability
in science.