* 9250064
* Increasing Minority Participation in Math-Based Disciplines:A Live Teleconference with Uri Treisman
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Francis Collea, California State University, Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Herbert E. Wylen
* 02/28/1994
* USD 41,800.00

This proposal, from the California State University Chancellor's Office and the
University of Pittsburgh, seeks to establish a grant program for underwriting
participation by community colleges in the 1992 Chautauqua Teleconference
Course, Increasing Minority Participation in Math-Based Disciplines. The course
will be given by Uri Triesman, Department of Mathematics, University of Texas,
Austin and the Dana Center for Mathematics Education, U.C. Berkeley. Increasing
Minority Participation In Math-Based Disciplines will be produced by University
Extension Services, California State University, Long Beach and will be
distributed live, by direct satellite transmission to reception sites across the
country. Emerging Scholars Programs have had a dramatic effect on the
performance and retention of underrepresented minority students in freshman
calculus courses. The program encourages a team approach. Using satellite
technology to distribute the program live allows for participation by man
instructors and administrators at one site, at a cost much lower than would be
incurred if the participants and Course Directors traveled to regional sites.
Satellite distribution also allows greater numbers to participate in the course
to learn about and implement strategies for incorporating the successful
Emerging Scholars Programs at their home institutions.//