* 9250061
* Michigan Statewide Systemic Initiative for Mathematics      and Science
* EHR,ESR
* 09/01/1992,09/30/1999
* Sylvia Buie, Michigan Department of Education
* Cooperative Agreement
* Linda S. Warner
* 09/30/1999
* USD 9,997,749.00

The Michigan Statewide Systemic Initiative in Mathematics and Science (MSSI)
will implement a comprehensive transformation of science and mathematics
education by coordinating policy initiatives already in place with curricular,
leadership, and partnership initiatives to support school-based change in
science and mathematics education. Michigan recently passed Public Act 25 (PA
25) which provided for the development of a State Core Curriculum, a process to
review and revise policies and programs that inhibit educational change, and a
process to encourage school-based change through State accreditation. To further
support school-based change, target disadvantaged school districts, and
transform science and mathematics education Michigan plans five connected
interventions: 1. Develop a state vision statement for mathematics and science
education, circulate it widely, revise it, and obtain endorsement from the MSSI
Steering Committee, the State Board of Education, and a range of stakeholder
groups. 2. Design and carry out a systematic review of existing legislation and
state policies, programs and regulations, that strengthen or impede the vision.
The review will be widely shared with district, state, and association
personnel, and a report on the results will be submitted to the State Board of
Education, Governor's office, and key legislators. The recommendations will be
reviewed annually to determine the extent of implementation. 3. Create Models of
Effective Learning in targeted school districts. This initiative will focus on
economically disadvantaged and extreme rural districts, along with other
districts interested in reform in mathematics and science education. Twenty-five
to fifty community coalitions will be formed in participating school districts
and the MSSI will provide technical assistance to them. The Models will generate
new knowledge about creating successful community coalitions to reform
mathematics and science education. 4. Reform teacher education programs to bring
them into line with the state's vision for mathematics and science education. A
draft framework that lays out this direction will be developed during the
project's first year. An incentive plan to implement the recommended reforms
will be implemented in years 2 - 5. 5. Develop and coordinate state-level staff
development to support mathematics and science education reform consistent with
the vision statement. Develop a coordinated plan to stimulate and support local
district efforts in considering, exploring, and implementing knowledge employed
and generated by this project and other state-level reform activities. 6. Create
an evaluation plan that will determine the success of the project's proposed
outcomes as well as the success of other state-level activities to reform
mathematics and science education. A state indicator system for mathematics and
science education will be developed.