* 9251983
* Enhancement of Control Systems Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Natarajan Narasimhamurthi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 40,107.00

Rapid changes in technology sometimes make obsolete some of the more applied
parts of an engineering curriculum, which are often the laboratories. This is
particularly true of the automatic control systems laboratory because of its
interdisciplinary nature. Advances in sensor technology, microprocessor
technology, and the availability of new and more efficient actuators have had
considerable influence on how machines, power plants, manufacturing processes,
and automotive vehicles are controlled. Also, the increase in complexity of
control systems requires both individual and team efforts. A challenge to
educators in the control systems area is to prepare graduates who have excellent
hands-on skills and team oriented interpersonal skills. The aim of this project
is to provide engineering juniors and seniors with a laboratory environment
where: (1) they have the opportunity to sharpen their hands-on skills by working
with cost effective state-of-the-art equipment, and (2) they are required to
work as a highly interactive team. The award will be used to purchase a variety
of transducers, actuators, electromechanical breadboarding kits, and computer
interfacing equipment. By working with electromechanical breadboarding kits the
students can undertake innovative laboratory projects. The project provides a
laboratory experience which fosters team effort and communication skills. It
impacts about 90 students per year in electrical and mechanical engineering
departments.