* 9251083
* Educational Enhancement of Physics Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Willard Fadner, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 12/31/1994
* USD 98,772.00

Educationally enhanced computer packages are being developed to greatly improve
the learning experience of students taking first-year college physics
laboratories. Many of the packages can also be useable in high schools. While
current computerized laboratories provide excellent accuracy (and thereby
support theory), they typically do not allow for or encourage extensive student
participation, as did many earlier and simpler (but less accurate) lab methods.
The interactive software packages being developed in this research program are
making use of animation, still and moving photographs and tutorials to help the
student understand the laboratory procedures, methods of analysis and related
theoretical concepts. They also allow the student to retain control of the
experimental procedure and data processing. Pre-lab instructional units, often
using complex and dynamic images, help the teacher to illustrate and explain
some of the laboratory concepts that are difficult to present at the chalkboard.
The computer learning packages are being made compatible with as many of the
existing commercial laboratory interfaces as possible. Such packages will also
be useful for many laboratory experiments in which the computer is not used to
collect data. The results of the investigation will be reported at national
meetings and at a regional compatible conference. The software developed will be
made widely available at low cost.