* 9251310
* A Laboratory Oriented Approach to Undergraduate Analog      CMOS VLSI Design Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Robert Caverly, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 95,703.00

Education in the design of very large scale integrated (VLSI) digital circuits
has reached a stage where undergraduate students in U.S. universities are
routinely able to successfully design sophisticated circuits. The education of
this same group of students in analog VLSI design principles is not at the same
level of maturity due to factors such as the extra degrees of freedom involved
in the analog design process. The increased complexity of analog VLSI design
seriously interferes with the closure of the design test loop that is an
important part of the digital VLSI educational process. This project offers a
means to provide closure to this design-test loop in analog VLSI design by
providing educators a laboratory style tutorial manual with accompanying VLSI
circuit chip set that covers many important topics in analog design. This Analog
CMOS VLSI Design Resource Kit will allow microsystems educators the ability to
cover important analog design concepts in lecture and then immediately assign
laboratory assignments based on this material. The resource kit, including chip
set, will be designed to be completely accessible via INTERNET. The chip set
will be designed so that fabrication may be handled by the NSF-supported
fabrication service MOSIS. Dissemination of the resource kit will be aided by
the Massachusetts Microelectronics Center.