* 9251715
* Coupled Chemical Reactor/Distillation Column Experiment     for Chemical Engineering Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* William Luyben, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1996
* USD 39,000.00

A new experimental apparatus is being constructed in the chemical engineering
unit operations laboratory at Lehigh University. The equipment illustrates the
effects of various design and operating parameters in a coupled chemical
process: a reactor with a distillation column mounted on top. While distillation
and reaction processes are well established, the design and operation of the
coupled units represent a novel and challenging problem for chemical engineering
undergraduates. When appropriate, this type of reactive distillation process has
significant advantages over the decoupled system: (1) yields and conversions can
be increased and reactor size reduced by removing one of the products of the
reaction by distillation, and (2) energy consumption can be reduced by using the
heat of reaction to generate vapor for the separation in the column. The major
pieces of the apparatus are a reactor and distillation column, and other
equipment include condenser, reflux drum, vacuum pumps, control valves, feed and
reflux pumps, and tankage for feed and products. The experiment is used in a
senior laboratory for undergraduate chemical engineering students, and is the
first time that these students have been exposed to a complex process which
combines two unit operations. Thus, it provides a deeper understanding of the
underlying principles involved in the design and operation of both chemical
reactors and distillation columns, and illustrates the sometimes obvious and the
sometimes subtle interactions between these two operations.