* 9251874
* Development of a Microcomputer Based Laboratory for         Introductory Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Dan Cross, King University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 07/31/1995
* USD 21,938.00

A microcomputer-based laboratory for the introductory physics classes has been
established. In addition to computers, appropriate interfaces and software lab
apparatus that can be used for a variety of computer-based experiments in the
first semester of the courses have been purchased. The project has been designed
around a network of Macintosh computers. The universal lab interface developed
by the Workshop Physics project and the Tools for Scientific Thinking project
are being used with appropriate transducers to input data from air track and
rotational mechanics apparatus. This project serves to introduce the students in
these courses to what has become the main method for data acquisition and
analysis in scientific work today. In addition several experiments that
previously were not in our program have been introduced. Upperclass physics
majors have been instrumental in evaluating equipment and experiment
possibilities for these labs. We plan to continue to involve them in the lab
development. Eventually the project will evolve to the point that computers will
be used in some capacity in almost every lab. Interactive simulation software is
being made available for the students to model experiments and study effects,
such as air resistance, normally not accounted for. This equipment is being used
mainly by students in the introductory labs, but when not being used in that
capacity, the computers are available for the upperclass majors to use.