* 9251447
* Undergraduate Power Laboratory Upgrade
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Abdollah Homaifar, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1995
* USD 56,548.00

The power systems curriculum at the North Carolina A&amp;T State University is
being updated, infusing more computer and control systems applications into the
program. In line with this scheduled update, the undergraduate power laboratory
is being upgraded in three phases - the digital application phase (1991- 1993),
the control application phase (1993 - 1995), and the replacement of current old
equipment phase. In this project, focusing on the first phase, personal
computers are being introduced into the undergraduate power laboratory. The
present analog meters are being replaced with IEEE-488 standard meters. The
meters are interfaced with the PCs through a data acquisition board. The
objective of this phase is to introduce the students to the use of computers in
power systems operation. The laboratory procedures emphasize: (1) principles of
collection and conversion of analog data to digital data; (2) programming (and
use of standard menu-driven software) to select, display, or store required
data, and perform simple analysis; and (3) the concept of energy (power x time)
and energy conservation which is not possible with the present instantaneous
data collection process. In the control systems application phase, the students
will be introduced to the use of control and digital systems to control power
systems elements.