* 9251862
* Equipment for Laboratory for Modern Optics Using the        Comprehensive Unified Physics Learning Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Joseph Haus, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 12/31/1994
* USD 20,960.00

We are combining current technology obtained from the field of optical
communications with a comprehensive computer-based learning environment as a
means of bringing information age optical technology into the undergraduate
laboratory at moderate cost. Recent advances in monolithic modelocked
semiconductor lasers and rare earth doped optical fiber amplifiers are providing
an easily maintained and relatively low cost means of introducing subpicosecond
optical pulses produced at high repetition rate into the undergraduate
laboratory. The short duration of the pulses and the high peak intensities make
a large number of experiments that have not been previously available except to
a small number of research workers and advanced graduate students, accessible to
undergraduate students. This technology combined with the computerized learning
environment provides a means for much of the science and technology underlying
high data rate optical communications to be taught to undergraduates in a
graphic and easily understood manner. The consistent user interface of the CUPLE
(Comprehensive Unified Physics Learning Environment) employed across different
media, such as, laboratory instruments, data arrays, graphical displays, and
video recordings provides a powerful, but easily accessed teaching tool for
conveying both the drama and the relatively simple concepts that characterize
this rapidly developing area. The rapid evolution of technology in this field
suggests that further increases in reliability and ease of operation and
reduction in costs will make this learning environment available to a large
number of users at reasonable cost.