* 9251556
* Development of Flow Loop Slurry and Multiphase Flow Studies in Petroleum and Geological Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* M. Islam, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 02/28/1995
* USD 5,597.00

Five undergraduate courses, which require the knowledge of single- or multi-
phase (involving solid-liquid or gas-liquid) flow in an open duct or a pipe, are
taught at the department of Geology and Geological Engineering of the South
Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&T). At present, these courses are
taught with theoretical interpretation and abstract visualization of the flow
process. This project provides a single- and multi-phase flow loop for the
departmental undergraduate laboratory that will be used by all five courses. The
flow loop will be used for the following applications: (1) single phase flow
experiments with Newtonian and Non-Newtonian fluids; (2) pressure drop
experiments for horizontal well drilling; (3) pressure drop experiments for gas-
oil flow through horizontal wells and production pipelines; (4) flow
visualization and quantitative analysis under slurry flow conditions; and (5)
flow visualization and quantitative analysis of fluvial deposition. The flow
loop will also be used for undergraduate design and research projects. The
experimental setup will be fully used throughout the summer for conducting
undergraduate research. Moreover, plans are underway to hold workshops for
training regional high school science teachers. This will generate interest in
petroleum and geological engineering topics through indirect impact on high
school students.