* 9251146
* Hands On Data Acquisition and Signal Analysis Equipment for the Undergraduate Mechanical Engineering Thermoscience      Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Joseph Klewicki, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1994
* USD 16,700.00

This project creates and enhances experiments which provide the students with
hands-on experience associated with modern data acquisition and signal analysis
techniques. A comprehensive plan is being implemented that provides a framework
for the long-term development and enhancement of these labs. Also included in
this plan are curriculum and administrative improvements which effect a greater
coordination between the lecture and laboratory courses. The current strategy is
to attain the goals of significantly increasing individualized hands-on student
involvement in experimental procedures, data acquisition and signal analysis
without resorting to the construction of multiple facility replications. The
project employs hand-held Fluke Scopemeters and Portable NeXT computers to
achieve, inexpensive, and novel means to accomplish these goals by putting each
two person lab group in complete control of the data acquisition and signal
analysis aspects of a number of existing experiments, as well as a few new
experiments currently being built. Furthermore, the equipment provides a
foundation for long term laboratory development, expansion, and enhancement. The
equipment utilization described herein represents an economical and
educationally valuable means of extracting maximum use out of a limited number
of experimental facilities.