* 9251836
* Programming in the Large Vs. Programming in the Lounge:     Software Engineering Meets Portable Computing
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Allan Fisher, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 01/31/1995
* USD 80,000.00

For several years, the undergraduate software engineering course at Carnegie
Mellon University has revolved around the specification, design and prototyping
of an ambitious real system such as an E-mail to FAX interface and an
interactive city directory system including building directories, maps and bus
routing information. The process of organizing an entire class of some thirty
students toward a single technical goal is itself one of the object lessons of
the course. This ILI funding will assist in moving this course to a new level of
excitement, by providing a notebook computer with a wireless network interface
to be used by each student. Students will use the computers to organize their
group project and work collaboratively on its implementation. The students will
also implement their system on the network, opening the door to a limitless set
of projects prototyping collaborative and personal productivity tools. Three
main benefits are expected from this project. First, the students in the course
will have a chance to work with technologies and applications that are at the
cutting edge, but will soon be widespread. Second, for that very reason,
software companies may be expected to take a keen interest in these projects,
which will in effect be doing rapid prototyping of new kinds of products, and
will be eager to interact with the students as clients and technical advisors
for the course. Third, the experiences will help to pave the way for other
institutions to start similar programs, introducing their students to emerging
consumer information technology, as hardware costs drop and wireless portable
systems become ubiquitous.