* 9251541
* Health Physics Instrument Simulator
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1995
* G. Samuel Hurst, Consultec Scientific, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 02/28/1995
* USD 99,997.00

Most recent labor studies predict a shortage of health physicists during the
next several decades. Failure to prevent this shortage will leave the United
States in a disadvantage in a number of areas: nuclear power, radiological waste
management, nuclear medicine, etc. One solution to this shortage is to expand
existing training programs and to create new training programs. Another solution
is to improve the effectiveness of the training programs. A major part of health
physics training is devoted to learning how to use radiation detection and
monitoring instruments. This is accomplished by: 1) using instruments and
radioactive sources in a classroom laboratory situation, and/or, 2) on-the-job
training. This project is developing an innovative new approach to laboratory
training in health physics, i.e., the development of a computer simulator that
can be used in place of actual radiation sources in laboratory training. Such a
simulator will result in much lower cost of training, provide for a wider
variety of training situations, and eliminate the safety hazards associated with
actual radiation sources. We are building a computer system that will simulate
the presence of various types of radiation sources in a variety of environments.
This system, based on the IBM PC, will have three modules, Surveyor, Radiation
Physics Laboratory, and Examination. The Surveyor will simulate an environment
where radiation exposure potential exists. This environment will include pre-
defined locations (known or unknown to the trainee) of radiation sources (Alpha,
Beta, Gamma and Neutron) and the ability to simulate the radiation level at any
given point in the radiation environment. This module will be connected (through
a digital to analog converter) to an actual instrument (or facade) so that the
trainee can hold the instrument in his/her hand. The Radiation Physics
Laboratory module will teach the principles of various types of radiation and
the Examination module, based on the Surveyor, will test the knowledge of the
trainee of the properties of various types of radiation and the ability of the
trainee in the radiation environment. A simulator of this type will have far
reaching effects on the health physics industry. It will streamline the way
health physics professionals are trained and will facilitate an increase in the
number of personnel trained in the health physics discipline. In addition, this
system will be used to train personnel working in and around potential hazards,
will improve their understanding of the principles of radiation physics and
radiation protection and will decrease the cost of training.