* 9251313
* Modern Physics Experiments for Undergraduates with Cooled   Charge-Coupled Device Array Detectors
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1994
* Lyman Page, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1994
* USD 38,087.00

The Junior Advanced Laboratory at Princeton University is the core experimental
course for physics majors. A major overhaul currently underway, seeks to replace
some old experiments with new ones, and to upgrade the instrumentation in the
rest. A significant fraction of the new experiments relate to techniques of
modern optics or the detection of photons. They have acquired two charge coupled
device (CCD) cameras that are greatly facilitating the implementation of these
experiments. (Some of these would not be possible without the CCD.) In three of
these experiments, the CCD is being used with a spectrometer and a home-built
pulsed nitrogen laser which pumps a dye laser. An introduction to the important
technique of hole-burning transient spectroscopy is being offered in Experiment
1. In Experiment 2, students are being introduced to modern non-linear optics by
performing four-wave phase conjugation in sodium vapor. The CCD detector greatly
facilitates tuning of the pump lasers to the sodium transition lines. The third
optics experiment demonstrates the phenomenon of Raman scattering in water. The
capability of simultaneously capturing the full Raman spectrum in a CCD array
makes this experiment feasible in an undergraduate lab. Resonance- enhanced
Raman scattering will also be used to study dilute concentrations of hemoglobin
in solution. Experiment 4 uses a CCD camera to record the orbits of the moons of
Jupiter, and to measure their periods and orbit radii. The last experiment
demonstrates the interference of a single photon with itself in generating the
classic Young interference pattern. Although photographic film is competitive
with the CCD detector, the latter is much more versatile and better suited for
an instructional laboratory setting.