* 9251627
* Advanced Laboratory for Operating Systems and Assembly      Language
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Alfredo Perez-Davila, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 12/31/1994
* USD 58,113.00

This project will create a new computer laboratory with modern equipment. The
goal is to enhance the quality of instruction in two of the required Computer
Science core courses, namely the Operating Systems course and the Assembly
Language course. The laboratory will consist of 40 486-33 MHz computers. These
PCs will be networked together with two as file servers. In addition, 20 of
these PCs will be equipped with removable hard disk drives. These machines will
enable students of the Operating Systems classes to experiment with
modifications and enhancements of the kernel of a real operating system without
adverse effect on other users. Students will be exposed to both operating system
code development and testing procedures. The removable hard disk will allow the
same laboratory to be used with different software configurations without time
consuming and complicated reformatting and reloading of systems software. This
flexibility will provide an increase of several orders of magnitude in the
usability of the laboratory. The use of the same platform for both the operating
system course and the assembly language course will reinforce the knowledge
obtained in both courses. The laboratory will also benefit other courses,
including the Ada Programming Language course (which is also a required course
for CS/CIS students), as well as the general instructional quality of other
computer science courses including Software Engineering, Computer Graphics and
Independent Study/Project courses.