* 9252935
* United States National Center- Third International          Mathematics and Science Studies
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1999
* William Schmidt, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 02/28/1999
* USD 3,723,113.00

With this proposal, Michigan State University is requesting funds to support
the U.S. National Center for the Third International Mathematics and Science
Study (TIMSS). In addition, we are requesting support to conduct the United
States curriculum analysis and to do the international data analysis. The TIMSS
sponsored by the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational
Achievement (IEA), will be the major international assessment activity during
the 1990's. The interest which governments around the world have in assessing
what is learned in school is a reflection of a global recognition that
scientific literacy and economic productivity are inextricably linked, with
mathematics at the forefront as the universal language of modern technology
(Walberg, 1983). Assessment can play a critical part in the identification of
needed reforms in education. Thus far, 40-50 countries around the world are
committed to participate in TIMSS. The study will take place in 1993-94 and
1997-98. United States participation in TIMSS has been agreed to at least in
general terms as conveyed by the U.S. IEA General Assembly Representative Gordon
Ambach and as endorsed by the National Academy of Science Board for
International Comparative Studies in Education, by the National Science
Foundation, and the National Center for Education Statistics. The activities
involve three major tasks outlined below: Administration and Supervision of U.S.
Participation in TIMMS: This includes all of the administrative and coordination
activities the National Center must perform to ensure that the U.S.
participation in TIMSS is informed and shaped by the many contextual realities
that affect U.S. mathematics and science education at all levels and is highly
coordinated within the country. The breadth of this task will require a staff of
professionals to coordinate this responsibility and the people involved. This
task constitutes the major work for which this funding is being requested.
Conduct of U.S. Curriculum Analysis for TIMSS: The National Center will
undertake the U.S. curriculum analysis. This will be carried out in three
phases: definition of the sampling frame with regard to the curricular materials
in conjunction with the ICC, conduct of the analysis, and development of the
U.S. report Conduct International Curriculum Data Analysis and Develop Report:
This will involve the development of a complex data file and constructing of
weights and procedures for analysis, detailed data analysis to be completed at
Michigan State University and development and dissemination of extensive
monograph contrasting countries with regard to science and mathematics
curriculum.