* 9252943
* VPW:  New Methodologies for Evaluating Interactive          Technologies (Computer Science)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Catherine Marshall, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 01/31/1994
* USD 187,292.00

Since we lack fundamental means for evaluating the merits of non-traditional
technologies, this research looks at extending currently impractical analytic
techniques, such as conversation analysis, to more easily used measures of
interaction effectiveness. In a laboratory experiment, face-to-face
communication will be compared with two forms of mediated communication: audio-
only and audio-plus-video. Two types of tasks will be studied: one with a strong
visual-spatial component and one with a strong verbal-logical component. Task
performance will be measured and questionnaires given. Using the results of the
objective measures of effectiveness, systematic, non-anecdotal methods for
conversation analysis will be developed using the videotaped protocols. The
research will make a substantial new corpus of task-related interaction
available to the scientific community. The project explores and evaluates the
use of new techniques for measuring the effectiveness of interactive
technologies, including teleconferencing systems, multimedia computing systems
and portable office environments. This project furthers VPW program objectives
to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or
engineering through research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in
these areas through the investigator's enhanced visibility as a role model on
the host campus. The proposed activities which contribute to the second
objective include: mentoring and counseling women students (in a department with
no women faculty); teaching one course in interactive systems; co-leading the
Interactive Systems Reading Group; advising students, and OGI as an institution,
on policies and mechanisms necessary for the development of careers for women in
science and engineering.