* 9252969
* VPW:  A Dynamically Reconfigurable Register Organization to Facilitate Multitasking, Sequential Programs, and Other     Language Paradigms (Computer Science/Systems Architecture)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Donna Quammen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 07/31/1994
* USD 80,937.00

Most current architectures have one of two large registers organizing, either a
register stacks, or a large sized single register sets. A single register set
excels over a stack if a program requires frequent access to globals. A register
stack performs better if deep recursive chains exist. It is generally agreed
that neither organization will benefit programs written in a concurrent language
because of the heavy context switch overhead. In this research a register
hardware organization called "threaded windows" is examined to enhance the
performance of concurrent systems, and sequential programs. The organization
allows the registers to be dynamically restructured to either of the above
forms, and any combination of the above forms. This permits the compiler, or the
programmer, to capitalize upon each register organization's strong points and
avoid their weak points. In addition, hardware fault tolerance is facilitated,
as well as graceful runtime fault detection and recovery. This work will also
explore the applications of this register configuration to programming paradigms
such as object oriented languages, functional languages, and logic languages.
This project proposes a study of a new approach in designing register
organization for high performance computer systems. It takes into account
several recent developments in computer architectural design which can tackle
the memory latency problem in such high performance systems. The effort furthers
VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their
careers in science or engineering through research, and to encourage other women
to pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced visibility
as a role model on the host campus. The proposed activities which contribute to
the second objective include: teaching an undergraduate course, and jointly
teaching a second year graduate course; doing a colloquial presentation;
involving students in research; serving on the Women and Engineering Program
Faculty Advisory Board and and being involved in WIE's annual conference;
participating in informal discussion groups; and mentoring students, especially
those with career interruptions.