* 9252917
* Connecting the Past with the Future:  Women in Mathematics  and Science
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1996
* Judith Olson, Western Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 07/31/1996
* USD 550,161.00

This three-year project will create six hour-long, interactive broadcasts for
junior high school students which are focused on the contributions of females in
the development and advancement of mathematics and science. Students will see
male and female role models in their work place, learn about contemporary
careers and historical contributions, and participate in related mathematics
activities before and after the broadcast. Following the broadcasts, the video
materials will be professionally edited and widely distributed for further use
in schools. Dissemination agreements made at the time of the award included the
McDonnell Douglas Foundation, Women and Mathematics Education, Society of Women
Engineers, and Western Illinois University Mathematics Resource Office and the
Women's Center. Accompanying print materials will be developed for teacher and
student use. The materials will represent significant topics that have extended
use in the classroom. Teachers will receive greater background information on
the role models and additional teaching ideas. The formative evaluation will
monitor the development and quality of the broadcasts/videotapes and their
effectiveness with students. The summative evaluation will evaluate data on
course selection, career plans, and recall of information about female role
models. //