* 9252502
* Metrolina Calculus Consortium: Implementing a Technology-   Based Curriculum
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* David Royster, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 12/31/1994
* USD 153,484.00

A consortium is being organized consisting of institutions in the Charlotte
metropolitan area that are interested in calculus reform. The Metrolina Calculus
Consortium will include local universities and colleges, community colleges, and
secondary schools. The project will provide support and resources for faculty to
adapt and implement a technology-based calculus curriculum. A summer workshop
will be conducted for faculty of these institutions, who will then teach a
technology based calculus course at their institutions during the following
year. Monthly sessions will be held to discuss problems, as well as having more
in depth two day meetings at the end of each semester. The workshop will be
repeated the following year for new participants. Support materials will be
developed to help high school teachers, community college faculty, and graduate
students in implementing a technology based calculus course. The materials will
be individualized for the particular audience. Long term research will be
conducted to find the effectiveness of technology based calculus on students. In
particular, there will be assessment of high school students who are taking a
technology based calculus course and their success in college calculus will be
monitored.