* 9252932
* RIMI:  Parametric Robust Control Design
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Leehyun Keel, Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bobby L. Wilson
* 02/29/1996
* USD 350,000.00

The proposed project deals with various problems of analysis and design of
control systems subject to parametric uncertainty. Specifically we consider
interval systems whose transfer function coefficients are linear or multilinear
functions of the parameters subject to perturbation. The main goals of this
project are 1) to develop effective methodologies to design controllers that
perform satisfactorily under large amounts of parametric uncertainties and 2) to
expand understanding of time and frequency domain properties of various types of
control systems. The project consists of two parts: development of new theory
and its implementation as a computer aided design software package. The
theoretical problems we propose to solve are as follows: 1) Reexamining the
classical control design and analysis techniques with robustness ingredients and
developing new design methodologies for robust parametric control design. 2)
Developing relevant theory for time delay systems. This includes what is a
necessary and sufficient condition to determine robust stability of a time delay
interval system with a fixed controller, how to computationally check the robust
stability, what are the frequency and time domain characteristics of a time
delay interval system, and how to adjust selective parameters within their
intervals to improve the system performance. 3) Developing equivalent theory and
computational algorithms to deal with multilinear interval systems. 4)
Developing theory to examine the time domain properties of interval systems and
its use in controlling transient response. 5) Developing a new modeling and
identification technique to determine an interval system from the given input -
output test data and the nominal linear identified model. The second part of the
project is to build an efficient computer aided design software to incorporate
all the above design methods. The base system of this software is MATLAB. We
expect it will be a valuable tool for robust parametric control design and
analysis for both theoreticians and practicing engineers.