* 9252521
* Implementation and Dissemination of the Harvard Consortium  Materials in Arizona, Oklahoma and Utah
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1997
* William McCallum, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 03/31/1997
* USD 799,770.00

The Harvard Calculus Consortium materials are being implemented throughout
Arizona, Oklahoma, Utah, and the surrounding regions. Implementation will be
achieved in two complementary steps. First, over three years, the coalition
(Arizona State University, Brigham Young University, Northern Arizona
University, Oklahoma State University, and the University of Arizona) will
implement the reformed calculus. Second, the coalition activities will be
expanded to include other two- and four-year institutions and high schools from
the region. The three-year plan consists of six parts: (1) A series of half- day
informational discourses to expose reform calculus to inform colleagues, members
of the client disciplines, high school teachers, future participants from two-
and four-year institutions. (2) A series of on-site workshops to train
instructors: full-time faculty, part-time faculty, adjunct faculty, teaching
assistants, and high school teachers. (3) A series of on-site workshops to train
undergraduate graders and tutors. (4) A one-day site-visit with participants
each month during the semester following the workshops. (5) The establishment of
an electronic mail and bulletin board type facility for all users of the Harvard
Consortium material. (6) A series of presentations at regional and national
professional meetings intended to encourage attendance at either an
informational discourse, or the workshops themselves.