* 9252716
* (SGER)--Research into the Barriers to Changing the Receptionand Rewards System in the Mathematical Sciences
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1993
* James Maxwell, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 10/31/1993
* USD 49,712.00

The Joint Policy Board for Mathematics, representing the American Mathematical
Society, the Mathematical Association of America, and the Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics is conducting a study of the recognition and rewards
system in the mathematical sciences. Numerous recent reports point to this
system as a key to reforming the K through 12 education system, to revitalizing
undergraduate science and mathematics education, and to elevating the level of
technology transfer in order to boost economic competitiveness. The study also
responds to the increasing awareness of the importance of interdisciplinary work
and of the participation of mathematical scientists in the education of
individuals who plan to work in industry and government. This initial study will
focus on the barriers to changing the rewards structure and will be implemented
as a series of case studies. The results of this research will be reported to
NSF and to the mathematics community through the news publications of the three
organizations that comprise the JPBM. This research is expected to be the basis
of further study of the system that will lead to a set of recommendations and
plan of action to produce a recognition and rewards system that is consistent
with the missions of institutions of higher education and with the diverse
responsibilities of college and university faculty.//