* 9252469
* National Dissemination of Calculus Reform in High Schools   by the Oregon State University Calculus Curriculum Project
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1996
* Thomas Dick, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* diane spresser
* 08/31/1996
* USD 1,619,690.00

This three-year project aims at preparing high school mathematics teachers
nationwide to integrate the use of graphing calculators and symbolic
manipulation software into their teaching of calculus. At the same time, the
project also serves to disseminate instructional materials that integrate the
use of such technology into the teaching of calculus (Oregon State University
Calculus Project). Participating teachers will attend intensive two-week summer
workshops offered at several sites around the country. During the following
academic year these teachers will implement the new calculus program in their
respective schools. In this endeavor, they will be supported by a variety of
communication networks (including electronic ones), as well as periodic two-day
regional follow-up meetings. The cognitive and affective factors involved in
learning and teaching calculus with technology will be studied. The evaluation
component will focus on student and teacher outcomes, with special emphasis on
student participation and performance in subsequent college mathematics courses.
A "leadership" component of the program will provide special training to 25
teachers aimed at preparing them to initiate in-service efforts around the
country that involve calculus and technology. The percentage of matching funds
is 67%