* 9252963
* Constructive Assessment:  Study Equity, Validation and      Communication
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Rose Wray Williams, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alice Moses
* 12/31/1994
* USD 339,920.00

The goal of the three-year Constructive Assessment Project is to enhance
student equity, as well as validation and communication aspects of alternative
assessment methods in mathematics. First year project activities will focus on
the objective "to enable more in-depth relevant understanding of student
achievement on the part of students themselves". This objective will be
addressed by investigating the needs, interpretations and values of
approximately 200 students who are participating in alternative assessment
activities within the constructivist Visual Mathematics programs. The research
will proceed at three levels. Ten Teacher-Researchers at five sites will
generate research questions, and will investigate these with the support of
workshops, monthly meetings and classroom visits by the PI. The PI and a
Research Associate will also research the issue across the five sites through
observation, interview and textual analysis. And a group of Faculty Associates
will explore the issues at the concept level through library research and data
analysis. During the second and third years activities will address on the
objective "to advance the general state-of-the-art of assessment practices" by
using the outcomes of the first-year investigation to develop classroom
guidelines which incorporate a learner-oriented, constructivist approach to
assessment. The project will provide an integrative model for the constructive
involvement of teachers, students and technology in a broad range of assessment
methods, and will provide a base of grounded theory for future research.