* 9252168
* Utilizing Characterization of Materials to Develop Unity    and Coherence of the Composite Materials Engineering        Curriculum at WSU
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Jeffrey Logas, Winona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1995
* USD 87,298.00

The Composite Materials Engineering Program at Winona State University, the
first of its kind at the undergraduate level, has a curriculum which includes
basic and engineering sciences, materials science, mechanics, and design and
manufacturing. The goal of this project is to use the laboratory work to provide
a relationship between these elements in the curriculum. Unity and coherence of
subject matters are provided by practical experiences in materials
characterization at various stages of study. Characterization of materials
enables students to understand materials properties, their structure and
composition, their performance, and how to design and process them. This
understanding will enable students to develop and produce composite materials
that perform in new and more effective ways for a myriad of applications. The
laboratory equipment consists of: ten microscopes, an analytical balance, two
hardness testers, surface area and porosimetry equipment, three high temperature
furnaces, a tabletop tensile test machine, and a data acquisition system. This
equipment is used in laboratory and classroom instruction of 13 courses in the
curriculum, and in the development of two new courses. The equipment is also
used in student design projects and undergraduate research.