* 9252940
* VPW:  Interaction Between the Syntactic & Phonological      Components of Grammatical Theory (Linguistics)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Irene Vogel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 02/28/1995
* USD 135,947.00

While it is now accepted that syntax affects the application of postlexical
phonological rules (P-rules), much less is known about the effect of semantics,
in particular focus, on these rules. The Rhythm Rule (RR) of English, which has
been found to be sensitive to F, will be examined in detail to determine
precisely where and how it applies. Since the domain of application of RR is
generally taken to be the Phonological Phrase, the main problem to be addressed
is how focus can be taken as input, along with the usual syntactic information,
to P-rules that apply within this domain. In addition, since RR contributes to
the overall rhythmic pattern of a sentence, a question that must be addressed is
whether there is one universal rhythmic mechanism of language that also accounts
for the effects of RR or whether RR is part of the specific phonological system
of English, and is thus treated by a mechanism distinct from that which handles
overall rhythmic alternations. Experimental data, which will be brought to bear
on the theoretical issues at the core of this research, will consist of
recordings of subjects reading sentences a) in isolation, b) embedded in
paragraphs, c) with special intonations (i.e., yes-no question and incredulity
patterns) and d) with the syllable "ma" in reiterant speech. The sentences will
contain the appropriate conditions for RR (i.e., stress clashes) in different
positions with regard to both syntactic and focus structure. The recordings will
be analyzed both perceptually and acoustically. The proposed research will
investigate the organization of the phonological component of grammar as well as
its interaction with other components of grammar, especially syntax and
semantics. This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in science or engineering through research,
and to encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the
investigator's enhanced visibility as a role model on the host campus. The
proposed activities which contribute to the second objective include: arranging
weekly meetings of the women graduate students, who will be joined once a month
by male students, with emphasis placed on developing the skills needed for
careers in linguistics (abstract writing, conference presentations, conducting
research, publishing, applying and interviewing for jobs, and teaching)--and
women's problems (for the single gender sessions); inviting prominent women
linguists invited within the context of the regular colloquium series; and
teaching an advanced seminar on the interactions of phonology with the other
components of grammar.