* 9252241
* Holographic Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Frederick Wirth, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 06/30/1995
* USD 14,006.00

Hampshire College, although a relatively new institution, has a reputation for
excellence in the teaching of science. Introductory courses for both science
majors and non-majors focus on inquiry methods and often involve students in
independent projects in the laboratory. These relatively sophisticated student
projects for beginners have become the hallmark of Hampshire's innovative
science education. Optics and Holography (NS 104) is such a course. Using
students natural enthusiasm for holograms and lasers we give them a good basis
in physical optics and equip them to function in the holographic laboratory in a
very independent way. Students create transmission, reflection and rainbow
holograms in 4x5 format. During the last third of the course, and continuing
into the following semester students complete an entirely independent project on
some aspect of holographic production, instrumentation or utilization, or on
some closely related topic. Improving the laboratory equipment for these courses
has improved them in several ways: 1) eliminating the frustration caused by the
touchiness our homebuilt equipment helps new students gain confidence and
independence in the lab; and 2) improving image quality helps to maintain
student enthusiasm during the sometimes difficult transition to independent
work. Hampshire's project based approach to introductory science education has
proved effective in attracting non-science students to the sciences. A greatly
expanded computational component aids student understanding and introduces them
to a rapidly expanding field of physics. Hampshire annually graduates more than
twice as many students majoring in science as entered with a declared interest
in science.