* 9252998
* VPW:  Corporations and Gender:  Changing Demographics and   the Response to Women (Sociology)
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1993,10/31/1995
* Patricia Martin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1995
* USD 124,628.00

Employer's growing dependence on women and the changing demographics of the
labor force have pushed gender issues to the forefront of workplace reforms.
This project asks about the conditions that prompt some corporations to
institute policies and programs to help women meet their family obligations and
succeed at their jobs. The research design includes a survey of 1,000 major
corporations regarding policies and programs for women and an on-site case study
of one corporation with a reputation for supporting women. The survey of
corporations asks about global predictors of responsiveness to women, and the
case study inquires about the dynamics of gender relations relative to corporate
structures, culture, and practices. Guided by new structuralism/devaluation
theory and theories of gender (that focus on the institutional and processual
aspects of gender), the investigator asks: (1) what kinds of corporations are
helping women? (2) what strategies are they using? (3) how effective are these
strategies and for whom? The identification of conditions and practices that
help women meet their job and family obligations gives practical and policy-
relevant import to this research. The project furthers VPW program objectives to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or
engineering through research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in
these areas through the investigator's enhanced visibility as a role model on
the host campus. The proposed activities which contribute to the second
objective include: bringing women scientists to campus to discuss their research
on sex/gender and science, and on gender, work and family; teaching; mentoring,
and counseling.