* 9252987
* Playtime is Science: A National Model for Parent Involvement in Early Science Education
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Barbara Sprung, Educational Equity Concepts Inc
* Continuing grant
* James D. Ellis
* 02/29/1996
* USD 722,769.00

Playtime Is Science: A National Model for Parent Involvement In Early Science
Education is an innovative parent/child science activity program. The overall
goal of the model is to enlarge the potential pool of students who are competent
in science and technology to include more girls, children of color, with
disabilities, and children from low-income families. By engaging parents in
partnership with schools and community organizations, Playtime Is Science will
increase the science literacy of young children (ages 4-7) as well as that of
their parents and other adults in their lives. This three-year project, built on
a successful local model developed in New York City public schools, will include
the following activities: training and networking for site liaisons; pilot
testing and evaluation at three sites chosen for geographic, racial, ethnic,
language, and socioeconomic diversity; materials development and production; a
formal research study; and intensive national dissemination of Playtime Is
Science materials package. Materials to be developed include 1) four videotapes
to provide a visual rendering of the program for parents, teachers, and
administrators; 2) a how-to manual providing easy-to-follow instructions for
implementing the program; 3) and a home activity booklet for parents
illustrating science activities which utilize inexpensive, readily-available
materials found in every home.