* 9252176
* Multimedia Interactive Learning in a Laboratory on          Embedded Control for All Engineering Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Frank DiCesare, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 84,558.00

Engineering majors at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute are designing,
implementing, and debugging the hardware and software for embedded control
systems using a multimedia interactive learning system laboratory. Students
learn the fundamentals of embedded control systems while building portions of
target systems in eight laboratory projects. Multimedia interactive tutorials
facilitate learning the fundamental principles and laboratory techniques
required to carry out the projects. These tutorials use text, graphics, still
color images, full motion video, audio, and animation to present information.
Hardware and software, available as part of the laboratory bench-station
equipment, is used to implement and debug the embedded control of the target
system. Multimedia Tutorial Systems at each station hold the knowledge bases,
hardware, and software required for interactive learning. Two Digital Video
Development Systems provide video- data compression in the multimedia system
resulting in higher quality video and faster access time. This laboratory
approach allows teaching embedded control to all engineering students
independently of discipline. It uses a multimedia interactive learning
methodology which can be easily adapted at other institutions to complement
traditional learning modes.