* 9252916
* SGER:  Research Explorations by Classroom Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1994
* J.Michael Shaughnessy, Math Learning Center
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 01/31/1994
* USD 49,962.00

This proposal requests funds to enable ten classroom teachers to conduct in-
depth research projects in teaching and learning in their classrooms and to
provide the necessary support and mentoring activities for them to plan, carry
out, document, write up, and share the results of their research. The proposed
teacher research projects fall under three general headings: a) The effects of a
visual mathematics curriculum on student learning; b) The effects of self
assessment on student learning; and c) Comparisons of teacher perceptions vs.
student perceptions of particular classroom issues. Monthly meetings in the fall
of 1991 have been held to plan and focus the teacher research projects.
Classroom research projects will be conducted by the teachers for the period of
January to June 1992. During the summer of 1992, a week long workshop with the
teachers will be held in order to share and write up the results of their
research projects. At the end of the summer workshop the teacher-researchers
will each choose a colleague from their school to form a research dyad for the
1992- 1993 school year. Results of the teacher-research projects will be shared
by the teachers in their own schools, at the Oregon Math Leaders Conference in
summer of 1992, and at the Northwest Mathematics Meeting in fall of 1993.
Monthly pull back meetings will be held during the 1992-1993 school year to
provide opportunities for the research dyads to share the progress of their
projects with each other and with the principal investigators.//