* 9252967
* VPW:  Copper Speciation Studies at Simulated Particulate    Surfaces Using Electrochemical and Spectroelectrochemical   Methods of Analysis (Analytical/Surface Chemistry)
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Margaret Goldberg, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 07/31/1995
* USD 164,991.00

Experimental methods will be developed to enable the study of copper speciation
at simulated natural water particulate interfaces. A novel experimental model is
presented to permit analytical determination of interfacial phenomena in situ.
The model consists of a stable polymer microemulsion containing immobilized
reactive ligands on its surface and is intended to simulate pertinent features
of organic-coated natural water particulates. Interdigitated array electrode
electrochemistry methodology will be developed to determine Cu(I) generated by
complex photolysis. This will result in enhanced interdigitated array
methodology and determination of copper-amino acid photolysis rates.
Spectroelectrochemical methods will be developed to optically determine
complexed copper concentrations following electrochemical generation of Cu(II).
The methods will have general utility to speciation studies at surfaces and will
be applied to the study of copper-amino acid complex formation and photolysis.
This advances interfacial spectroelectrochemical methodology and knowledge of
equilibrium speciation of copper-amino acid complexes on surfaces. The project
furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance
their careers in science or engineering through research, and to encourage other
women to pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced
visibility as a role model on the host campus. The proposed activities which
contribute to the second objective include: developing and teaching a new course
on Aquatic Chemistry; presenting a guest lecture on environmental chemistry;
starting a new curriculum in Environmental Chemistry; and providing research
guidance and mentoring to students.