* 9252196
* Redesign of the General Physics Laboratory Utilizing        Computer Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Mark Schneider, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 12/31/1994
* USD 36,597.00

The Grinnell College Physics Department is redesigning the introductory physics
laboratory in order to incorporate new teaching methods and new technology. The
most conspicuous change is the introduction of microcomputers for data
acquisition and analysis. The computers are equipped with versatile data
acquisition hardware and software, as well as with graphing software, to permit
the same instrumental configuration to be easily adapted to a wide variety of
experimental situations with minimal software development effort. The computers
perform the more repetitive and non- educational tasks, leaving the
decisionmaking and intellectual processing to the students. The use of computers
in the lab has several educational benefits: 1) experiments for which data must
be taken rapidly become possible; 2) experiments which involve a great deal of
repetitive analysis require less time between performing the experiment and
seeing the result, increasing the impact on the student; 3) students are able to
see both their own results and the class average, allowing them to see the
effects of experimental uncertainties; 4) experiments can be designed to be more
flexible, allowing greater accommodation to the different abilities and
interests of the students; 5) new or revised experiments can be made available
more easily; and 6) students are gaining some experience with the use of
computers for data acquisition and analysis. These changes result in a
laboratory experience which is better suited to the needs of our students, who
are then able to concentrate more on understanding the physics and less on the
mechanical handling of the data.