* 9252705
* Development of Effective Mathematics Learning Environments  and Tasks for Prospective Middle Grades Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1997
* Grayson Wheatley, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Haver
* 01/31/1997
* USD 1,007,743.00

Florida State University seeks funds to develop a program for the mathematics
preparation of preservice middle grades teachers. The purposes of the project
are: to plan and implement courses in mathematics learning and teaching and
mathematics for prospective middle school mathematics teachers based on problem-
centered learning; to construct a model of prospective teachers' cognitive
operations in learning; and to develop tasks and protocols for investigating
knowledge structures, beliefs, values, and classroom practices of prospective
middle school mathematics teachers. Five mathematics courses and two mathematics
education courses will be revised or designed as a sequence of experiences which
provide opportunities for prospective middle school mathematics teachers to
reflect on mathematical knowledge, beliefs, and practices. Using a teaching
experiment design, the proposers will construct explanations and models of
participants' understanding and beliefs about mathematics and mathematics
teaching and learning. Faculty from the Mathematics Department and the College
of Education will collaborate to develop the programs. There is an in-service
component which include area teachers. The dissemination plan includes work with
other institutions in Florida and faculty members from the state and the nation.
Cost sharing is approximately 10% of the NSF funds.