* 9252936
* RIMI:  Antihemorrhagic Activity in Variation in Hemorrhagic Activity of Rattlesnake Venoms &amp; Woodrats Sera
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Steven Smith, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Continuing Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 02/28/1997
* USD 234,869.00

Poisonous snakes use venom for immobilizing and digesting prey. Crotalid and
viperid venoms are complex mixtures of toxins and enzymes which are extremely
effective in destroying tissue and causing hemorrhage. Physical, chemical, and
immunological properties of venom suggest that a number of hemorrhagic factors
are present in a single venom sample. Even though many hemorrhagic factors are
common to several species of snakes and some of the amino acid sequences are
similar, geographical variation in hemorrhagic factors have been demonstrated
within certain species. Although envenomation is an effective way to capture
prey, we were among the first to show that a number of mammals, such as the
opossum and the grey woodrat, exhibit resistance to lethal toxicity, proteolytic
and hemorrhagic activities os snake venoms. We have isolated antihemorrhagic
factors that are not antibodies in the sera of resistant mammal. The nature of
the resistance is significant, since it is broad-spectrum and neutralizes all
hemorrhagic toxins tested thus far. The proposed research will expand and
correlated the hemorrhagic variation found in rattlesnake venoms (Crotalus sp.)
with the antihemorrhagic variation found in resistant animals. The goal of the
RIMI proposal is to examine, using recombinant DNA techniques, a hypothesis of
correlation between a venomous predator and venom- resistant prey. The
information derived from this study will also be crucial to understanding the
mechanism of venom detoxification in resistant species and in developing
potential uses of snake toxins in medical science such as the production of
immunotoxins. The RIMI proposal will expand our present venom research program
and more students and faculty will be involved. Both students and the University
will benefit by such an expansion. The teaching load is heavy and undergraduate
students require intensive training before they are capable of doing meaningful
research. Many of our undergraduate and masters' students working under the
direction of Dr. John C. Perez have published in professional journals before
going on to major universities for doctoral research. With the RIMI program,
three additional faculty would be working with minority students in a very
active research program.