* 9252157
* Equipment for a Flow Imaging and Control Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Narayanan Komerath, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1994
* USD 83,576.00

Undergraduate education in fluid dynamics can be greatly improved if analytical
descriptions are complemented by the experience of visualizing and controlling
the dynamic behavior of real flow fields. This project employs modern
multidimensional flow diagnostics and digital image processing, powerful and
convenient educational tools, which take the student far beyond the usual scope
of laboratory courses. The student can see unsteady flows around complex
configurations. These techniques are incorporated into assignments in a required
first course in fluid mechanics. A junior-level laboratory employs flow
visualization from both the Eulerian and Lagrangian viewpoints. Senior-level
elective courses teach advanced flow diagnostics and flow control techniques,
while Special Problem courses facilitate individual undergraduate research
projects in these areas. Argonion laser beams are expanded into sheets, with an
acousto-optic beam modulator for fast, controlled strobing. A laser schlieren
system illuminates density variations. Images will be captured through fast-
shuttered CCD-array videocameras and analyzed using computer workstations.
Planar velocimetry and vortex and shock tracking are used for analysis of the
spatial and temporal evolution of flows. These will be used along with existing
flow facilities and single-point quantitative diagnostics, to study flow
control. The project makes possible the incorporation of modern unsteady fluid
mechanics into the undergraduate curriculum.