* 9252885
* Constructing Science:  Materials and Activities for         Kindergarten and First-Grade
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1997
* Pamela Freyd, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 08/31/1997
* USD 550,622.00

Constructing Science: Materials and Activities for kindergarten and First grade
will use a collaboration of classroom teachers, science educators, university
psychology and education researchers, and university scientists to develop,
implement, evaluate and disseminate on a national basis model sets of
instructional methods and materials for the active engagement of kindergarten
and first-grade children in science learning and exploration. This process for
curriculum development has been successfully piloted through a colloquium series
initiated by the Citizens' Committee for Public Education in Philadelphia and
facilitated by directors of PENNlincs with funding from PATHS/PRISM, ARCO and
the Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, U of P. The proposed program
will improve the quality of science education and at the same time ensure that
more time is spent on science education in kindergarten. This project will bring
developmentally appropriate science content and science processes to primary
grade children in such a way (a) that scientists, educators and parents will be
assured that children are truly learning important science concepts and
processes, (b) that the methods have applicability to the realities of
classrooms, and (c) that children's initial school experiences in science are
rich and that children gain positive attitudes, motivation and vocabulary that
will serve as a strong foundation for more formal science study. The methods
will enhance any science curriculum available or under development.