* 9252959
* VPW:  The Cloning Membrane Receptor-Proteins in Mammalian   & Sea Urchin Development (Cell Biology)
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/1992,03/31/1994
* Merrill Hille, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 03/31/1994
* USD 104,279.00

The project has two objectives: (1) for the investigator to learn molecular
cloning by isolating a new member of the TGF- beta superfamily from mammalian
cells through work in the host laboratory, learning state-of-the-art cloning of
membrane proteins; and (2) to make sea urchin cDNA libraries from embryos, and
with these and host laboratory resources, to search for clones for TFG- beta
receptors and integrin receptors. The investigator will begin by using low-
stringency hybridization to look for sea urchin clones of TGF-beta and integrin
receptors. If too many clones are found she will design redundant oligo-
nucleotide probes and use PCR techniques to try to isolate sea urchin probes
from her libraries, or prepare antibodies to redundant peptide sequences in the
integrin receptors and screen expression libraries for clones. Finally, she will
use her own antibodies to the putative 200kDa-laminin receptor to screen for
clones in the sea urchin libraries. The long term goal is to understand how
receptor molecules on the surface of cells interact with specific molecules of
the extracellular matrix to signal or aid cell movements and morphogenesis of
embryos. With preliminary evidence that the interaction of the extracellular
matrix protein, laminin, by interacting with cell receptors may stimulate or
mediate gastrulation these embryos, the investigator has begun to purify
membrane proteins from sea urchin embryos that bind to extracellular matrix
components. She has found one protein that binds laminin--the first
identification of a matrix receptor in sea urchin embryos, and is currently
searching for other integrin proteins that may bind laminin or fibronectin using
an antibody evolutionary tree from sea urchins to mammals, significantly
overlap. The investigator, an expert on the regulation of translation in
echinoderm egg and embryos, is changing the emphasis of her own laboratory to
study the role of membrane receptors and extracellular matrix molecules in
morphogenetic movements of sea urchin embryos. The studies on sea urchins, a
model for the easy visualization and manipulation of development, are
potentially very important for furthering our understanding of cell-
extracellular matrix interactions as determinants of embryonic cell movement and
differentiation, particularly the critical processes of gastrulation, and
similar processes such as imaginal disc formation in Drosophila or neurulation
in vertebrates. This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or engineering
through research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas
through the investigator's enhanced visibility as a role model on the host
campus. The proposed activities which contribute to the second objective
include: giving lectures/seminars; lecturing in a number of graduate and
undergraduate courses, including developmental biology, introductory biology,
and advanced cell biology; working with graduate student women participating in
the on-going biology brown-bag lunches; and giving a lecture to the Cambridge
Chapter of the Association of Women in Cell Biology (AWIS).