* 9252908
* SMART Assessments:  Scientific Mathematical Arenas for      Refining Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1998
* James Pellegrino, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 05/31/1998
* USD 1,944,380.00

Project SMART Assessments (scientific and Mathematical Arenas for Refining
Thinking) combines assessment models and extends them via technology for
teleconferencing to create frequent, intrinsically motivating assessment
strategies. SMART assessment involve a series of stages focused on a Challenge
Series in which students work on problems that are imbedded into an
instructional unit. Students use gained knowledge to evaluate answers and
arguments in a live video teleconference format. They receive immediate feedback
and then work on new problems with the opportunity to respond again in a second
Challenge Series teleconference program. A series of studies will evaluate the
design features of SMART assessments and how these features enhance learning and
the quality of teaching in the areas of science and mathematics. The model will
be applied across curricular areas to establish its generalizability. Initial
application is to mathematics, in particular to the NSF funded Adventures of
Jasper Woodbury Series. The model will then be applied to two other programs in
science and mathematics. Major outcomes from the project will be: (1) a
documented set of assessment design procedures with examples of applications to
the three curricula emphasizing problem solving and reasoning in mathematics and
science; (2) data from research studies investigating the implementation of such
procedures in multiple classrooms with different teacher and student
characteristics; (3) data on the impact of such assessment procedures on
instructional program outcomes; (4) analyses of the implications of the
assessment for psychometric modeling and measurement.