* 9253208
* Science is BASIC (Bridging Assessment into Science          Instruction and Curriculum)
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1993,09/30/1997
* Nancy Angello, Highline School District
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 09/30/1997
* USD 435,368.00

The Highline School District of Seattle, Washington, has been a leader in the
use of hands on science kits in elementary schools. Virtually all teachers in
all schools rely on a series of experiential learning modules for science
instruction. The district now plans to replace their current system of paper-
and-pencil student assessment with "authentic assessment", which uses student
performance products (portfolios, discussion, simulations, etc.) as data for
evaluation by teachers. Testing would change from a separate activity to one
that is embedded in the instruction. Teachers will be exposed to a variety of
approaches to authentic assessment and the research that has been done on each.
With the guidance of specialists on performance assessment, the teachers will
develop assessment techniques that fit into each kit module. Many simultaneous
benefits will accrue from this change. Teachers will gain greater insight into
each student's abilities and needs, and the methods used for assessment will
become better aligned with the educational goals of the district. Teachers will
also work with volunteer scientists in developing assessment plans, thereby
increasing their understanding of the true nature of scientific inquiry as well
as of specific content areas. The implementation of performance assessment
throughout the Highline District constitutes a unique and important experiment
that has the potential for very wide impact. Cost sharing on this project
represents 29% of the NSF contribution.