* 9253326
* College Prepatory Mathematics Project
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1997
* Roberta Dees, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* diane spresser
* 03/31/1997
* USD 2,156,297.00

This project will continue training teachers at the University of Illinois at
Chicago and will begin the training of teachers at two other sites -- the
University of Wisconsin-Parkside and DePaul University. Training will consist of
intensive summer workshops on student-centered methods for teaching, such as
using cooperative learning using innovative problem-solving/applications-
oriented materials. The teachers will gain experience using the materials in the
summer by teaching groups of high school students taking summer courses. Each
teacher will implement the materials in a double-period class of first-year
integrated high school mathematics during the following school year for the same
students that attended the summer course. There will be support seminars during
this school year to support the teachers, as well as in-class observation by
project staff. This support will continue for two more summers and school years,
with the teachers teaching second- and third-year high school mathematics those
years to the same students. In a total of five high schools spread among the
three centers, the Interactive Mathematics Project materials will be implemented
by the teachers supported by this project. A comprehensive evaluation plan will
track student performance and retention of teachers from this project.