* 9253191
* Training Leadership Teachers to Enhance Science Education   through Experiments and Demonstrations (SEED)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/1992,12/31/1996
* Christos Zahopoulos, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 12/31/1996
* USD 885,665.00

Project SEED is a four week summer workshop for middle school teachers that
focuses on the use of inexpensive materials to teach the basic concepts and
principles of physical science. The core of the program is a manual of over 150
experiments and a kit of supporting demonstrations. In addition to workshop
sessions visits to local research and industrial facilities and talks by
Northeastern University research faculty are included. Teachers who have
participated in SEED workshop will then receive two years of leadership
training(PRO-SEED) to prepare them to conduct in-service activity based
workshops in their own school districts. This after school program of "teachers
teaching teachers" will be named EX-SEED. An additional component of the project
is to train retired scientists to act as Science Resource Agents(SRA'S) within
the schools(RE-SEED) Over the 46 months of funding 48 leader teachers, 16 peer
teachers and 70 retired technical professionals will be taught. Additional
features of the program involve the use of: * Live interactive telecasts
distributed by Massachusett's Corporation for Educational
Telecommunications(MCET) satellite network to EX-SEED leaders and participants
prior to each EX-SEED workshop. * Museum-style corridor exhibits to be
distributed within the schools for students. Cost sharing is estimated at 85%.