* 9253965
* PROJECT SOCRATES; Improving Introductory Physics Education  Through Interactive Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1993,06/30/2001
* Richard Hake, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2001
* USD 347,506.00

The Indiana University SOCRATES PROJECT is contributing to a critically needed
national improvement in university introductory physics education through
research on and development of interactive engagement methods for cost-
effective mastery learning. In particular, this project is further developing,
improving, and promulgating the Socratic Dialogue Inducing (SDI) Lab method
which has been shown to be effective in promoting student crossover to the
Newtonian World. The focus is on mechanics and related areas (fluid statics and
dynamics, oscillations, and waves). The testing ground is the Indiana University
Physics Department's General Physics I, a large-enrollment, non-calculus based
course for science (but not physics) majors (including prospective high- and
middle-school teachers). "Real-world" in-class investigation, well-controlled
out-of-class research with paid student subjects, and in-depth case studies are
being utilized. The goals sought are to (1) improve and systematize the
Socratic-dialogue and SDI lab techniques; (2) collaborate with other instructors
to modify the SDI method for various instructional settings; (3) improve and
extend the laboratory modules and instructor's guides; (4) more widely
disseminate the method by means of publications, talks, workshops, and
distribution of videotapes and lab modules; and (5) continue the construction of
computer Force-Motion-Vector Animations to assist laboratory and lecture
instruction.***//