* 9253355
* Dissemination through Wisconsin Fast Plants Master Leader   Workshop
* EHR,DRL
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1996
* Paul Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 11/30/1996
* USD 678,933.00

This is a three year project to disseminate the use of an effective teacher
enhancement program in biology, Wisconsin Fast Plants, to elementary and middle
school teachers, nationwide. Four different dissemination models will involve
the presentation of teacher workshops at universities and colleges, local
schools districts, and other institutions, such as museums. Workshop leaders at
these sites will include scientists, master teachers, science educators from
museums and other institutions, and Wisconsin Fast Plants staff. Non-staff
workshop leaders have been, or will be, trained by the Wisconsin Fast Plants
staff. The goals of the project are to 1) enhance teachers' science attitudes
and skills; 2) train teachers to grow and use Fast Plants for inquiry-based
instruction; 3) bring Fast Plants and better science instruction to underserved
students; 4) encourage community partnerships among educators, scientists, and
institutions; 5) expand the Fast Plants Network; and 6) continue to support all
previous Fast Plant users. An estimated 3,000 teachers will receive training via
126 workshops supported by the Wisconsin Fast Plants Program. The innovation is
expected to spread to an additional 6000- 9000 teachers as a result of the
project. Cost sharing equals 21.2% of the NSF award.