* 9253055
* RIMI: Minority Research Enchancement Program in Power             Systems
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Arunsi Chuku, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 02/28/1997
* USD 438,747.00

The "Minority Research Enhancement Program in Power Systems (MREPPS)" proposal
is designed to enhance research education in the application of systems theory,
optimization, control and expert systems for power systems planning, operation
and management by the use of artificial intelligence. An outreach program and
early involvement in research are program components designed to increase the
minority population in engineering. Enhancement of power systems research will
advance Howard University's educational mission by enhancing the quality of
programs offered to undergraduate and graduate students and by providing a means
of sharing technological breakthroughs in power systems with other HBCUs. The
research component of the proposal focuses on investigating four of the nine
national needs in power systems which have been identified by the Electric Power
Research Institute and the NSF. The outreach component of the program will
provide pre-college students with a more systematic exposure to science and
technology, increase the level of graduate students, and broaden the expertise
of faculty. Howard University is the only historically black university which
offers Ph.D. level studies in power systems, therefore, a unique feature of
MREPPS will include training of graduate students (about 12 students each year)
from the HBCUs. These students will be the future college professors in power
systems and through their research experience at Howard ıinfinite transfer on
program development at the undergraduate level will be developed!. Faculty
researchers and prospective graduate students who specialize in power systems
will be invited to Howard University to attend a week-long workshop that will
address current topics in the power industry and provide a mini-course on
knowledge-based systems engineering and neural networks application to power
systems. A teleconference, to be held at Howard, will link students, faculty and
researchers of HBCUs and engineers in the power industry. Minority engineers,
particularly those with graduate-level degrees, remain acutely underrepresented
in the field of engineering. This problem is especially evident in the field of
power systems. Howard University has contributed significantly to the current
pool of minority engineers in the power industry. Through this program, the
University will have a grater impact on increasing the number of minority
students entering undergraduate and graduate programs in engineering, on
increasing the number of practicing engineers and addressing faculty shortages
in the field of power systems. Finally, the program will address national
research needs in power systems.