* 9253973
* Science in the Liberal Arts Education: An Undergraduate     Course Development Project
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1996
* Michael Flower, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 09/30/1996
* USD 199,749.00

Science in the Liberal Arts Curriculum This two-year collaborative curriculum
development project will develop and implement an innovative interdisciplinary
Science in the Liberal Arts Curriculum at Portland State University and at
Clackamas, Mt. Hood, and Portland Community Colleges. Faculty from the four
institutions will cooperate in formulating a curriculum that provides liberal
arts students with three types of interdisciplinary science courses that will
meet the University's general education science requirement. Natural Science
Inquiry courses will focus on open-ended laboratory and field studies in the
manner recommended by Project Kaleidoscope. Integrated Science Concepts courses
will be developed around concepts that bridge more than one scientific
disciplIne and will feature investigative laboratories. Context of Science in
Society courses will explore the social, political, economic and ethical
dimensions of science and technology. The project will support course
development efforts by natural science faculty from the greater metropolitan
area community colleges and the university academic departments. The Advisory
Council for the project will consist of nationally recognized experts in
undergraduate science education and educational evaluation in both university
and community college settings. In the year following completion of the project
Portland State University will host an undergraduate science curriculum
conference as one of the dissemination tools for the project. Throughout the
course development period educational research will be conducted to evaluate the
effectiveness of the curriculum and teaching strategies.***//