* 9253464
* Kids as Global Scientists:  The Utilization of the Internet for Middle School Atmospheric Science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Nancy Songer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1995
* USD 242,360.00

The Internet telecommunications network is a resource that has begun to be
utilized in many arenas, yet has a potential for K-12 learning that is
unexplored and unstudied. As a component of the Boulder Valley Project, a school
district/university/industry partnership which is deploying Internet
connectivity to an entire school district, Kids as Global Scientists will couple
the implementation of Internet technology with detailed research on student
learning, collaboration models, and interface design for a K-12 audience. In
particular, the project will contribute: 1) Insights into the study of seventh
graders' understanding of atmospheric science concepts while investigating rich
and dynamic representations of weather phenomena, 2) new models for communities
and teacher interaction, and 3) prototype Internet interfaces for K-12
audiences. Internet connectivity within Middle School Internet Laboratories will
allow classrooms of students to collect and interpret National Weather Service
data and satellite images of an extensive variety of weather phenomena.
Telecommunications within the District will support vertical curricular themes,
teleapprenticeships, and new models of proximal and virtual communities.
Extensive work with teachers-as-project-members will expand current models of
teachers-as-researchers/learners/curriculum developers. Middle school students
will be Global Scientists both in their extensive study of North American and
world weather, and in their ability to communicate and personalize weather
phenomena with scientists of all ages, both locally and world-wide.