* 9253078
* An Analysis of Mathematic Teaching Reform Orientation
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1992
* C. Riedesel, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 08/31/1992
* USD 7,500.00

The Research Foundation of State University of New York seeks funds to conduct
a study among preservice and inservice teachers which will inform the
mathematics education community involved in teacher preparation and will also
have implications for inservice education. In particular, the proposers will
identify teaching behaviors and relate them to teachers' mathematical
understanding, beliefs and attitudes, class management styles, and to school-
level socio-economic status. They will try to determine the relationship between
conceptual mathematics understanding and teaching consistent with the NCTM
Curriculum and Evaluation Standards. The principals investigators will use a
Teaching Policy Instrument in their research. This instrument appears to be
appropriate to assess teacher behavior. It is grounded in current research and
reform documents including the NCTM Curriculum and Evaluation Standards. The
instrument was developed and validated by mathematics education experts; it was
also piloted prior to the proposed study. The proposers are not requesting any
funds for themselves or for their institution. Instead, a very modest amount is
requested for the teachers participating in the study. Other funds will be
provided by the university and by the Mark Diamond Research Fund at the
University of New York at Buffalo. Cost share is over 10%, given that no
indirect costs are requested and additional funding will come from the Mark
Diamond Research Fund at SUNY at Buffalo.