* 9253994
* An Enhanced Bioscience Education Program for the IntroductorYears of the Biology Major and for Interested Preteachers
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1993,01/31/2000
* Bernard Sagik, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 01/31/2000
* USD 325,788.00

The Enhanced Bioscience Education program greatly increases the effectiveness of
undergraduate education in the biological sciences. The new integrated
Curriculum presents science as it is practiced--as a problem solving,
investigative activity. The curriculum is designed for up to 100 bioscience and
teacher preparation majors. It is organized around topic areas and extends over
five quarters of instruction: (1) Biological Investigation is the heart of the
curriculum and consists of a series of laboratory modules covering the important
concepts of modern biology, leading students toward design of their own
experiments. There is a strong emphasis on use of computers for collecting data
and for data analysis and interpretation. (2) Principals of Bioscience includes
the content areas now covered in freshman biology, cell physiology, microbiology
and genetics presented as a single, coherent sequence and completely integrated
with Biological Investigation laboratories. (3) Physical Sciences and
Mathematics covers the topics of freshman and sophomore chemistry, mathematics
and physics, with the appropriate information and skills introduced in the order
needed. An Undergraduate Research Program includes freshman and sophomore
independent research projects, preparation for more advanced projects, and the
establishment of the Drexel Journal of Undergraduate Research as a vehicle for
dissemination of student research. Special attention is paid to problems of
student support and retention. Specific plans are included for evaluation and
effective dissemination of the outcomes of the project.