* 9253472
* Developing A Comprehensive Desert Exhibit: An Innovative    Model for Informal Science Education in Outdoor Museums
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1997
* Joseph McAuliffe, Desert Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 03/31/1997
* USD 634,776.00

The Desert Botanical Garden will utilize its extensive collection to create a
science learning center focusing on deserts and presenting fundamental science
concepts applicable to all environments. The comprehensive desert exhibit
created by this proposal will feature six thematic trails through 25 acres of
the Garden, with the trails' themes ranging from basic characteristics of
deserts to adaptions of plants, animals, and people to the desert. Emphasizing
ecology and conversation, the trails will include conceptual signs,
investigation stations for hands-on, interactive learning, and innovative
written exploration guides. The proposal also includes educational programming
which will extend the exhibit and encourage use of the Garden as an outdoor
laboratory. An exhibit-based curriculum will be developed for use across the
state, and an institute will be created to prepare teachers to use the exhibit
and curriculum. A newspaper series focusing on key exhibit concepts will be
disseminated across the state to reach out-of-school adults. The products of the
proposal and the model created will be shred through various networks with a
national audience. The local and worldwide population explosion in arid lands
mandates an increased understanding of deserts. With this proposal, the Garden
will be a catalyst for greater awareness and change.