* 9253157
* Learning and Applying Difficult Science Knowledge:  School- Based Research into the Application of Hypermedia Learning  Environments
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Michael Jacobson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1996
* USD 689,682.00

This project investigates the learning of important but difficult scientific
knowledge in biology using hypermedia learning systems based on a recent
cognitive theory of case- based learning (Spiro, Feltovich, Coulson, & Anderson,
1988; Spiro & Jehng, 1990). This approach to structuring hypertext and
hypermedia systems provides a multidimension and nonlinear learning environment
that explicitly demonstrates critical conceptual interrelationships in the
instructional content. The system has been tested in a number of different
domains, such as biomedicine and military strategy (Spiro et al., 1988). There
have also been promising findings of knowledge transfer in a controlled
experimental setting using a hypertext system of this type (Jacobson & Spiro,
1991). The proposed research represents the first application in biology
classroom settings of this theory-based approach to structuring hypermedia
learning technologies. Scientists will validate the accuracy and currency of the
biology content and practicing biology teachers will explore ways in which these
hypermedia systems can be best integrated in real-world classroom settings.
These new instructional systems will be tested in public high school biology and
life sciences courses with a wide range of students spanning from academically
talented to underserved populations comprised of low income, minority, or
academically low performing students. These hypermedia learning systems are
expected to help these different types of students both to learn difficult
biology concepts and to be able to use their acquired knowledgen in new ways and
in new situations. This collaborative university-school research project will
explore a number of issues related to the acquisition and transfer of biological
knoweledge, cognitive learning theory, hypermedia instructional design, and the
integration of hypermedia learning systems into the overall school-based science
learning environment.