* 9253171
* Engineering Concepts for the High School Classroom
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1997
* John Collier, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Householder
* 12/31/1997
* USD 418,360.00

A seven day workshop is proposed for 24 high school science (biology, chemistry
and physics) and mathematics teachers from across the nation. The teachers will
experience first hand an unusual systematic instructional strategy which employs
open ended problem solving techniques. During the first three days the
participants work in interdisciplinary teams of four to devise a product that
addresses a problem or need in an assigned field e.g safety or energy
conservation. Workshop participants are encouraged to call upon companies as
they develop their solution and are encouraged to consider how to capitalize on
the industrial interests and talent available. In addition a key test of a
team's solution to a problem is found in the presentation to a review board. The
second half of the workshop participants are teamed with other teachers from the
same discipline. The task is again problem solving with teachers working to
develop curricular modules for use in their high school classrooms which
incorporate the problem solving techniques they have learned. Each teacher who
participates will present at least one in- service program in their home
district during the year following their participation in the workshop. The
program is for four years with four teachers from the previous year returning to
the workshop to serve as "master teachers". These teaching assistants will
develop a manual for dissemination and use in future workshops. Cost sharing is
4%.