* 9253462
* Learning Through Collaborative Visualization: A Model for   Sixth-Generation Project Science
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Louis Gomez, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur W. St. George
* 07/31/1995
* USD 2,341,832.00

Project Enhanced Science Learning (PESL) offers learning partners opportunities
to engage in authentic scientific inquiry through apprenticeship. Such inquiry
is often enabled by dynamic interactions among learning partners in physical
proximity. Yet scientific and business practice using Internet and broadband
services recognizes that not all partners necessary to an interaction can be co-
located. Our vision uses new technologies to extend the collaborative "reach" of
PESL to include diverse expertise among remote learners, teachers, and
scientists. This work, in atmospheric sciences, extends collaborative media
beyond asynchronous text-only email to shared workspaces and two-way audio/video
connections that allow for collaborative visualization of science phenomena,
data, models - What You See Is What I See (WYSIWIS). Tools for local- and wide-
area networked learning environments will enable highly interactive, media-rich
communications among learning partners. Research on these learning architectures
will provide pedagogy and social protocols for authenticating the science
learning experience in classrooms and other spaces. Greater motivation to learn
and enhanced science learning in terms of more valid, performance assessments
should result from students' participations. The next decade brings widespread,
networked multi-media interpersonal computing. This project will provide a
blueprint to inform the effective use of interpersonal collaborative media for
science education.