* 9253963
* Improving Science and Mathematic Education through          Integrated Content and Interactive Discovery Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1993,05/31/1995
* Aubra Riddle, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/1995
* USD 78,000.00

This is a project to develop an integrated introductory course in undergraduate
science and mathematics by a team of faculty and professional staff in science,
mathematics and psychology representing three of our four major campuses of
Florida Community College at Jacksonville. The work is integral to the College's
long range plan to revitalize the curriculum and make learning an exciting and
rewarding process. The goals are to increase understanding and retention of
complex subject matter, while at the same time make these enjoyable experiences,
leading to the adoption of life-long learning habits by students. Teaching
faculty have teamed with psychologists versed in applications of learning and
motivation theory to the classroom as well as in the application of technology
to the learning process. The faculty team will develop an introductory level
undergraduate course combining the central themes of cycles, information, and
change common across scientific disciplines including botany, microbiology,
chemistry, physics, and mathematics. The developers will team teach the course
using strategies that integrate science and mathematics and focus on the
interrelationships among the sciences and mathematics. The course will be
delivered in electronic classrooms that allow team teaching via
telecommunications systems providing graphic, audio and visual interaction
between faculty and students located on both the North and Downtown Campuses.
The course will engage student in learning by discovery exploration and
collaborative partnerships between students and faculty and administrators
acting as mentors to student teams.