* 9253030
* Action Research:  Purposes, Practices, Possibilities -      Creating Links to National Science and mathematics Reform...
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Molly Watt, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Margaret B. Cozzens
* 06/30/1994
* USD 153,415.00

This proposal links action research with three educational reform initiatives
for this decade; the push for new professional roles for teachers, the
revitalized reform movements in mathematics and science education, and the need
to reframe the current practices in teaching and assessing learning along a more
constructivist approach. Action research in schools is usually undertaken by
teachers to improve their own practices; it can make significant contributions
to each of these agendas, although it has been under-utilized. This project will
develop and disseminate the rationale and knowledge of how action research can
support real change in classroom practices. It has been used extensively in
Australia and the United Kingdom to bring teachers' professional knowledge to
bear on educational development and reform initiatives, and in the United States
for major reforms in the teaching of reading and writing. Despite significant
local projects, this approach remains largely outside of mainstream science and
mathematics reform efforts. This project will bring together for one weekend a
working conference of 35 participants who represent multiple perspectives in the
fields of math, science, teacher development, and research methodology, and who
play key roles in educational reform: teachers, school administrators, research
methodologists, policy makers, and teacher educators. They will define action
researcch as it applies to American education, identify its enabling conditions,
and create a vision of its potential to support renewal in science and math
education. This project will create a strong network of colleagues knowledgeable
about how action research can faciliate reform; ongoing telecommunications among
participants as the project is developed and as follow-up to new initiatives; a
set of recommendations for ways that action research can suport reforms in
science and mathematics education, disseminated through professional
organizations; a published monograph written by conference participants that
encompasses current theory and practice of action research, which will be
delivered to 1,000 leaders and made available for purchase; and a new
methodology for linking small, context-specific research by teachers for the
purpose of informing larger educational decision-making.