* 9253006
* Continuous On-line Monitoring of Bacteria in Water and      Wastewater Treatment Plants
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/1993,02/28/1997
* Gary Eiceman, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1997
* USD 300,000.00

The concept proposed for this research program is based on combining advanced
immunoassay strategies for microorganism recognition with capable vapor sensors
for on-line feedback in wastewater chlorination. the antibody-antigen step will
be configured to yield simultaneously vapors specific to certain pathogens and
will likely involve multiple antibody-enzyme-substrate-vapor combinations. The
sensor will be an ion mobility spectrometer which has been altered chemically in
the ion source to produce favorable response to target vapors and diminished
sensitivity to potential interferences. This combination of antigen-antibody
recognition will be a basis for high selectively and the ion mobility
spectrometer will provide ultra-low detection limits and fast response. The
combination of immunoassay with vapor sensors is intended for domestic fixed
point monitoring in domestic water treatment plants. The feedback loop is
intended to allow a rational and informed control over chlorination. Such
enhanced control will permit a balance between over-chlorination (chemical
pollution) and under chlorination (biological pollution) in wastewater treatment
plants initially. However, with minor changes in inlets and small modifications
in procedures (mostly sample handling), in-field rapid bacteria assays could be
developed and used nationally and in developing nations where water borne
pathogens constitute daily threats to public health. The core science and
engineering is much the same and both uses will be pursued although priority
will be given to water and wastewater treatment plants.