* 9253364
* The Indianapolis Challenge
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1992,04/30/1995
* Sanford (Sam) Low, Cambridge Studios Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 04/30/1995
* USD 299,544.00

The goal of the project is to produce a one hour television documentary and a
series of video teaching modules which explore a wide range of scientific
disciplines in an exciting manner by presenting the story of how these
disciplines are used in the preparation and racing of an Indianapolis race car.
This program will be distributed to a wide audience through its broadcast by PBS
and cable sports networks; through dissemination to classrooms and museums
nationwide; and through distribution via agencies that focus on bringing
educational programs to youth and minorities across the country. We expect to
attract a new audience to science, the millions of Americans who are infatuated
by automobiles. This is an audience that cuts across age, ethnic and racial
distinctions in America today. This exciting story of applied science should
also appeal to American youth in a way that more traditional science stories do
not. The major scientific disciplines involved in the project are: basic
engineering, mathematics and physics, aerodynamics, materials science,
mechanics, telemetry and computer aided design. This project is submitted to the
Informal Science Education Program. The specific content of this project will be
aimed at an audience with little background in science. High-school students and
adults should be able to understand all the principles presented. Younger
audiences will gain insight into how a knowledge of science is fundamental to a
sport that many of them find fascinating.