* 9253433
* Model Proj:  A Model Program to Motivate and Educate Women  High School Students for Careers in Science
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Rubin Battino, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 08/31/1995
* USD 101,144.00

In partnership with the Dayton Board of Education and the business community,
Wright State University is building a pilot multi-faceted model program for
maximizing the number of highly motivated and academically competent women
students at Dunbar Magnet High School so that they go on to earn baccalaureate
(and higher) degrees in the natural sciences. Women constitute 52 percent of the
student body at Dunbar, and most are minority (95 percent). The specific goals
are: to enhance pre-college science and mathematics courses; to strengthen the
teaching skills of high school science teachers by updating their knowledge of
modern research tools and techniques; to make science education more active and
participatory; to make science relevant; to provide minority and women high
school students an orientation to career needs, requirements and opportunities
in the natural sciences; to establish year-round links between science teachers,
faculty, and the private sector research scientists; to develop a mentor program
through which faculty can nurture, encourage, motivate, inspire and challenge
women and minority high school students to pursue scientific careers; to form a
network of partners with the private sector and seek their involvement in the
Dunbar project; and to sensitize the faculty to the educational needs and
"culture" of women and minorities. Since most public high schools in large
cities have demographics similar to Dayton's, this pilot model program may be
replicated almost unchanged. Thus, its impact is expected to be significant
nationally.