* 9253547
* Presidential Faculty Fellow: Numerical Studies in Wave      Propagation and Scattering
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1997
* Shira Broschat, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 01/31/1997
* USD 300,000.00

This research area is the propagation and scattering of electromagnetic,
acoustic, and optical waves. Current research interests include rough surface
scattering, radar scattering from icy moons, ultrasound mammography, computer-
aided instruction in electromagnetics, and microwave nondestructive evaluation.
The PFF Award will be used to establish a Laboratory for Numerical Studies in
Wave Propagation and Scattering for research in the aforementioned topics. In
rough surface scattering the work is in two areas: developing models that
accurately predict scattering from randomly rough surfaces and developing a
Monte Carlo finite- difference time-domain (FDTD) method) to perform exact
numerical simulations of scattering from rough surfaces. We are also using the
FDTD method to try to solve the puzzle of anomalous polarization returns from
icy moons, an understanding of which is needed to assist in determining the
origin and evolution of icy moons. In ultra sound mammography we are working on
an imaging algorithm that will permit the early detection of breast tumors when
patient prognosis is most favorable. In the area of education we have developed
interactive software that is used in conjunction with two required junior-level
courses in electromagnetics. The software is composed of notebooks, each with
animated graphics, equations, and text covering a particular topic. Ten have
been written to date, and more are underway. Finally, the plan is to expand the
research to study the use of microwave nondestructive evaluation to detect
defects in large composite structures such as an airplane wing. We will use the
FDTD method to study microwave scattering induced by the different defects
within complex composite materials.