* 9253452
* Common Knowledge:  Pittsburgh
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1995
* Michael Levine, MPC Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1995
* USD 1,989,654.00

This project establishes an educational networking testbed to test conjectures
about major changes in the teaching environment of the Pittsburgh Public Schools
made possible through the installation of an electronic data network that will
ultimately be available to all students and teachers in the school district. The
proposed network will be novel in its distributed architecture and distributed
administrative structure. Teachers and students will use the network to access
information and people outside of their classrooms. These new resources will be
incorporated into curriculum, reform efforts, and the network will be used as a
tool for the development, implementation, evaluation and dissemination of new
curriculum components. The project will develop a set of network-based
activities and provide a framework in which such activities can be implemented
throughout the local school system, tested, evaluated and made available to
other school districts around the nation. The project also establishes
mechanisms to institutionalize the use and maintenance of network technology in
the Pittsburgh Public Schools. The model that will be developed for the
Pittsburgh Public Schools will be applicable to other urban school systems, and
materials generated in the course of the project will be immediately available
for the use of other school districts via district's connection the internet.
The project thus tests the educational utility of wide area networks for the
national K-12 community and will provide empirical date on costs and essential
factors contributing to effectiveness. The project is a joint effort of the
school district, the University of Pittsburgh and the Pittsburgh Supercomputing
Center, which itself was jointly founded by the University of Pittsburgh,
Carnegie Mellon University and the Westinghouse Electric Corporation. The
proposed activities will build coalitions involving these groups and many others
across the local community. Within the school district the project involves
cooperative activities which include students, teachers, instructional
specialists, administrators and the Pittsburgh Federation of Teachers. The
proposed network is the key element which will allow these groups to work
together efficiently and smoothly. It is also the key to significant changes in
the structure and quality of education in the Pittsburgh Public Schools and, by
extension, in other school districts across the country. Full implementation of
the proposed network will require an estimated five years to complete. The
present proposal will fund a two-year pilot phase of the larger project. This
pilot phase will attempt to answer all those questions which Pittsburgh - or any
other school district contemplating the development of an extensive computer
network - should understand before proceeding to a full-scale implementation.
Funding for the three-year implementation phase which follows will be sought
from a combination of NSF programs and programs managed by other federal
agencies and private foundations.