* 9253014
* RIMI:  Photocatalytic Oxidation Kinetics of Priority OrganicPollutants by TiO2 - A Molecular Structure and Reactivity   Study
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* William Cooper, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1994
* USD 50,073.00

In a one-year study, the research term proposed to study the kinetics of the
oxidation--in the presence of UV light and TiO2--of chlorinated phenols and
substituted phenols which are two classes of compounds that include 24 of the
129 priority pollutants listed by EPA. The intent is that the results will aid
environmental engineers in the development of photocatalytic oxidation
techniques for water and wastewater treatment. Objectives of the proposal
research are: 1. Photocatalytic oxidation kinetics or organics for three
different classes, namely, chlorinated aromatics, substituted aromatics,
competitive oxidation between them will be investigated. A model compound in
each organic class will be extensively studied for both adsorption and
oxidation. The oxidation kinetics will be mathematically modeled by Langmuir-
Hinshelwood equation. The kinetic parameters obtained will be used to estimate
the oxidation parameters of other organics in the class according to molecular
structure-reactivity relations at a given water quality. 2. The effects of water
quality such as pH, dissolved oxygen, alkalinity, and hardness on the Hammett
plot will be studied. The effect of temperature and light intensity will also be
investigated for different classes of organic pollutants. 3. When more than on
substrate coexist in the solution, a competitive oxidation kinetics will be
established. A mathematic model will be constructed according to molecular
parameters, water qualities, temperature, and light intensity to predict the
oxidation rate for a given organic compound at a given water quality and organic
mixture. 4. Fundamental mechanisms such as hydroxyl radical attack and positive
hole oxidation will be differentiated under different experimental conditions
for different organic compounds through Hammett plots by using pH as the master
variable.