* 9253292
* Buzzards Bay Rim Project
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Timothy O'Sullivan, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 07/31/1997
* USD 956,276.00

Dr. Timothy O'Sullivan, a chemistry professor at the University of
Massachusetts, Dartmouth campus, has designed the Buzzards Bay Rim Project. This
multi-year effort will train a science teacher leader in every elementary school
in the region surrounding Buzzards Bay in southeastern Massachusetts
(approximately 100 schools in nine school districts), as well as many principals
and school district administrators. The region has a high proportion of minority
students and recent Portugese immigrants, and a level of education that trails
behind the rest of the state. These teachers will receive more than 50 hours of
training on exemplary hands on curriculum, as well as two summer institutes
devoted to inquiry based pedagogy and assessment. This cadre of teacher leaders
would train teachers in their schools in the use of hands on inquiry based
curriculum, and would interact as agents for systemic change in each of their
host districts. Each district will form a leadership team consisting of leader
teachers, principals and district administrators, and will develop a plan for
reform of their science instruction. Pre-service teachers at U Mass Dartmouth
will be assigned to these science leaders as mentees. Scientists from Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute and Lloyd Environmental Center will act as science
content resources. Massachusetts has recently received a State Systemic
Initiative award from NSF, and this project will coordinate its activities with
the State Department of Education. The New Bedford School district will
participate in both projects, and will provide a meeting ground for integrating
the efforts. The Buzzards Bay Rim Project is a model collaboration among
universities, informal science centers, and local school districts. This effort
has significant potential to establish outstanding science instruction in
elementary schools throughout the region. Interactions with the Massachusetts
State Systemic Initiative Project PALMS will allow this approach to be
duplicated throughout the state. Cost sharing represents 83% of the NSF
contribution.