* 9253410
* Toward Universal Access to Math and Science Resources: PhaseI of A National School Network Testbed
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Denis Newman, BBN Systems & Technologies Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur W. St. George
* 02/28/1995
* USD 1,574,891.00

Phase I of a National School Network Testbed will test the feasibility of a
model for elementary and secondary school participation in internetworking. This
model makes available current scientific resources, engages students and
teachers in authentic problem-solving, supports teachers in classroom
innovation, and supports the implementation of advances in pedagogy and
educational technology. The Phase I Testbed brings together a number of projects
that have already begun to use networking, from simple email applications to
distributed databases and multi-user simulations. BBN-developed technology will
provide a uniform infrastructure for this range of applications. Collaborating
institutions will supply support, training, and study of usage. The testbed
research addresses the trade-off between the educational value and cost of the
technology. Can the technology bring educational benefits sufficient to attract
large scale investment by local, state, and federal agencies, as well as
industry? Can it be implemented in a robust, supportable form with low entry-
level costs? The K-12 server and BBN/MacEMail software supply file, electronic
mail, database, news/bulletin board, and other communications-based services to
classroom desktop computers. The server can operate at a national, regional,
district or within-school level. School computers connect over local and wide
area networks using TCP/IP, the standard protocol for the Internet, instead of
the currently common asynchronous terminal connections to a host computer. A key
component of the project involves the design and development of standard
mechanisms that allow educational software programs to take advantage of email,
database, and other services on the network server by invisibly establishing the
underlying connection between the desktop computer and the server.