* 9253312
* Project ET: Energizing Teachers of Mathematics, Science and Technology in Grades 4-9
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Jack Perna, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 02/28/1997
* USD 1,578,991.00

The proposed three year project is based on an equal partnership between Hunter
College and Community School District is to help students in grades 4 through 9,
particularly under-represented groups, achieve their potential in mathematics,
science and technology. This will be accomplished through staff development for
both teachers and supervisors and also parent education. During the first two
years of the project activities will focus on teams of at least two teachers
from each of the schools in CSD in workshops and computer based activities for
15 days during the spring semester and three weeks in July at Hunter College. By
the end of the spring semester each participant will have a library that
includes grade appropriate curriculum materials, activities developed by the
staff, computer discs, laser discs, model lessons, assessment instruments and
other educational resources. Field trips to local industry, environmental
activities on the River and an intensive three day "camp" experience at the
Mohonk Mountain Reserve are included in the program and are designed to help
teachers duplicate similar experiences with students at a later date.
Participating teachers will receive 9 graduate credits in mathematics, science
and technology education upon successful completion of the program. Over the
three years of the project in all of the six community school districts in
Manhattan 270 teachers, 32 supervisors and 300 parents will participate. This
should directly benefit over 17,500 students. Cost sharing is estimated at 28%.