* 9253299
* Building Leadership to Enhance the Teaching of Secondary    School Biology in Mississippi
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1993,12/31/1997
* Sabine Heinhorst, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 12/31/1997
* USD 551,755.00

This project is a three-year program to establish a partnership of five
universities, fifteen community colleges, the State Department of Education, and
school districts from throughout the state of Mississippi to improve high school
biology education. In order to accomplish this goal, ten five-member teams from
throughout the state (three high school teachers and two community college
instructors per team) will be prepared as master teachers at two summer
institutes in the content areas of molecular biology, genetics and evolution.
The institutes will be hosted by The University of Southern Mississippi. The
teams will collaborate with the State Department of Education in the revision of
the high school biology curriculum and will conduct 52 hour workshops at local
sites throughout the state that will update an additional 470 high school
biology teachers in the content area focus and appropriate pedagogy. An
equipment lending program will support the equipment needs of the teachers in
the implementation of new laboratory explorations. The specific objectives of
the project are to help teachers 1) integrate the processes of science skills to
the teaching of biology concepts, 2) build students' conceptual understanding of
biology rather than the recall of isolated facts, 3) acquire laboratory and
field skills appropriate for teaching these contemporary topics, and 4) to
develop strategies to teach decision-making on biological and controversial
issues. Cost sharing equals 51.9% of the NSF award.