* 9253362
* State of The Environment:  Understanding Connecticut's      Environment Through Interactive Map
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1999
* Michael Jordan, Science Center of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 02/28/1999
* USD 639,739.00

The Science Museum of Connecticut (SMC) proposes a three- year exhibit project
called The State of the Environment. This cost-effective project will serve over
500,000 citizens a year by producing two permanent exhibits - 2400 sf for SMC
and 400 sf for SMD's Roaring Brook Nature Center -- and eight traveling exhibits
for use primarily in connecticut's Priority schools. These innovative exhibits
use highly accurate sculptural relief maps which are animated by laser graphics
and responsive to visitor inquiries through a research-calibre database
containing vast information on Connecticut's environment. Thorough evaluation
will help SMC design visitor experiences that make map-database interaction
attractive, easy to use and understand, and educationally satisfying. State
accredited teacher workshops will give educators a firm grasp of database
capabilities prior to its use in the traveling exhibits for schools. Traveling
exhibits will support goals in Connecticut's NSF-funded Statewide Initiative.
Teacher's Guides will facilitate in-dept investigations for high school science
lessons. These exhibits will provide hands- on experiences with professional
tools for environmental research, show how environmental maps are made, teach
basic principles of environmental science, and provide-in-depth information
about the ecology of an entire state.