* 9253322
* Teachers, Time, and Transformation: A Grassroots Model for  Reform in Practice and Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Faye Ruopp, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* diane spresser
* 02/29/1996
* USD 796,470.00

The aim of this three year professional development program is to give 36
teachers (grades 4 through 12) in the Boston MA area the mathematical and
pedagogical background to become teacher-leaders. Specifically, the proposers
have designed a program to explore in depth and across grade levels, topics
relating to algebra-- beginning with "pre-algebra" topics at the elementary and
middle school levels, as well as high school algebra proper. Participating
teachers will study these topics using available, exemplary curricular
materials, and in the kinds of teaching contexts called for by the NCTM
standards--including cooperative peer learning, use of hands-on materials, and
applications of computers and calculators. To these ends, participants will
attend eighteen half- day workshops during the school year, which will take
place during the school day. Local businesses cooperating with the project will
provide substitutes to the schools gratis, using volunteer employees who can
discuss with students how mathematics is used in the work place and who, in
turn, will gain an appreciation of the day-to-day problems of the schools.
During the summer, the teacher- participants will continue their studies in an
intensive two-week workshop. This basic format will be repeated in each of the
three years of the program. In the second year, the participating teachers will
develop and begin to implement new lessons relating to algebra in their own
classrooms. Project staff will provide close support and mentoring throughout
the year. The lessons developed will then be integrated into a coherent 4-12
program of algebra: "Algebra for Everyone." In the third year, participants will
plan and lead a variety of inservice programs in their schools and districts to
familiarize other teachers with the new materials and teaching styles. The
program will conclude with a dissemination conference at which the materials,
lessons, and experiences of the program will be made available on a national
basis.