* 9253281
* Teachers as Research Partners: Testing A Problem-Solving    Curriculum Model that Integrates Mathematics and Science
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1993,08/31/1995
* Patricia Alexander, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/1995
* USD 646,626.00

This proposal seeks to bridge educational research and classroom practice
through the establishment of collaborative partnerships among university
educational researchers and practicing middle school classroom science teachers.
Expected results include (a) enhancing the expertise and professionalism of
middle school science teachers in the state of Texas, and (b) producing a field-
tested model for the development and integrated mathematics and science problem-
solving curricula. There are three major objectives of the project: (1) to plan,
design, execute, and evaluate a project that develops and enhances teachers'
abilities to teach science; (2) to design, filed test and revise a prototype of
a model for the development of middle school problem-solving curricula; and (3)
to evaluate the model's effectiveness in answering research questions that
pertain to the teaching and learning of science. Texas teachers will be involved
at two levels. Three master teachers specifically chosen because of their areas
of expertise in mathematics, science, and computers, will collaboratively
execute all aspects of the project, including workshop teaching to other
teachers and collaborative research with university researchers; and 30 pilot
teachers, chosen from a pool of teachers throughout the state of Texas, who will
receive instruction, write and field test the prototype, and assist in the
research activities of the project. The significant of the project is that it
provides a mechanism for interpreting research data and their cognitive worth
within the context of good science teaching. Cost sharing is equivalent to 2.0%
of the NSF award.