* 9253028
* RIMI:  High Temperature Fatigue of Continuous Fiber         Reinforced Silicon Carbide/Silicon Nitride Composites
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Hassan Mahfuz, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Bobby L. Wilson
* 02/29/1996
* USD 309,912.00

Continuous fiber reinforced ceramic composites (CFCC) will be tested under
fatigue at room and elevated temperatures to study the variation in fatigue
phenomena with temperature. Laminated coupons of SiCf/Si3N4 (silicon Carbide
fiber reinforced Silicon Nitride matrix) composites with symmetric layups will
be subjected to tensile-tensile fatigue. Prior to fatigue tests, tensile
properties will be characterized at various temperatures to determine the
strength, and to decide about specific temperatures at which the elevated
temperature fatigue tests are to be conducted. Room temperature fatigue tests
will be performed at various stress ratios ranging from 0 to 0.5, and which
frequencies varying from 1 to 10 Hz, to observe their effects on the fatigue
life of the composite. High temperature fatigue tests will be conducted under
isothermal conditions to maintain the cyclic loading as the main driving force
for the composite failure. NDE and SEM characterization will be performed to
evaluate the damage and the failure characteristics of the composite. Parallel
to mechanical testing, finite element analysis will be performed to investigate
the non-linear response of the laminate under tensile and fatigue loading.
Layered shell element developed on the basis of first order shear deformation
theory will be used. Both large deformation and plastic strain behavior will be
considered to account for the geometric and material non-linearities in the
analysis. Cumulative fatigue damage bases on the Miner's rule and the
experimental S-N curve, will be simulated in the finite element model to study
the laminate response under two and three stress level cyclic loading. Few
specimens will be tested under cumulative fatigue to verify the FEM results. The
proposed research will be conducted by three faculty associated with the
Tuskegee University's Materials Research Laboratory (MRL) which is a multi-
disciplinary facility developed for synthesis and characterization of high
performance materials including advanced composites. It is proposed to involve
six minority graduate students and six minority undergraduate students over a
period of three years. The program will also allow the sponsoring department to
recruit talented minority faculty and students.