* 9253008
* VPW:  Development of Genomic Libraries for Glycine max:     A Genetic Tool (Genetics)
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Kathleen Danna, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 07/31/1994
* USD 84,396.00

The investigator proposes to produce a tool critical for further studies of
soybeans: a collection of large, cloned segments of DNA (P1 library) from two
lines: (1) an elite line (BSR101) which has superior genes at most loci and
which is representative of the broader germplasm used for breeding; and (2) one
which carries exotic genes, including those for resistance to soybean cyst
nematode (SCN), a serious pathogen. Dr. Danna will screen the cloned DNA to
identify segments that hybridize to molecular markers tightly linked to the SCN-
resistance loci. The cloned segments will be useful for obtaining new markers
more tightly linked to these important genes and for eventual isolation of the
genes for transfer to other lines of soybean. The P1 libraries produced will be
useful in addressing fundamental questions about the soybean, including sequence
organization of the genome and its evolutionary history from a wild ancestor
species. The long term goals of this project are to contribute to the
fundamental understanding of the molecular biology and genetics of soybean and
to facilitate the manipulation of soybean germplasm for crop improvement. This
project furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to
advance their careers in science or engineering through research, and to
encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the
investigator's enhanced visibility as a role model on the host campus. The
proposed activities which contribute to the second objective include: giving
guest lectures on virology; teaching an undergraduate seminar course on "Women
in Biology," with both an historical perspective and a focus on contemporary
biologists; arranging for guest lecturers, who will also present departmental
seminars; organizing an informal discussion group for women in the biology
department to provide a framework for "networking," and to provide counseling
and mentoring for women students.