* 9253417
* Examining the Impact of Geology on American Society:        An Interdisciplinary Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Lauret Savoy, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Judith L. Hannah
* 08/31/1994
* USD 12,000.00

The experiences of all humans are tied to the Earth, its processes and
materials, and an understanding of this relationship is critical to the ability
of individuals and society to make informed decisions about environmental
issues. Unfortunately, the current level of earth-science illiteracy in the
United States indicates that the nature and history of human- environment
interactions is not adequately understood. The proposed research represents the
initial stages of an interdisciplinary program to review and analyze aspects of
the interaction between humans and the environment in North America from a
geologic perspective. Focusing initially on the American Southwest, this study
will examine the idea that the physical environment and its study directly
influenced human (Native American and Euro-American) perceptions of landscape
and, in turn, land use through time. The record of human-environment
interactions will be evaluated using historical review of geologic studies and
other primary and secondary literature (e.g., in anthropology, history, or
geography), and field study. The proposed program will contribute a geologic
context by which Earth-human interactions through time can be considered. The
interdisciplinary nature of this study also has the potential to increase the
accessibility of earth science to a wider, more culturally diverse audience.