* 9253407
* Learning Science Through Guided Discovery: Liquid Water and Molecular Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1997
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 06/30/1997
* USD 1,778,805.00

In every drop of water, down at the scale of atoms and molecules, there is a
world that can fascinate anyone - ranging from a non-verbal young science
student to an ardent science-phobe. The objective of Learning Science Through
Guided Discovery: Liquid Water & Molecular Networks is to use advanced
technology to provide a window into this submicroscopic world, and thereby allow
students to discover by themselves a new world. We are developing a coordinated
two-fold approach in which a cycle of hands-on activities, games, and
experimentation is followed by a cycle of computer simulations employing the
full power of computer animation to "ZOOM" into the depths of his or her newly-
discovered world, an interactive experience surpassing that of an OMNIMAX
theater. Pairing laboratory experiments with corresponding simulations
challenges students to understand multiple representations of concepts. Answers
to student questions, resolution of student misconceptions, and eventual
personalized student discoveries are all guided by a clear set of "cues" which
we build into the computer display. Moreover, the ability to visualize "real-
time" dynamic motions allows for student-controlled animated graphic simulations
on the molecular scale and interactive guided lessons superior to those afforded
by even the most artful of existing texts. While our general approach could be
applied to a variety of topics, we have chosen to focus first on water; later we
will test the generality of the approach by exploring macromolecules such as
proteins and DNA. The simulation sofware we have been developing embodies a
simple molecular interaction model but requires leading edge computing in order
to (1) apply the model to large enough systems to yield simple and realistic
behavior, and (2) animate the result in real time with advanced graphics. Our
ultimate goal in this project is not only to help students learn science, but
also to help them learn to think like research scientists. By looking at
scientific knowledge as a set of useful models - models that are essentially
temporary and will inevitably lead to better ones - they can see that science is
not a set of facts, but a method for discovering patterns and predictability in
an otherwise disordered and unpredictable world. Through mastery of the
simulation software, students will gain the self-confidence to embark on their
own missions of discovery.