* 9253298
* Mathematics Teacher/Researchers Collaborating for           Collaboration in the Classroom (MTRC3)
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/1992,05/31/1997
* Patricia Tinto, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* diane spresser
* 05/31/1997
* USD 545,473.00

This four-year project aims at establishing a county-wide network of secondary
mathematics teachers whose ongoing work will be to support the teachers of
Onondanga County (Syracuse, NY) as they introduce and maintain programs of
modern mathematics in the county's high schools. To these ends, 42 well-prepared
mathematics teachers will be selected for a program designed to strengthen their
mathematical background, expand their pedagogical repertory, and enhance their
leadership skills. The program will begin with an initial group of 18 teachers
(2 from each of 9 schools) attending a 4-week residential summer institute at
the University of Syracuse with two major foci: (1) helping teachers modernize
their classroom instruction (e.g. involving their students actively in doing
mathematics); (2) professinalizing teaching by asking teachers to reflect on
their own classroom practices, involving themselves in professional societies,
and the like. Participants will also study mathematical content -- with emphasis
on the importance of connections between diverse topics; solve (real world)
mathematical problems in small groups; explore the uses of technology to aid in
doing mathematics; create lessons and units for use in their classrooms; learn
new and appropriate ways of assessing student progress in mathematics. During
the implementation phase in the ensuing academic year, project staff will lend
support to the participating teachers in a series of 12 half-day workshops. In
the second year, the program described above will be repeated for an additional
24 teachers. Participants from the first summer program -- after additional
training -- will act as mentors to this second group of teachers. In the third
and fourth years of the project, the entire group of participating teachers will
have formed teams (of 4 to 14 members) to initiate and maintain implementation
and dissemination efforts throughout their respective districts. Project staff
will provide a variety of support for these efforts. It is expected that the
network of teams thus established will continue its work after the end of the
grant. Cost sharing is 30%.