* 9253398
* Raptors: A National Traveling Exhibition and Education      Program
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1996
* Donald Pohlman, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 12/31/1996
* USD 1,100,000.00

The Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM) will develop an interdisciplinary
national traveling exhibition about raptors (birds of prey). Created in
collaboration with The Raptor Center at the University of Minnesota (TRC) and
the Museum Magnet School of the St. Paul School District, this exhibit and its
related programs will explore themes of biodiversity, ecology, and human
relationships with the natural world. It will help visitors understand raptors
as diverse, charismatic, biologically-complex animals whose continued survival
is linked to fundamental questions of public policy, economics, and
environmental ethics. combining the perspectives of the sciences with those of
the humanities, the exhibit will present science in a real-world context of
human values and actions. Opening at SMM in the summer of 1944, the
5,000-square-foot exhibit will travel for five years or more to other large
museums, nature centers, and zoos throughout the U.S. Using specimens, models,
artifacts, dioramas, audiovisual programs, and interactive components and
supported by theater, demonstrations, and a variety of other on-site programs,
it will provide a compelling mix of informal learning experiences for families,
school groups, and other general audiences. Beyond the museum walls, the themes
of the project will reach schools and other important outreach audiences through
videotapes, teacher training programs, educational materials, and other
programs. SMM will also produce a scaled-down version of the exhibit that will
tour to smaller museums, nature centers, and zoos.