* 9253363
* Tools of the Astronomer, An Interactive Science Education Exhibit
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Robert Millis, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 06/30/1995
* USD 500,710.00

Lowell Observatory astronomers will collaborate with educators, museum
specialists, and planetarium professional to design and implement a unique
series of interactive science education exhibits entitled Tools of the
Astronomer. The exhibits will capitalize on widespread interest in astronomy to
illustrate the research process, demonstrate the theory and function of basic
astronomical instruments, and encourage visitors to discover how measurements
made with these instruments reveal the properties of celestial objects. Exhibit
concepts developed by the Lowell staff will be evaluated by a National Exhibit
Advisory Board (NEAB). The original concepts will then be modified to reflect
the Board's recommendations, and prototype exhibits will be built. The
prototypes will be extensively tested for durability and effectiveness in
achieving the educational goals. Students and teachers from Arizona (including
those from nearby Navajo and Hopi Indian Reservations), plus members of the
general public, will participate in the testing. The NEAB will then review the
completed prototypes and test results, and recommend any further modification or
testing needed prior to selection of a professional exhibit fabricator to build
the final exhibits. The completed exhibits will be installed and further
evaluated in a new educational facility to be opened at Lowell Observatory in
spring of 1994. There, the exhibits will be experienced by tens of thousands of
people who visit Lowell Observatory each year. A significant fraction of these
visitors will be school children who will participate in instructional programs
designed around the exhibits. The exhibits also will ultimately be used in
teacher workshops. To achieve maximum impact, all software, exhibit designs,
teacher's guides, and other material developed in this project will be marketed
to schools, science centers, planetaria, observatories, and other educational
entities at the cost of reproduction.