* 9253103
* Conditional Immortalization of Olfactory Neuron Precursors  from Transgenic Mice
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Anne Calof, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 12/31/1993
* USD 18,000.00

Neurogenesis, the proliferation and differentiation of cells that give rise to
neurons, plays a fundamental role in shaping the developing nervous system.
Currently, little is known about molecules that regulate neurogenesis in mammals
and other higher vertebrates. To facilitate the study of vertebrate neurogenesis
at the molecular level, an in vitro system has been developed involving primary
culture of a relatively simple germinative neuroepithelium, the olfactory
epithelium (OE) of the mouse embryo. Immortalized cell lines, which have some
properties of OE neuronal precursors, have also been generated, but failure of
these cell lines to differentiate fully precludes their usefulness for many
studies. The objective of the experiments performed during this Research
Planning Grant is to generate conditionally-immortalized cell lines capable of
undergoing full differentiation into olfactory receptor neurons. A strategy
specifically designed to select for differentiating cell lines, involving use of
an existing strain of transgenic mice, will be used in these preliminary
experiments. Future studies to be conducted with cell lines generated during the
planning period would be directed towards identifying gene products
characteristic of the neuronal precursor phenotype. Specifically, a molecular
genetic approach ("promoter trapping") would be used to identify genes that are
expressed in proliferating neuronal precursor cells and are turned off upon
terminal neuronal differentiation. Genes identified using this approach would
then be analyzed with respect to pattern and timing of expressing in vivo during
normal development, to determine whether they are expressed in all germinative
neuroepithelia; such widely-expressed genes are potentially of general
importance in the regulation of neurogenesis.