* 9253221
* Preparing Preservice K-8 Teachers for Teaching              Mathematics for the Future
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1992,08/31/2000
* Phyllis Chinn, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2000
* USD 1,168,116.00

Humboldt State University seeks funds to develop and implement a program which
will reach mathematics faculty members who teach courses for preservice K-8
teachers. The goal of the project is to transform the way preservice mathematics
courses are taught so that mathematics faculty will model the teaching
techniques which prospective K-8 teachers will be expected to exhibit in their
own classrooms. To achieve this goal, intensive summer workshops are planned for
300 California college faculty who will teach over 9,000 students per year, and
other programs which will reach an additional 600 faculty members. These
workshops and inservice activities focus on: selection and dissemination of
integrated instructional units, increased use of effective instructional styles,
increased participation in mathematics education reform, improved networking and
discussion among mathematics faculty, and improved preparation of K-8 teachers
who will experience learning mathematics from instructors who model exemplary
practices for the new teachers to emulate. University level materials will be
developed for the mathematics courses which take into consideration the NCTM
Standards documents, the MAA Call for Change and the California Framework as
well as other curriculum and content mathematics project for the precollege and
collegiate levels. Two year college faculty will participate in the program.
Cost sharing is approximately 12% of NSF funding.