* 9253237
* Hands-On Science in Pasadena: Middle School Extension
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1997
* James Bower, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 11/30/1997
* USD 570,804.00

Dr. James Bower is a biologist on the faculty of the California Institute of
Technology, and an active proponent of inquiry-based hands-on science education.
Dr. Bower has designed a project that will an NSF-supported elementary teacher
enhancement effort in the Pasadena Unified School District (PUSD) to the middle
school level. Project SEED (Science for Early Educational Development) is being
supported by a four-year award from the Teacher Enhancement Program to establish
a hands on inquiry-based instructional program in all of the 22 elementary
schools in PUSD. The students entering middle school are encountering a
traditional textbook/lecture format in science class, and parents have begun to
demand expansion of the outstanding elementary school instruction to the upper
grades (3,500 students in 5 middle schools). This project will train teachers in
the use of hands on science kits, establish a materials support system for
refurbishment of kits, engage scientists from the community in teacher workshops
and in classroom activities, and encourage integration of science with other
curricular subjects through additional summer workshops. This project will
create a comprehensive and integrated K-8 science curriculum for the public
schools in Pasadena, and will prepare all middle school teachers responsible for
science instruction to deliver exemplary learning experiences. The collaboration
between Cal Tech and the Pasadena Unified School District has been a productive
partnership, and the expansion of the project from elementary to middle schools
is a model for other districts to follow. Cost sharing by the University and
school district represents 104% of the NSF contribution.