* 9253105
* RPG:  Organic Geochemistry of Fossil Non-Marine Molluscs    with Applications to Amino Acid Racemization Dating
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1993,01/31/1995
* June Mirecki, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

Enantiomeric (D/L) values of amino acids preserved in the organic matrix of
molluscan fossils are used to characterize Quaternary stratigraphic units, and
provide a basis for correlation of strata and estimation of relative age. D/L
values increase as a function of time (termed racemization), at a rate
controlled to some extent by post-depositional thermal history of the fossil.
Protein hydrolysis also exerts a rate-controlling effect on amino acid
racemization, because amino acids on protein termini racemize preferentially to
those located within the protein chain. The extent to which hydrolysis affects
D/L values preserved in mollusc shell protein is not well-defined. Leaching of
hydrolyzed amino acids (primarily D-enantionmers) can affect resolution of the
amino acid racemizaton (AAR) dating method. The focus of this work is how the
physical and chemical condition of fossil mollusc shell protein affects
resolution of the AAR method. Fossil organic matrix will be studied using
molecular weight separation methods to define "resistant" versus "labile"
components. Enantiomeric values will be determined in each component using HPLC
methods, to understand the influence of hydrolysis on diagenetic racemization.
Physical evidence of leaching will be observed using scanning electron
microscopy. This study will focus primarily of molluscan fauna from Quaternary
units of the southern High Plains, which represent a long geologic record during
which protein diagenesis can be studied.