* 9253473
* Why is Music Music?  An IMAX/OMNIMAX Film about the Science of Music and Sound
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1993,04/30/1996
* Valentine Kass, Museum of Science and Industry
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 04/30/1996
* USD 50,000.00

Shedd Productions, Inc. will produce a 38 minute 70 mm IMAX/OMNIMAX film which
uses multicultural music to stimulate audiences' interest in the physics,
physiology, math and technology of music and sound. The film will be a musical
science investigation of what music is, why we respond to it, and what it means
in the lives and diverse cultures of people around the world. By exploring
together music's scientific structure and its variety of human interpretations,
WHY IS MUSIC MUSIC? will show the dynamic relationships between science,
technology, art, and culture. Hands-on science materials will be developed for
general audiences and middle school classrooms to encourage in-depth exploration
of the science and math concepts presented in the film. Model teacher training
workshops for middle school music and science teachers will be held with the
opening of the film in each venue to increase teachers' effectiveness with the
hands-on materials. To enhance the educational effectiveness of future large-
format films, comprehensive evaluations of WHY IS MUSIC MUSIC? and the
accompanying classroom curriculum will be made available. This film will be
distributed through the national and international network of science centers
that house IMAX/OMNIMAX theaters, and may be seen by approximately 14 million
viewers during the first five years.