* 9253324
* Sea Experience:  Theoretical and Practical Summer Programs  of Teacher Enhancement in Marine Science
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1993,12/31/1999
* Audrey Meyer, Sea Education Association
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 12/31/1999
* USD 1,017,028.00

This 5-year SEA (Sea Education Association) project offers two intensive summer
institutes each year - one for elementary school teachers and one for middle
through high school science and mathematics teachers - in marine and nautical
sciences, designed to provide participants with a general knowledge of marine
sciences, ideas of field and lab work that can be implemented in the classroom
and passed on to other teachers, and practical experience working at sea as part
of a team conducting scientific research. Twenty- three elementary school
teachers and twenty-three middle and high school teachers will be selected
nationally each year to participate in the summer institutes, for a total of 230
teachers over the course of the project. The Sea Experience programs will begin
with shore-based, three week components held in Woods Hole, MA at SEA's campus;
here, teachers will participate in courses emphasizing basic concepts in
physics, chemistry, geology and biology which can be conveyed to students
through studies of the ocean. The final ten days of each program will be spent
on board one of SEA;s fully equipped oceanographic research sailing vessels,
where teachers will participate in the practical hands-on experience of carrying
out research projects and in the operation of the vessels. Follow-up activities
will include annual workshops for Sea Experiences participants, and each teacher
will be committed to presenting two in-service training workshops in their home
states. Teachers will be provided with a large variety of materials to use in
their own teaching and will also be required to conduct two workshops for
colleagues in their home schools. This proposal is appropriate for Teacher
Enhancement because it is designed to enhance the science knowledge and teaching
of participants, and because it provides practical experience working as part of
a team conducting scientific research. Non-NSF Cost-sharing is approximately 34%
of the amount requested from NSF.