* 9253404
* Science Exhibit Starter Sets
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Joe Ansel, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 06/30/1996
* USD 2,087,041.00

The Exploratorium seeks support for a program designed to help approximately
twelve new or expanding U.S. museums acquire quality, educationally provern
interactive exhibits. Over a thirty-six month period, two groups of museums will
work with the Exploratorium to select and produce an individualized set of
exhibits. The museums will dedicate staff to participate in the exhibit
production process, as well as in the development of exhibit-based educational
programs. The production cost of the exhibits will be shared on a fifty/fifty
basis, with NSF's portion being matched by funds raised independently by the
participating museums. Participant museums will be able to acquire stimulating
and proven exhibits at half cost, and make use of the Exploratorium's exhibit
construction shops, staff and other resources in developing educational programs
and materials that complement their chosen exhibit set. It is expected that each
participants will receive between fourteen and twenty-four exhibits. The program
will repeat, to include another six institutions, in the second eighteen months.
Participants will select exhibits in an initial one week visit to the
Exploratorium and then return for a minimum four-week period to assist in
producing their exhibits. Participation staff, through their involvement with
construction, will become conversant with their exhibits' technical and
operational aspects. The program will give participants true hands-on training.
In addition to individualized assistance, each participant museum will receive
publications about exhibit construction and use, as well as a booklet that
includes technical, maintenance, and educational information about their own
exhibits.