* 9253739
* Presidential Faculty Fellow
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,09/30/1997
* James Kadonaga, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 09/30/1997
* USD 512,000.00

Dr. Kadonaga is an outstanding young scientist, with an exemplary research
career to date. His credentials are impeccable, his research plan is excellent,
and he is already at the forefront of his field. The objective of this award is
to examine the relationship between chromatin structure and gene activity in
eukaryotes. Recent findings on the mechanism of transcriptional activation by
sequence specific factors strongly suggest that dynamic interactions between
chromatin and the transcription factors are involved in the regulation of gene
expression. These transcriptional "activators" may actually function as
antirepressors--that is they appear, at least in part, to counteract repression,
stems for reconstitution of chromatin will be developed, and then the resulting
chromatin will be used as template for in vitro transcription analysis. These
studies should lead to a better understanding of the process of gene activation.
%%% The objective of this award is to enhance his research involving examine the
relationship between chromatin structure and gene activity in eukaryotes.
Interactions between chromatin and the transcription factors are involved in the
regulation of gene expression. Transcriptional "activators may actually function
to counteract repression of basal transcription by chromatin. Different systems
for reconstitution of chromatin will be developed, and then the resulting
chromatin will be used as template for in vitro transcription analysis. These
studies should lead to a better understanding of the process of gene activation.
Dr. Kadonaga is exceptionally broad in his research achievements, as well as in
his teaching interests and plans. He will have an important impact on a
department as distinguished as UCSD's Biology Department. There is no question
that he will be a leader in biological sciences in the future.