* 9254712
* ANIMALS EAT Traveling Exhibition
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1993,11/30/1997
* Carol Enseki, Brooklyn Children's Museum Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 11/30/1997
* USD 242,787.00

The Brooklyn Children's Museum (BCM) is requesting $242,753 from the National
Science Foundation to introduce a traveling version of the Museum's award-
winning, interactive science exhibit, ANIMALS EAT: DIFFERENT FEASTS FOR
DIFFERENT BEASTS. ANIMALS EAT was designed to assist children in the formation
of their concept of a living thing. The exhibition specifically focuses on
familiar animals, and on eating in order to illustrate this complex idea.
Throughout the exhibit, where appropriate, human parallels demonstrate the
interrelatedness of all living things. The touring exhibit will incorporate the
in-depth research, development and extensive evaluation that went into the
installation at BCM. It will encompass approximately 2,000 square feet and will
travel to at least ten locations over a perior of two-and-one-half years,
offering hundreds of thousands of children and families a unique and exciting
way to learn important natural science concepts. As part of the touring package,
the Museum will also circulate Evi"Dents," a science curriculum kit developed
for grades 3-5. Using activity books, natural science specimens and
investigation tools, Evi"Dents" provides an interactive seven-week study of
teeth for teachers and students that develops students' scientific and research
skills. Through loans to local schools at the tour sites, Evi"Dents" will
complement and extend the educational potential of the exhibition.