* 9254597
* Preparation of Elementary Mathematics Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1996
* Robert Gilbert, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1996
* USD 420,992.00

Just as the preparedness of a classroom teacher directly effects the
achievement/attitude of students in the school classroom, so can the same be
said for the preparedness of university mathematics educators. POEMT is a two-
year program to develop a model preservice elementary teacher preparation
program. It offers professors and adjuncts an opportunity to participate in two
summer sessions and corresponding academic years emulating the NCTM Standards.
Three weeks of intensive summer "coursework" at FIU including one week of actual
clinical experiences are scheduled each year with follow-up activities each
academic year. Participants will be expected to deliver the fruits of their
program participation each following academic year through trialling activities
and revising their pragram/syllabus. Forty participants will be carefully
selected from across the country. An outstanding staff of respected mathematics
educators, including current NCTM President, has committed to lead instructional
sessions and visit sites. Funding support has also been pledged by Delta
Airlines, Cuisenaire Company, and Longman Publishers. The proposal makes a
strong case for the need to provide opportunities for professors to upgrade
their knowledge and skills to guide the restructuring of preservice teachers,
and to interact with colleagues over extended periods of time.