* 9254168
* Improving Introductory Biology Laboratories at Allegheny    College Through the Development and Implementation of       Computer-Based Modules
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1997
* Ronald Mumme, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1997
* USD 101,010.00

This project addresses the overall problem of keeping students in the science
pipeline. The Biology Department faculty are providing computerized pre-
laboratory exercises that involve students in the challenge and excitement of
scientific investigation and discovery. Specifically, our project addresses
common "roadblocks" to learning faced by biology students, such as: the
limitations of time and finances on the laboratory experience; a lack of
understanding of the scientific process; a lack of analytical, critical
thinking, and quantitative skills; differing cognitive styles; and a lack of
comfort with advanced technology. Project objectives include: 1) Development and
refinement of computer-based applications, such as experiment simulations,
systems models, data collection and analysis tools, and visual image libraries
of organisms, preparations and dissections; 2) Expanding the faculty's use of
investigative laboratory activities; students will be expected to design
experiments, execute them, analyze data collected, and draw conclusions and
generate ideas for further investigations; and 3) Utilizing the talents and
experience of advanced-level biology students to help faculty develop and test
computer applications for introductory labs, and to work with underclassmen on
their laboratory and independent investigations. Working with the College's
Educational Computing Services, a group of six biology faculty, each of whom has
release time, are developing 12 pre-laboratory computer modules. They are using
the multi-media, multi-tasking capacity of the NEXT computer workstation and the
NeXTStep development environment to create lessons specifically designed to meet
the needs of students in the three introductory biology courses. Advanced-level
students are taking advantage of NeXTStep development workshops held on campus
so that they can assist faculty in applications development. They also assist
the faculty in the labs. We plan to use formative and summative evaluation tools
to assess the effectiveness of this project. An Advisory Board comprised of
biologists from other institutions will meet at least yearly to monitor the
program to determine whether parts of the program ought to be redirected,
replaced or augmented. A summative evaluation will be conducted by this Board
and by the Allegheny faculty. Final project results will be disseminated to the
Advisory Board and to other colleagues nationwide. In addition, Allegheny is
planning a symposium to mark the opening of its Hall of Advanced Biology in
1993, and this project and other advances in the educational uses of computing
technology will be featured. This project will help our students to discover the
excitement of science, and it will help Biology Departments at other colleges
which use Unix-based workstations. Colleges that do not use Unix-based
workstations can emulate Allegheny's approach by identifying roadblocks to
learning and addressing them through interactive computer lessons.