* 9254615
* Science of Fashion:The Principles of Chemistry, Physics, Biology, Mathematics and Technology that Drive the Textile Industry
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Jo Ann Leichte, Discovery Place, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 02/29/1996
* USD 585,670.00

Science Museums of Charlotte, Inc. will develop a 5500 square foot traveling
exhibit on SCIENCE of FASHION for the Science Museum Exhibit Collaborative
(SMEC). Opening in February 1994, SCIENCE of FASHION will tour eight major U.S>
cities over thirty-two months, introducing 2.5 million people to principles of
chemistry, physics, biology, mathematics, and technology that drive the textile
industry. SCIENCE of FASHION integrates diverse disciplines and will help public
explore science in a wholistic manner. Because the subject matter is somewhat
unusual fare, SCIENCE of FASHION will help diversify audiences, drawing in
population segments, particularly women, who may not normally visit science
museums. SCIENCE of FASHION is an eloquent vehicle for science-rich exhibitry
which teaches the mathematics of pattern geometry, production statistics, and
retail costs, polymer chemistry for engineering new fabrics, the genetics of new
natural colors and strong aware fibers, and the sophisticated research,
robotics, and computerized technologies that keep America's textile industry at
the top international commerce. Rigorous evaluation will ensure a satisfying
product that is educationally-effective, durable, and appealing to a broad
public audience. SCIENCE of FASHION will be a worthy addition to the rich menu
of science fare in SMEC exhibitry.