* 9254084
* Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1996
* Peter Henderson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 04/30/1996
* USD 125,001.00

The objective of the proposed work is to develop a freshman level course,
Foundations of Computer Science,in the interface of computer science and
mathematics that integrates critical reasoning, provlem-solving strategies and
discrete mathematics topics with fundamental computer science concepts.
Mathematics and computer science educators have observed and commented on the
weaknesses of entering college students in the areas of problem solving and
mathematical reasoning, skills which are fundamental to computer science and
should be a primary focus of the first college level course for computer science
majors. The course to be developed emphasizes the importance of mathematics and
provlem-solving concepts within the context of computer science and its
applications. Computer laboratories are an integral component of this
philosophy. Hands-on experience acts as a catalyst to reinforce course material,
provides motivation for learning and encourages students to be creative,
independent thinkers. An added bonus is the wide applicability of such an
approach to other mathematically based disciplines. The primary objective is to
develop and evaluate material which makes it easier for educators to teach
mathematically based introductory computer science courses and to integrate
these concepts into existing courses. The material to be developed includes
guidelines, available resources, annotated notes, problem sets, exam questions
and laboratory software and manuals. The material will be disseminated through
announcements in mathematics/computer science education journals, meetings,
newsletters, electronic bulletin boards and direct nailings. Evaluation of
course material using both problem-solving and mathematics pre- and post- tests
and survey questionnaires can assess the suitability of this approach for
introductory computer science and can improve the quality of the material.
Evaluation of laboratory material canalso significantly improve the quality of
supporting courseware and manuals.