* 9254431
* Primarily Physical Science
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1993,01/31/1999
* Mignon Morgan, East Baton Rouge Parish School Board
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 01/31/1999
* USD 1,687,697.00

9254431 Soileau The East Baton Rouge School Parish has planned a five-year
district-wide teacher enhancement effort for physical science in grades K-3.
This project builds on a state-funded pilot project in five elementary schools.
Two teachers in each of the district's 63 elementary schools will receive
training in the use of hands on kits, background science content, inquiry
teaching methods, performance assessment of students, and integration of science
with other subjects. Design of the workshops and instruction of the teachers
will be the responsibility of Gayle Kirwan (American Institute of Pysics).
Teachers will attend several three-week graduate workshops at LSU, during which
they will learn content and instructional methods tied to hands-on kits. These
teachers will provide inservice training to the other teachers in their schools.
Principals will receive two days of training when their school enters the
program. Student enrollment in the Parish is nearly 60% African-American,
Hispanic, or other underrepresented groups. The Parish has been undergoing the
transition to site-based decision making, and standardized testing is being
replaced by portfolio or other performance-based assessment tools in many
schools. The Parish has sent a team to the NSTA/Monsanto Institute and to the
NSRC Leadership Institute. Partnerships have been formed with Panasonic,
Monsanto, and Dow Chemical. This reform effort has the potential to create
exemplary science instruction for tens of thousands of minority school children,
and to provide a model for systemic reform in rural districts. Cost sharing on
this project represents 79% of the NSF contribution.