* 9254479
* Mathematics For Tomorrow
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1993,04/30/1999
* Barbara Nelson, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia M Horak
* 04/30/1999
* USD 2,913,390.00

This 4-year project, involving a total of 80 K-8 teachers in the greater Boston
area, has three basic aims: (1) to shift teachers' beliefs about the nature of
teaching and learning mathematics; (2) to deepen and broaden the teachers'
knowledge of mathematics itself; and (3) by capitalizing on (1) and (2), to
introduce fundamentally new instructional practices into the classroom. In Phase
I (Years 1 and 2), the 3 participating districts each send a team of 8 teachers
to the program, and--to help assure district-wide, systemic change-- a
principal, a mathematics supervisor and an associate superintendent as well. The
format of the program in each of the four years of the project is similar: a
4-week summer institute, followed during the ensuing school year by "inquiry
groups" (facilitated by project staff) that meet every other week after school.
Year 1 focuses on initiating fundamental changes in the participating teachers'
beliefs and practices; in year 2, the same teachers change their beliefs and
practices also. In Phase II (Years 3 and 4) the project begins a collaboration
with EdCo--a consortium of school districts in the greater Boston Area. Phase II
involves 36 new teachers. Research/evaluation is an important component of the
program that seeks to document and understand in rather fine detail the
histories (external and internal) of the teachers in the process of trying to
make radical changes in their professional views and practices. Finally, a
dissemination strand aims at developing teachers enhancement materials for use
by others, which will be publicized by participants and project staff at a
variety of professional meetings.