* 9254922
* Connections Between Individual Mathematical Problem Solving And Instruction Related to Five Knowledge Representation Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Verna Adams, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/1998
* USD 343,758.00

9254922 Adams This project explores a way of forming a link between theories of
problem solving and theories of instruction on problem solving. A single
problem-solving framework is used to analyze the discourse patterns of the
teacher, of students in small-group problem-solving sessions, and of individual
students solving problems. The problem-solving framework focuses on five areas
of knowledge: (a) mathematical content, (b) problem-solving strategies, (c)
beliefs about mathematics, problem-solving and the self, (d) control of
cognition and (e) discourse knowledge. Three instructional units of
approximately three weeks each are identified before the beginning of the school
year for two middle-school classrooms. These instructional units are the focus
of concentrated data collection in which whole class instruction and small group
problem solving are video taped. Additional classroom observations are made on a
regular basis throughout the school year. Also four students from each classroom
are video taped as they complete think-aloud problem-solving interviews once a
month throughout the year. Problems used in the problem-solving interviews are
coordinated with the instructional units in order to from hypotheses about the
connection between classroom discourse patterns and process used by individual
students. ***