* 9254451
* Aquatic Science Teacher Institute For Master Teachers Of    "Living in Water"
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1999
* Valerie Chase, National Aquarium in Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/1999
* USD 233,582.00

"Living in Water" is a hands-on instructional program in life science for upper
elementary/middle school grades. Dr. Valerie Chase, a biologist and educator at
the National Aquarium in Baltimore, developed this program with support from
NSF's Instructional Materials Development Program. Teachers in the Chesapeake
Bay region have been given access to training workshops for a number of years,
and Dr. Chase now plans to offer training to teachers from across the country.
Summer workshops would be offered at Towson State University for three years,
providing training for 72 "regional master teachers". These workshop
participants would learn to teach "Living in Water" in their own classrooms, and
they would gain a deeper understanding of the biology, chemistry, and physics
that underlie the activities in the curriculum. Each of these teachers would
provide training to other teachers in their home region. This national
dissemination project would 1) train teachers as teacher-trainers for an NSF-
supported curricular unit, 2) establish a national newsletter for users of the
unit, 3) support an NSTA short course to introduce the unit to a wide audience,
and 4) result in an update of the unit based on input from an Advisory Board and
the expanded pool of users. "Living in Water" is a unique and high quality
instructional program, and these teacher training activities will disseminate it
to classrooms across the country. Cost sharing represents 46% of the NSF
contribution.