* 9254222
* Devleopment of a Discovery Approach for an Introductory     Level Physics Course
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1993,06/30/1996
* S. Leslie Blatt, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Program Director
* 06/30/1996
* USD 240,000.00

For the past three years, we have been developing and offering an innovative
course, "Discovering Physics," for non- science majors. We are now broadening
the approach we have been taking, which includes elements of the "discovery
technique and the small-group "complex instruction" learning environment, to
both the elementary/middle school level and the standard college science-major
physics sequence. The original course is being expanded to two semesters, and is
being aimed especially at students planning to go into precollege teaching;
active participation of current teachers is also being emphasized, as an
important part of the developing partnership between the University and the
Worcester Public Schools. The course will retain its stress on understanding
nature through direct experience and the concepts which grow out of careful
consideration of these experiences; we are continuing to encourage students to
ask "How do we know...?" and "Why do we believe...?" questions about physical
phenomena. Our program welcomes, and has been successful with both male and
female students and students from groups traditionally under- represented in
science. To promote a broad, national impact, are producing a "discovery
workbook," a teacher's manual, and associated software. An outstanding group of
consultants is working with us in the various aspects of this project.