* 9254498
* Project PHYSLab
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1993,05/31/1997
* Lowell Herr, Catlin Gabel School
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 05/31/1997
* USD 383,300.00

During each of three years, Project PHYSLab will serve 20 high school physics
teachers. The focus of Project PHYSLab is a three-week workshop for 20 teachers
to learn and experiment with current technology designed to help students
understand fundamental concepts in nature. Teachers work with Microcomputer
Based Laboratory (MBL) interfaces, spreadsheets, and a variety of physics
related courseware. Teachers experiment with motion, force, temperature,
magnetic field, light, sound and radioactivity probes. Computer interfacing
experiments include the use of photo- gates and "Smart Pulleys". In addition to
the assortment of instructional hardware, a wide variety of physics-related
software is used for data analysis. Graphical analysis, equation fitting
programs, spreadsheets, simulation software, and mathematical programs are all
available for data analysis, computational instruction, and independent study.
Not all PHYSLab experiments require the use of a computer. A low-cost digital
timer yields excellent data in projectile motion, free-fall, sound, and simple
harmonic motion experiments. Non-computer laboratory equipment provides
graphical methods for analyzing two-dimensional collision problems. Innovative
laboratory experiments focus on fundamental and subtle concepts that students
frequently find difficult. Many of the experiments are designed to overcome
misconceptions students bring to the physics classroom. Project PHYSLab prepares
teachers to help their students hypothesize, think, reason, understand,
challenge, and analyze as they examine fundamental scientific ideas. Project
PHYSLab will prepare well-prepared physics teachers to lead workshops for their
peers. Each participating teacher will give at least two such workshops during
the academic year following the summer workshop. Workshops will be held at
Catlin Gabel School, Portland, OR and at national meetings of the American
Association of Physics Teachers. Project PHYSLab is dynamic in nature. The
workshop will continue into the future using the world-wide Internet for an
extensive system of follow-up support and interactive experiences. A network of
follow-up activities and services is in place so that the support for the
teacher continues well after the formal workshop ends. This support is
continuous and immediate. The PI is Lowell Herr of Catlin Gabel School. Cost-
sharing equals 60% of the NSF award.