* 9254120
* Geometry and the Art of Design
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1993,02/28/1995
* Clare Johnson, Fashion Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/28/1995
* USD 35,390.00

This is a proposal to create an interdisciplinary course in geometry and design.
The primary objective of the project is to address a major challenge in
mathematics education for undergraduates by creating a course, innovative in
content and structure, that will demonstrate the links between artistic
creativity and the logical processes of mathematics to art and design majors.
The course will use geometrical ideas as the organizing force which links
scientific, artistic, and cultural subject areas. The course will expose
students to new processes of reasoning and make them aware of the possibilities
that can arise through radical thinking and risk taking; and it will bridge the
apparent gap between the realm of art and design and that of mathematics. The
process of awakening students to their creative potential by allowing them to
work with unfamiliar reasoning processes will widen their horizons and give them
skills in new areas. Students will have the opportunity to test out the
effectiveness of the concepts they have developed and bear witness to the
reaction of a public-at-large to their experimental efforts. The materials
developed for this course will be tested at several sites in courses for liberal
arts majors as well as for students of art and design. An advisory board will
also assist in evaluation of the materials.