* 9254354
* Focus on Interactive Problem Solving in a First-Year        Engineering Course
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1993,12/31/1995
* H. Scott Fogler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1995
* USD 200,000.00

Typical engineering courses emphasize closed-ended examples and problems. While
these problems aid in the development of convergent thinking skills, they
usually do not provide practice for improving the divergent thinking patterns
essential for the solution of industrial and research problems. This proposal
presents a plan for enhancing the problem-solving and synthesis skills of first-
year engineering students to develop a mind-set lasting throughout their college
careers and professional lives. This enhancement will be achieved through an
innovative, required first-year course. In a first-year class of over 1,000
students, it is virtually impossible to achieve the ideal one-on-one interaction
required to develop divergent thinking skills. In the proposed first-year course
interactive computer modules and open-ended problems will be used in conjunction
with lectures and exercises that present a robust problem solving heuristic. The
computer modules will allow the students to make decisions in gray areas at
branch points in decision trees, to troubleshoot, and to make decisions on what
data they need to access from the computer. Our previous work on writing
interactive modules has resulted in our developing strategies that individualize
the instruction. The students will then work in groups to apply these concepts
to solve open-ended design problems, written at such a level that first-year
students will be able to generate innovative solutions. These group
interactions, requiring a written report, will provide a framework to enhance
the students' interpersonal and communications skills. The proposed project will
initially have the potential to influence over 1,000 first-year engineering
students. Further, the modules and material developed will then be distributed
to other engineering colleges across the nation.