* 9254116
* Addressing Software Development Skills in a Curriculum      Focusing on the Science of Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1994
* David Cordes, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 10/31/1994
* USD 40,241.00

The introductory curriculum in computer Science is placing an increasing
emphasis on the science of the discipline itself. The student is presented with
a broad (yet detailed) overview to the breadth of the discipline in a manner
similar to that of the other sciences (physics, chemistry, etc.). This is a
substantial change from the introductory curricula of old, in which the primary
focus was the development of competent programmers, or software engineers. It
provides a proper perspective for the incoming student regarding the true nature
of the discipline of computing. Furthermore, it increases student interest and
motivation, as actual research topics and applications can be addressed almost
immediately in the student's studies. Nevertheless, care must be taken to ensure
that the students emerging from this sequence are skilled in the basic issues
regarding software development. A necessary by-product of this introductory
sequence must also be the generation of competent software practitioners. This
proposal focuses on techniques that can be integrated into an existing computer
science curriculum (that places its emphasis on the science of computing) to
ensure the production of competent software developers. In particular, emphasis
is placed on the development of software engineers that can function in an
environment of large-scale applications, where emphasis is placed on
maintainability, re-use and reliability.