* 9254377
* Technical Assistance to Increase the Participation of       Minorities in Mathematics, Science, and Engineering Fields
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1996
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/1996
* USD 3,300,000.00

The Quality Education for Minorities Network will create a resource and project
center to build capacity -- in as many as possible of the approximately 250
predominantly minority institutions of higher learning in the United States --
to respond to and compete effectively for external grant funds for the
strengthening of participation by minorities in the fields of science,
mathematics, and engineering education. QEM will establish on- and off-campus
links with such institutions to help them benefit fully from the programs of the
National Science Foundation, in particular the Education and Human Resources
directorate. Over a period of three years, campus-by-campus needs assessments
will be done; workshops for proposal development and project management will be
conducted; and collaborative links will be forged between institutions with
similar or complementary characteristics. Various kinds of communication systems
will be put in place within and between institutions, and between the
institutions and QEM: for example, E-mail, electronic bulletin boards, document
sharing, an 800 number at QEM, a Clearinghouse of grants-related materials, and
access to federal databases on science and math education and minority
education. For institutions presently receiving support from the NSF, the goal
is to improve proposal and project efficiency and to increase the rate of
successful proposals. For institutions that are not presently NSF grantees, the
goal is to move them into the grantee category.