* 9254713
* Growth and Equilibrium: A Series of Exhibits on the Topic   of Feedback
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1996
* Thomas Humphrey, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 06/30/1996
* USD 288,475.00

We propose to develop a series of 12 exhibits on the topic of feedback. We will
create an introductory cluster of 4-5 exhibits situated in our "Patterns"
section to introduce the basic concepts. We sill situate each of the remaining
708 exhibits in the area of the museum that suits it phenomenologically. A
continuity in the theme of feedback will be created through Feedback Pathways
(both a field trip Pathway and a general use Pathway) and associated maps which
will be available in the introductory cluster&gt; These will guide both visitors
and school classes from area to area with feedback as the unifying element. The
feedback behavior exemplified in these exhibits will be accessible to both young
and older audiences and will be strongly connected with the "Themes of Science"
listed in the California State Science Framework for Pre-College Science
Education. The exhibits will receive extensive use in our teacher training
programs at both the elementary and secondary level. Exhibit evaluation will
take place at the level of extensive prototyping by exhibit development and
teaching staff and on a more formal level in conjunction with a formative
evaluation program. We will disseminate this work in a publication describing
inexpensive classroom versions of Exploratorium exhibits. In addition, we will
experiment with the dissemination of our work to other museums through the
Internet Computer Network.