* 9254089
* Interactive Hypermedia Experimental Simulations for         Introductory Biology and Cell Biology Students
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Mark Bergland, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/1995
* USD 50,060.00

The problem is to help the over 900 first and second-year students in the
Introductory Biology and Cell Biology courses at the University of Wisconsin-
River Falls develop the critical thinking skills used by scientific
investigators. Hypermedia software to be developed enables introductory students
to simulate actual experimental investigations in cell biology and
biotechnology, including patch clamp studies of ion channels in cell membranes
and the micromanipulation of transgenic embryos used to create animal models for
AIDS research. Students can generate data and make inferences from these data.
The simulations are planned to: (1) complement existing laboratories in
Introductory Biology with experimental procedures that are otherwise not
feasible in this course, (2) enrich and expand those Cell Biology laboratories
which do give students hands-on experience with at least some of the simulated
procedures, (3) prepare students for the advanced Molecular Biology course which
includes the actual manipulation of embryos used in transgenic animal
production, and (4) serve as a recruitment tool for the Biology major and also
for the new interdisciplinary Biotechnology major at UW-River Falls. A
controlled statistical study will evaluate the long-term impact of this project
and results will be disseminated via workshops and presentations to educational
organizations.