* 9254939
* Recreating Teaching Mathematics in the Elementary School
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Terry Wood, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/1998
* USD 859,370.00

9254939 Wood The project focuses on teachers and the nature of teaching
mathematics in early elementary classrooms which are compatible with current
reform initiatives. This project seeks to advance previously funded NSF research
projects that emphasized primary-level children's mathematical learning in these
classroom environments to consider the teachers. The project has 4 interwoven
goals which interrelate research and development to create realistic classroom
video-based instructional materials for beginning teacher professional
development. The first goals is to analyze the nature of instruction in
classrooms in which teachers have been teaching in a manner compatible with
reform initiatives for the past 6 years. The second goal is to analyze the
process by which teachers starting to teach in this manner change their beliefs
about mathematics and teaching as they learn about children's mathematical
thinking, and how this process is related to and enhances their own
understanding of the mathematics they teach. The third goal is to use the
information acquired from the research analyses to develop prototype video-based
instructional materials to deepen and enrich beginning teachers' content
knowledge by developing an understanding of the mathematics that underlies
children's conceptual development and forms the basis for their solution
strategies. The fourth goal is to create prototypic video-based instructional
materials to aid beginning teachers in creating images for classrooms in which
the reform initiatives characterized by problem solving and mathematical
reasoning are illustrated. The investigation of the nature of teaching is
accomplished in collaboration with 20 experienced teachers currently teaching in
a reform-based instructional materials for beginning teacher development both as
a source for exemplary examples of classroom teaching and as collaborators in
the selection and design of the classroom-based materials. These materials will
th en be used in a university teacher preparation program, evaluated and
revised. ***