* 9254396
* National Invitational Symposium:  Improving Math and ScienceEducation in Urban Schools, A Systemic Approach
* EHR,ESR
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1994
* Arley Franklin, Council of the Great City Schools
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 02/28/1994
* USD 75,000.00

The purpose of the proposed project is to design and convene an invitational
working symposium on systemic efforts needed to improve math and science
achievement in the nation's largest urban public school districts. The
symposium's participants include Superintendents, Board of Education members,
and specialists in research, curriculum and technology from the nation's Great
City School districts; and representatives from teacher organizations,
universities, state education departments, and national associations. Topics at
the day-and-a-half symposium will include "Barriers to Higher Math and Science
Performance in Urban Schools", "Model Urban Schools Programs in Math and Science
Education". The Roles of Community Agencies and Others in Improving Math and
Science Education in Urban Schools", "The Ideal Urban School Program for Math
and Science Education Improvement: What would It Look Like?", "Meshing Systemic
Urban Reform to Improve Math and Science Education with State Reforms". and
"Changing the System in Urban Education:Reform from Top to Bottom to Improve
Math and Science Achievement". The proceedings of the symposium and accompanying
recommendations and work-plan for improving math and science achievement in
urban schools systemically will be published and circulated to the nation's
major city public school systems and others.