* 9254068
* Using a Computer-Supported Cooperative Problem Solving      Environment to Teach Undergraduate Computer Science StudentsCooperative Skills and Requirements Elicitation
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/1993,06/30/1995
* Robert Brazile, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 06/30/1995
* USD 141,457.00

As the number of jobs in which shared rather than individual work continues to
grow, we are being forced to re-examine the way people work. This proposal
suggests that in today's work- place, computer scientists must be adept at both
technical as well as communication skills. It also suggests that we, as
educators, must be prepared to teach our students how to work in collaborative
environments that improve programmer productivity. Towards this end, we propose
to use an existing computer-supported cooperative problem solving environment to
teach undergraduate computer science students to elicit software requirements.
We believe that requirements elicitation and cooperative skills are highly
interrelated and, as such, can be taught more effectively through the use of a
computer-supported cooperative environment. By doing this, we will be able to
expand the problem solving skills of our students and, thus, release into the
computer science community more effective programmers. The environment will
encourage cooperative work, and yet provide instructors with the ability to
monitor individual as well as group performance. Through this system, students
will be able to learn requirements elicitation techniques and, at the same time,
gain valuable experience in working together on large team projects.