* 9254577
* Arkansas STRIVE:  A Joint Venture For Math/Science Teacher  Enhancement Through Involvement In Research
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1993,08/31/1997
* Gaylord Northrop, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 08/31/1997
* USD 577,058.00

The University of Arkansas, Little Rock is requesting three years of support to
build a self sustaining program to place secondary math/science teachers in
research positions in university or industrial laboratories. Arkansas/STRIVE has
developed from a three year pilot program which was supported both by NSF funds
through Oak Ridge Associated Universities (ORAU) and six Arkansas businesses and
institutions. the program will ultimately provide research experiences for at
least 50 secondary math/science teachers per year. The teachers will engage in
research for 7 weeks. They will afterwards spend one week at a central site on
curriculum development leading to a plan for improvement in the teacher's
personal pedagogical activities and to contributions to the preparation of a
Recommendation for Curriculum Change report in their respective area of Life
Science, physical Science or Mathematics/Computer. A minimum of five more
meetings are scheduled during the academic year with each participant being
responsible for mentoring 5 other teachers in their school/school district. One
result of the program will be to infuse the research workshops, to create video,
computer and other materials which will be made available to teachers throughout
Arkansas and nationally. Cost sharing is 94% of the funds requested.