* 9254376
* ETA Project: Development of Educational Technology Awareness among Professional Educational Societies
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1993,02/28/1994
* C. Dianne Martin, International Society for Technology in Education
* Standard Grant
* Barbara J. Hunter
* 02/28/1994
* USD 47,625.00

The adoption of technology by education has always lagged behind the same
technology's widespread use by other segments of society. The pace of technology
development, and the impact this pace has on society, coupled with the massive
problems of science and mathematics education in this country, has made this
time lag no longer tenable. As a society, we can not afford inefficient and
limited use of the capabilities of technology to help educators attack the
problems of education for all citizens. The full participation of educational
professional associations in defining a policy along these lines is a
fundamental component of planning how to accelerate the pace of adoption of
technology by education. The presence of many such associations in the
Washington, DC area offers a good opportunity for taking first steps towards
assessing teh state of knowledge by educational leaders, and for creating a
forum to help coordinate their activities. The outcome of this project will be a
clearer definition of who are the stakeholders for the incorporation of
technologies in education, a membership profile of the associations, their
leaders, and their technology awareness and plans, and a series of targeted
forums and discussions where educational leaders and NSF program officers can
interact and explore policy issues related to the adoption of telecommunication
technologies in education.