* 9254252
* Gateway Labs for a Problem Solving Course
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1993,02/29/1996
* Greg Scragg, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/29/1996
* USD 83,919.00

We claim that short hands-on laboratories make text books obsolete for many
purposes. This is particularly true for those topics which are largely
implementation-dependent or "how to" topics, or deal with purely
representational aspects of material. This material is better presented in small
interactive modules, which we call gateway labs. The name gateway was used in
part because these labs share some of the properties of both open and closed
labs: they are open because the student works independently, but the tasks
comprise closed- end introductions, which can be much shorter than either of the
two more common formats, open or closed labs. We claim students should receive
the bulk of their "how to" instruction through direct hands-on interaction with
gateway labs. The lectures, the text, and the traditional labs can, thus, be
devoted to the more intellectual aspects of the course, such as problem solving.
We believe gateways should be implemented as a coordinated set of as the
principal means of instruction in the use of specific software tools. Gateway
labs will be assigned regularly and frequently, just as most courses currently
employ reading assignments. We expect roughly as many gateway labs as there are
lectures. Thus, a full course will incorporate 30 to 40 specific modules. We
presently incorporate several gateway labs in our primary course for non-majors,
CSc 104: problem solving with computers, a problem-solving course, in which the
actual use of computer tools is subordinate to the generalized problem-solving
techniques. Although we focus on problem solving, students must still have
experience in the use of specific tools. Such experience is best gained through
laboratories, but we want to use our traditional-format labs for problem-solving
experiences.