* 9254117
* A Redesign of the College Algebra Course
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1993,02/29/1996
* Linda Kime, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/29/1996
* USD 221,097.00

A cross disciplinary team from the University of Massachusetts at Boston is
developing a new approach to the introductory college algebra course. This
course has a large enrollment nationally, including a disproportionately large
number of women and underrepresented minorities. It is often the first and only
mathematics course taken by many undergraduates, including prospective teachers.
Rather than encouraging, it too often serves to discourage students from
pursuing paths that emphasize quantitative skills. Thus it is a critical target
for reform, identified by the National Research Council (NRC) as the linchpin of
national mathematics education reform efforts. This project will develop,
implement, evaluate, and start dissemination of a new approach to introductory
college algebra, designed to increase enthusiasm for and competence in
quantitative reasoning. It will cover approximately 80% of the traditional
material and fully prepare students for subsequent mathematics courses. It will,
however, approach the topics in a nontraditional way, with a particular focus on
mathematical reasoning, problem solving, and communication, as recommended by
the NRC and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. The course is
computer based and requires access to a spreadsheet and function graphing
program. The materials themselves are machine and software independent. Students
work in small groups, using algebraic and technological tools to work on open-
ended questions based on real world data and physical phenomena. Half the course
will be from a social science point of view, half from a "hard" science
viewpoint, using topics in astronomy, physics, and the life sciences. Formative
evaluation will be accomplished by using teams to simultaneously co-teach and
develop the course, by student responses and writings, by tracking students
through subsequent placement tests and quantitative courses, and by feedback by
outside reviewers. An outside evaluator will provide a summative evaluation.
UMass/Boston is an urban, commuter, comprehensive university with the highest
percentage of minority students of any college or university in New England.
Collaborating institutions are Roxbury Community College, an historically black
college, Bridgewater State College, a suburban college with a large teacher
preparation program, and Wentworth Institute of Technology, a private college
that focuses on educating students for technical careers. This project is
designed to aid in the revitalization of undergraduate mathematics teaching by
providing a successful national model for introductory algebra.