* 9254626
* A Two-Piece Program to Develop and Support a Nationwide     Corps of Human and Molecular Genetics Resource Teachers at  the Secondary Level
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1993,06/30/1997
* Mark Bloom, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 06/30/1997
* USD 854,150.00

Project staff from the DNA Learning Center, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY
plan to bring instruction in human and molecular genetics to 216 precollege
advanced biology teachers in rural/non-urban areas of the western half of the
U.S. and the upper Midwest regions. Three 5-day DNA Science institutes (24
participants each) are to be held with 3 follow-up workshops. In addition,
leadership and advanced training will be provided for a cadre of 72 "Human and
Molecular Genetics Resource Teachers" throughout the United States who have
already implemented model units on molecular genetics and have proven networking
abilities. This training will consist of a 27 day leadership institute at Cold
Spring Harbor and three 3-day regional follow-up conferences associated with
regional NABT or NSTA meetings. The proposal contains specific follow-up and
evaluation programs, and includes provisions for participation by minority
faculty. This proposal is appropriate for teacher enhancement because it will
select participants regionally for discipline- focused summer institutes
utilizing new approaches and content (DNA and molecular genetics) to enhance the
participants' current leadership component for teachers with more advanced
backgrounds in the field. Non-NSF cost-sharing is approximately 35% of the
amount requested from NSF.