* 9254109
* An Integrated Approach to Teaching the Languages of         Programming and Mathematics in the Computer Science         Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1994
* Ursula Wolz, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 12/31/1994
* USD 78,604.00

Computer Science educators are faced with the dilemma that one cannot do
computer science well without being a good programmer, nor can one understand
the underpinnings of computer science without a strong background in
mathematics. The goal of this project is to use the first three courses of the
computer science major to make students fluent speakers of mathematics and
programming, and to expose them to both functional and imperative language
paradigms so that they can effectively learn computer science. Computer Science
I and Discrete Mathematics, taken in the first semester, will carefully
articulate the strong ties between mathematics and programming through an
integrated curriculum, a functional programming language and a shared
laboratory. Computer Science Il, taken during the second semester, will bridge
the gap between the mathematical perspective of the first semester and the
implementation of an algorithm as a sequence of instructions through an
imperative language. All courses will also provide a strong foundation for the
computational concepts that are considered in advanced courses. The approach
used exposes students to theoretical concepts in mathematics and computer
science without having these concepts walled off as abstractions unrelated to
applications, and it gives students extensive programming experience without
neglecting important theoretical concepts that are the foundations of
correctness and the basis for generalization and creative work.