* 9254129
* A Creative Approach to Teaching Undergraduate Mechanics     Emphasizing Development of Instructional Tools to Enhance   Spatial Visualization and Inductive Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1994
* Anil Bajaj, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1994
* USD 79,999.00

The primary objective of the proposed project is the development of a creative
approach to the teaching of sophomore-level engineering mechanics courses which
stimulates the students' thinking beyond a problem-solving level and helps
students overcome fundamental deficiencies in their ability to conceptualize
problems. The stimuli is to be supplied by adding both visual and hands-on
components to the teaching and learning experience, two components which are
known to be critical in the retention of learned material. Specifically, there
are three distinct, yet interrelated, components to this proposal: development
of graphical software emphasizing the visualization of relationships such as
load distribution is static systems and force/motion relationships in dynamical
systems: design and development of a mechanics toolbox consisting of basic
building block components for individual experimentation by the students; and
the development of more sophisticated in-class experimental demonstrations
emphasizing the relations between qualitative and quantitative perspectives of
static and dynamical systems. The immediate impact of these learning tools will
be that students develop an improved physical insight, engineering relevancy and
spatial visualization of mechanics problems. The long range impact of the usage
of these tools will be to help capture the interest of the students at an early
stage of their education thereby fostering an increased interest and enthusiasm
in engineering. In addition, the proposed work will allow for exploration of
problems from a perspective which encourages inductive learning, a learning
style which is more natural for the students than the traditional deductive
style. Critical review and evaluation of the proposed work will be conducted
through formative evaluations by participating students and faculty, through a
2nd year evaluation workshop using external reviewers, and through quasi-
experimental testing of student performance and long-term retention. Finally,
deliverables from this work will be in the form of graphical software from the
visualization component, a working mechanics toolbox set and development of
experimental in-class demonstrations. These deliverables along with the
pedological contributions of the research will be disseminated through technical
publications, a summer workshop during the third year and a videotape summary of
the project.