* 9254653
* Team Science
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1993,09/30/1997
* David Haase, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Debbie Jones
* 09/30/1997
* USD 759,542.00

This project called 'Team Science' will directly aid the school districts of
northeastern North Carolina where there are a disproportionate share of rural,
poor and minority children. Thirty-two teachers each year from these counties
will be brought to North Carolina State University for a four week program which
will emphasize hands-on learning through a mixture of low-tech, "homemade
science" activities and high- tech microcomputer based laboratory activities.
The pedagogy will emphasize cooperative learning, station laboratories, and the
integration of physics and chemistry. The teachers will jointly plan and
schedule their teaching programs for a van which will visit their school at
least once each semester during the academic year. This van will be loaded with
new physics and chemistry station laboratories and microcomputers and will be
driven by a master teacher who has worked with each of the participants during
the summer. They teachers are selected in teams of two, physics and chemistry,
for this project. The Science House faculty will maintain the equipment and
provide other support over the year. During the year the teachers will meet at
least four times to discuss their successes and problems. The teachers will
return to the university for a second summer session, building on the previous
summer and the experience of the academic year. In addition a new cohort of 32
teachers from new high schools will be chosen and started in the project with a
second van to visit their schools. A third cohort will then be chosen for years
3 and 4. This project has a 11.5% sharing of the cost of the grant.