* 9254573
* Math/Science Fellows:  Restructuring Mathematics and Sciencein Essential Schools
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/1993,04/30/1999
* Merle Bruno, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 04/30/1999
* USD 3,882,744.00

The Coalition of Essential Schools (CES) in co-operation with Brown University
proposes an interdisciplinary training program for 96 Secondary Mathematics and
Science fellows over 4 years. The 4 years will be divided into three 2 year
cycles with 32 teachers in each cycle. In the first year each teacher will
upgrade his/her content knowledge and pedagogical techniques. The teachers will
attend, in the Spring, a one week orientation meeting to create working teams
each to consist of eight science teachers and eight math teachers (designated as
Fellows), one National Re: Learning Faculty member and to college faculty (one
science, one mathematics). These teams will work together throughout the
orientation and the Summer institute. During the orientation a detailed Summer
program schedule will be developed based on the specific needs of the Fellows.
An introduction will include the use of electronic mail networks and computer
skills. In the four week summer institute the Fellows will formulate essential
questions, participate in experiments: design, hands-on laboratory/field work,
data collection and analysis and problem solving and developing pedagogical
skills in investigative style classes. In the second year the Fellows will
attend a spring orientation to assess the progress of implementation of
math/science investigations in each school to develop additional essential
questions and investigations and to identify pedagogical issues for examination
during that summer. They will also receive extensive training in classroom
observation and debriefing techniques and learn skills of consultation and
conflict resolution. At the end of the project 96 math/science colleagues (each
fellow mentoring 4 teachers). The fellows will also work as consultants in some
200 other essential schools located in states across the nation. Cost sharing is
13%.