* 9254182
* Realizing the Power of Computers in Business Statistics     Instruction: A Next Step
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1993,07/31/1995
* Ronald Tracy, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1995
* USD 60,029.00

Numerous reports have cited the deplorable state of scientific and mathematical
illiteracy that exists within the U.S. Numerous approaches are being made to
rectify this problem in grades K-12. However, until students who have benefitted
from these new approaches reach the university, something must be done to help
today's university students. This project is using the power of modern computers
in the classroom to motivate, interest, and engage students who are taking a
required business statistics course so that they can become more adept at
quantitative reasoning and problem solving. In order to reach this goal, lesson
modules are being developed that use quality color graphics, intensive
computation, and multi-tasking to illustrate and demonstrate selected
statistical concepts. Each module consists of computer-based lecture materials,
classroom exercises, instructor notes, and student experiments. These lessons
illustrate statistical concepts by integrating the computer into the classroom
environment; involve students in problem solving by employing real, interesting,
and relevant databases, statistical experiments and simulations; and illustrate
situations where statistics can be used as an effective tool to understand and
solve problems. Potential impacts include improved student performance, an
increase in students' abilities to use statistics to formulate and answer their
own questions, and enhanced interest in quantitatively-oriented business
careers.