* 9254013
* The Innovative Use of Software in Introductory Computer     Programming
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1995
* Nira Herrmann, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1995
* USD 25,000.00

We propose the development of a new approach for teaching introduction to
computing courses, tailored to the needs of students in different curricula.
This approach is based on the following precepts: 1. There is a strong need for
students in all curricula to understand the concepts of programming a computer,
particularly in the sciences and engineering fields. 2. It may no longer be
necessary for students in many majors to know how to write programs in
traditional block-structured languages (such as Pascal). 3. There is a wealth of
software in wide use today which allows the user to write programs in
specialized built-in macro languages. 4. Teaching programming concepts through
the use of powerful, user-friendly software with programmable features allows
the user to write programs immediately which produce nontrivial results. This
provides stronger motivation to learn programming than traditional approaches.
Moreover, the essential concepts of computer programming, (such as variable,
branching, iteration, etc.) can be readily illustrated and implemented using the
sophisticated features of a variety of commonly available software packages,
such as word processors, spreadsheets, and databases. The main intention of our
approach is to teach programming concepts and techniques, not simply how to use
software. Students will be exposed to the kinds of functionality common to all
languages, thus facilitating the learning of a general purpose language or new,
innovative software they will need for pursuing both their education and their
careers in science, engineering, or teaching. This project will focus on two
courses, a general introduction to scientific and statistical programming for
science majors and an introductory programming course for computer science
majors. It will focus on developing a set of modules to illustrate the
programming concepts exhibited by various pieces of software in the Drexel
"bundle" which each freshman obtains. In addition to the modules, examples and
exercises will be created in the two subject matter areas.