* 9255853
* Working Conference on "Developing a National Agenda for     Enhancing Educational Opportunities in Housing Developments and Low-Income Residential Communities (LRC'S)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1993
* Ronald Blackburn-Moreno, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 08/31/1993
* USD 29,660.00

This proposal, from the Quality Education for Minorities Network, is designed
to support a working conference whose agenda is the conceptualization of a
national strategy to improve the education, especially the mathematics and
science education, of children and youth living in low-income residential
communities (LRCs). Attendees, approximately 60 working participants and 25
observers, will include representatives of HBCUs and predominately minority
institutions, school districts, professional organizations and human service
agencies. The conference is planned for 8/28- 30, 1992. A national organization,
the Housing Development Network, will be established as an outcome of the
conference and will be hosted by QEM. Its major purpose will be to promote
linkages between universities, housing developments LRCs, community- based
organizations, health and social service agencies, and local housing
authorities. Attendees at a small follow-up conference will write the Conference
Proceedings. This project is an extremely cost-effective yet substantive way of
addressing one of the Nation's largest problems and shows potential for reaching
out to a large number of institutions, youth and teachers. The influence it
might exert is increased by its probable joint sponsorship of a number of
federal agencies. Non-NSF cost-sharing is approximately 23% of the amount
requested from NSF.