* 9255239
* AMP:  NSF ALLIANCE PROPOSAL
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1992,10/31/1998
* Harold Martin, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/1998
* USD 5,881,620.00

Development of quality educational programs to attract and retain
underrepresented minorities in science and engineering is a well- established
national priority. This proposal describes a program designed to improve the
educational framework for emerging minority scientists and engineers. The
proposal will focus on undergraduate education as its core component as well as
the essential elements required to increase the percentage of students in post-
graduate science and engineering programs. The partners in the proposed alliance
represent diverse programs, yet have remarkably common objectives. The unifying
goal is to build on the existing knowledge base relative to minority
participation in science and engineering and to expand the available options to
enrich programs at partner institutions and beyond. This Alliance has been
formed to develop strategies increase access and opportunities for minority
students in science and engineering. The goals of the alliance are: 1) to
improve the quality of the learning environment for minority science and
engineering students at all schools, 2) to substantially increase the number of
minority students graduating with degrees in science and engineering, and 3) to
develop and implement effective methods of attracting talented minority students
who would not otherwise choose science or engineering as a career. The project
will emphasize collaborative learning approaches, positive and sustained
interaction with faculty, intensive interaction with other support persons, and
hands-on research and internship experience. The Alliance will focus on
developing and implementing innovative methods for interesting community college
students in science and engineering careers and will concentrate on the
transition point to graduate school.