* 9255854
* Planning Grant to Develop a Program to Improve the Teaching of Science at the Middle and Upper Elementary School Levels
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/1992,11/30/1994
* George Pallrand, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 11/30/1994
* USD 49,491.00

This planning grant seeks to develop a program to improve the teaching of
science at the middle and upper elementary school levels. The program will be
directed at developing mechanisms for establishing ongoing relationships between
faculty in a university research community and teachers in regional schools.
During the twelve months planning period approximately 70 teachers from three
school districts - Urban School District, Suburban School District, and Rural
School District will work together to review and analyze a series of science
teaching tapes. Upon completion of this task, the teachers from the various
schools in the three school districts will present the tapes to science teachers
in a workshop in their respective systems. The reactions and results from the
workshops will be used in answering the following questions: What types of
written materials for teachers should accompany such a tape? Would a kit with
examples of the materials introduced in the unit also be helpful? What is the
optimal length of time for such a tape? Upon completion of analysis of the
tapes, the curricula of the participating schools will be analyzed. One of the
goals of the program will be to establish some commonly agreed upon needs for
middle and upper elementary school science programs. This aspect of the program
is based on the assumption that every program in science education needs to be
updated in response to advances in the fields of science as well as changing
societal needs and needs of the various school districts. An outcome of the
planning period is the design and development of new teaching units in science
that are flexible in structure and format that can be introduced into existing
programs without changing the entire science program or without committing the
district to new series of books. Teachers can learn how to introduce new
teaching material that is limited in scope. The new material and teaching
strategies they learn with these units can also be extended to other areas of
the curriculum.