* 9255551
* Summer Workshop on Microelectronic Systems Education
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1993,08/31/1994
* Karl Weiss, Massachusetts Microelectronics Center
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1994
* USD 72,917.00

The Massachusetts Microelectronics Center (M2C) plans to conduct a two-week (ten
day) project-oriented workshop on the fundamentals of microelectronic systems
education. This workshop is directed towards Electrical and Computer Engineering
faculty with some experience in VLSI design but little or no experience with
microelectronic systems building. The goal of the workshop is to equip the
faculty with the resources necessary to develop and conduct undergraduate
courses in microelectronics systems design that would culminate in rapid
prototyping and testing of a system that incorporates multiple components and
technologies with well-defined interfaces. Topics will include: the computer-
aided engineering (CAE) approach to systems design, technology selection
criteria, rapid prototyping, technology re-targeting, high- level description
languages, multi-level simulation techniques, and systems test methodology. An
integral part of the workshop experience is a system design project which
illustrates each stage of the design process with an emphasis on design trade-
offs based upon implementation technology. A combination of public domain and
commercial CAE tools is used. Working in project teams, attendees build a
prototype system in FPGAs and then re-target the design specification to a
standard-cell CMOS technology. One month after the workshop each attendee
receives a set of the chips designed by his/her team and a test fixture for use
in their undergraduate microelectronic systems design courses.