* 9255567
* A Unified Classical/Modern Approach for Undergraduate       Control Education
* EHR,DUE
* 11/15/1992,01/31/1994
* Thomas Kurfess, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1994
* USD 39,239.00

This project uses a five-day short course to present faculty members with an
integrated methodology for teaching undergraduate control theory applicable to a
wide range of mechanical, electrical, thermal, and fluid systems. The program
combines the insight and understanding of classical control (frequency domain)
theory with the computational power of modern control (time domain) theory.
Often, the tools of these two domains are taught in separate sections of a
course, or in separate courses. This need not be the case. Frequency domain
analysis provides excellent insight into system stability, performance and
robustness. Time domain methods are best suited for computer applications.
Having exposure to both time and frequency domains, students may learn how to
freely move between them. Such a capability provides students with both an
excellent intuitive understanding of control theory, as well as the ability to
exploit computational tools. Participants will leave the course with a powerful
set of resources (bound lecture notes, software, syllabi, and worked problems)
that are easy to use. Contact will be maintained with participants after the
conclusion of the short course; a meeting of the participants will be organized
at a technical conference to share lessons learned and to evaluate the
effectiveness of integrating the short course concepts into their curricula.