* 9255269
* 1993 Conference on Science Education for Persons with       Disabilities; Kansas City, MO; March 29-31, 1993
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Greg Stefanich, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Costello L. Brown
* 08/31/1994
* USD 29,741.00

This project will convene a two-day conference prior to the 1993 National
Science Teachers Association (NSTA) Convention in Kansas City, Missouri. The
purpose of the conference is to educate science teacher educators, science
teachers, and professionals providing services and/or equipment to persons with
disabilities as to what resources and strategies are effective in providing
science education for students with disabilities. General goals of the
conference are: o to assess the current state of conditions concerning science
for persons with disabilities and to provide recommendations to Federal, state,
and local agencies, institutions and organizations concerning science education
for disabled students; and o to increase awareness of technological advances and
contributions which can enhance and contribute to the learning and participation
of disabled students. The conclusions and outcomes developed by participants in
working groups will be synthesized and shared with all attendees. A position
statement along with recommendations for improved practice will be communicated
to the participants and their responses will be solicited. Suggestions in areas
of career concerns, teacher education, methods, materials/programs
dissemination, evaluation and assessment, and educational organizations and
agencies will be compiled and from the basis of the document which will
summarize conference proceedings. Conference participants will be asked to
complete a questionnaire assessing the effectiveness of the conference. A
follow-up questionnaire will be mailed to all participants one year following
the conference. The purpose of this survey will be to determine what changes
have taken place in the participants' schools or regions to improve the quality
of education and services for students with disabilities.