* 9255364
* Partnerships for Minority Student Achievement in Science,   Mathematics and Technology in Prince George's County Public Schools
* EHR,ESR
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Louise Waynant, Board of Education of Prince George's County
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 02/28/1997
* USD 1,492,727.00

Partnerships for Minority Student Achievement in the Prince George's County
Maryland, Public School System will coordinate and expand the links between
those efforts whose goal it is to increase the number of minorities in
mathematics, scicence and technology- related careers. Curriculum refork efforts
will yield an integrated curricular framework in mathematics and science which
includes instructional resource support materials. Teacher enhancement and staff
development efforts will build upon the "lead teacher" concept already
established in the district's schools to create School Science and Mathematics
Leadership Teams. Within each of the district's five administrative areas,
cluster or feeder schools will come together as School Partnership Teams,
thereby constituting Kindergarten through grade 12 field study laboratories.
Oversite and coordination for all existing and proposed initiatives and
resources for staff and students will be the primary responsibility of the
Project Director and designated school system staff, working with an advisory
committee representing a broad spectrum of agencies, organizations, consultant
"experts" and other school communities. The PMSA Advisory Board will review and
advise staff regarding such issues as priority areas of focus; teacher, student
and parent activities; outreach initiatives; and process and product evaluations
for the efforts undertaken through the grant. Student enrichment activities will
include mentoring, tutoring and role model programs, Saturday and summer
enrichment programs involving such groups as the National Society for Black
Engineers, Black Men United, and a variety of religious and community groups.