* 9255387
* Model Proj:  Improving the Climate for Women in Physics     Departments
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Judy Franz, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Larissa Rogers
* 02/29/1996
* USD 57,230.00

The purpose of this program is to gather information about the climate for women
in physics departments across the country and to feed this information back to
these departments, accompanied by suggestions outlining how each department can
assess its own climate and then act to improve it. General information about
climate issues will be obtained by producing, distributing, and analyzing
questionnaires for undergraduate and graduate students. These will seek to
identify the special problems and concerns of women students. More specific
information about climate issues will be obtained by visits by four or five
physics faculty, predominantly women, to 10 physics departments offering both
graduate and undergraduate physics programs. Each visit will be by invitation by
the department and the university. A written report by the visiting team to the
physics department will follow each visit. Six months after the visit, the
department will be requested to provide feedback on changes that have resulted
from the visit. At the end of the grant period, the results of the national
questionnaire and a summary report of the 10 visits will be available to the
physics community. The principal investigators will also prepare a report on the
project that will be distributed widely.