* 9255829
* PRIME Science
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1993,04/30/1998
* Richard Saykally, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 04/30/1998
* USD 1,510,844.00

PRIME Science provides an American adaptation of "Salter's Science"--a well-
tested British multi-disciplinary science program for middle grades. The science
is balanced - not integrated - between life, earth and physical science,
developing conceptual understanding and integrating mathematics, technology and
decision-making. The science is rigorous, interesting and useful to the student.
Among the major integrative themes that provide structure for grades six through
ten are the earth in space, properties of matter, etc. Each unit begins with an
application. The teachers' guides are directed at first year teachers, not
teaching in their major discipline. Included are student preconceptions, safety,
background, ways of introducing the content and assessment items. The visually-
stimulating, attractively-designed student supplements for each of the forty
units contain the application, a summary of what students should know, what they
need to learn and the activities the can do. The materials are tested and
rewritten by teachers and science educators at several sites throughout the US.
Professors at the University of California/Berkeley review the materials for
content accuracy. The British developers are part of the design team. The
adaptation involves not only language translation, but changing data to interest
American audiences and adding units to meet local interests and frameworks.