* 9255832
* National Conference for Black Physics Students; February    1993; East Lansing, Michigan
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/1993,07/31/1994
* Gerard Crawley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. McHenry
* 07/31/1994
* USD 32,950.00

Michigan State University's Physics-Astronomy Department will host the seventh
National Conference of Black Physics Students (NCBPS) in February 1993. NCBPS'93
will be the continuation of a sequence of such annual conferences that began in
1987. The motivation for the NCBPS is to assist and encourage those African-
American students who have shown interest and ability in physics to enter and
complete Ph.D. programs, and to initiate research careers in Physics. The idea
for this conference series came from African- American physics graduate
students, and the conferences have been organized and executed by students, with
faculty and staff assistance at the host institutions (Howard, MIT, Hampton,
Southern University and Stanford hosted the conference in the past). The
following data illustrates the level of participation by students from 1987
through 1992. 1987 MIT 34 1988 MIT 68 1989 Howard Univ. 124 1990 Southern Univ.
140 1991 Hampton Univ. 150 1992 Stanford Univ. 150* *(50 additional applicants
were turned away due to lack of funds) The format of the conference includes
lectures by distinguished physicists, research papers by current Black graduate
and undergraduate students, and workshops on applying to and successfully
completing a graduate program in physics. The primary audience for the
conference are undergraduate students who are majoring in physics, or who have
expressed an interest in physics. A principal goal of the conference is to
permit these students, who are in the process of making career decisions that
will shape the course of their working lives, to meet and interact with Black
graduate students, and Black scientists who can serve as role models and
mentors. The conference will be financed by grants from MSU, corporate gifts
solicited by MSU's College of Natural Science Development Office, and grants
which are being requested from NSF,NASA, DOE, and ONR. The organization and
program of the conference will be arranged by the faculty, staff and graduate
students, African-American and non- African-American, of the Department of
Physics and Astronomy of Michigan State University with assistance from the
National Executive Committee of Minorities in the Physical Sciences (MIPS).