* 9255248
* Alaska Native Science Education Colloquium: April 1992      Chena Hot Springs, Alaska
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1993
* Neal Boyd Brown, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* David E. Jones
* 09/30/1993
* USD 57,406.00

Dr. Raymond Barnhardt is a professor of Anthropology and Educational
Administration at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. Dr. Barnhardt has
organized a three-day conference on science education for Alaskan Native
peoples. This conference will bring together science educators, scientists, and
representatives of Alaskan Native organizations, especially the Alaska
Federation of Natives. The conference participants will formulate a long-term
agenda for improving science instruction for native children. One special focus
of the conference will be the integration of Native tradition with the practice
of western scientific traditions, in the setting of small rural fishing
villages. This conference will produce a report outlining an agenda and
priorities for future action. Alaskan Native people have been underrepresented
in the scientific and engineering disciplines. Science education programs for
native children have been designed by non-natives, commonly resulting in a
failure to integrate native traditions and culture with instructional content
and delivery. The proposed conference will be the first meeting that brings
together representatives of the Alaskan Native people and representatives of the
non-native scientific and educational communities. The action plan and agenda
produced by this conference will have the potential to catalyze significant
improvements in science education.