* 9255347
* Enhancement of Education Statistics, Mathematics, and       Science Education, and the Educational Research             Infrastructure
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1992,03/31/1997
* William Russell, American Educational Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 03/31/1997
* USD 1,941,733.00

Improving the infrastructure associated with education statistics, mathematics
and science education, and research is imperative if we are to benefit from
policy decisions that are informed by expert knowledge and reliable data. Based
on the experience from its current knowledge and reliable data. Based on the
experience from its current NSF/NCES grant, AERA proposes a program of research
and training designed to achieve two primary objectives: (a) to strengthen
communications between scholars in the educational research community and
government administrators and social scientists, and (b) to enhance the
capability of the research community to conduct policy and practice relevant
research that shape NCES and NSF missions. The program will consist of seven
components: (a) a training program to increase the educational research
community's capacity to work with NCES and NSF data sets; (b) a small grants
competition to increase policy and practice-related research using NCES data
sets, with a particular emphasis on mathematics and science data; (c) a visiting
Senior fellows program at each agency; (d) a research fellowship program at NCES
and NSF that will allow newer scholars to become involved in the design,
analysis, and interpretation of data; (e) an annual think tank exercise to
engage in strategic planning; (f) a University based evaluation and
dissemination traineeship program, and (g) an invisible academy of highly
technical researchers to undertake a sophisticated level of basic, policy, and
applied research on a relevant issue.