* 9255365
* PMSA:  Partnership for Reform in Science and Mathematics    (PRISM) Previous Title K.I.D.S.
* EDU,ESR
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Eloy Rodriguez, Santa Ana Unified School District
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1996
* USD 1,425,188.00

PRISM(Partnership for Reform in Science and Math) is an innovative science and
model designed to increase participation and achievement of minorities, 94% of
which compose the Santa Ana Unified School District's (SAUSD) student
population. Key elements of this project include cooperation and collaboration
between the school district, local postsecondary institutions, industry,
community groups and parents. The district- postsecondary institution
partnership known as Project STEP has had a successful relationship since 1982.
This partnership will forge a new initiative for science and math curriculum
reform, based on the new California Frameworks; staff development and
leadership; student enrichment and support and community involvement. PRISM
features kindergarten through university "pipeline" strategies; career-oriented
family math/science activities; creative bilingual solutions such as the "Padres
Y Maestros Unidos" support organization; effective role modeling; secondary
student independent research with undergraduate student mentors; structured,
product-oriented dialogues for members of the partnership; and a high profile
awards program, all of which are woven into an experience of high quality
science and math education for the Santa Ana student. The impact of PRISM will
be felt not only school wide but district and community wide and will increase
the number of SAUSD students in math and science career pathway courses, who in
the future will reflect the full spectrum of American society in SEM
professions.