* 9255705
* Planning Grant:  A Mentorship Program for Teachers of Life  Sciences and Health in Prince George's County, Maryland
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* W. Austin, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 12/31/1993
* USD 49,991.00

This planning grant seeks to develop a proposal for the enhancement of teachers
in the life sciences and health in Prince Georges County, Maryland. The overall
objective of the proposal is to improve the quality of science instruction in
grades 4-8 by forming a partnership between the school system, Howard University
professionals and community based scientific and technological personnel. During
the twelve months planning period the proposal working sessions will be arranged
to assess science teachers needs in the County, formulate proper evaluation,
plan the kinds of instruction teachers want and need at the university level and
training in mentorship. During the planning period the proposal will seek clear
commitment from the county school system in the planning of the partnership to
train a corps of mentor teachers and will use classroom teachers in planning
project activities in science along with community based institutions. An
outcome of the planning period will be the design of a proposal that will have
the following objectives: The development of a program to broaden and strengthen
pedagogical and technological knowledge to science teachers; the development of
hands-on laboratory experiences for teachers and make provisions for these
experiences to be translated to classroom activities; and the development of a
strong partnership formation between the school system, Howard University and
community based scientific and technological personnel.