* 9255803
* Recruiting &amp; Retaining Students with Disabilities in        Engineering, Science and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1996
* J. Ray Bowen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 09/30/1996
* USD 1,543,804.00

The Task Force on Women, Minorities and the Handicapped in Science and
Technology recommended that actions be taken to increase the participation of
persons with disabilities in science and engineering. To this point, most
attention to these educational reforms has been given to precollege science and
mathematics education, but colleges and universities must be involved if this
goal is to be reach. The goals of this project are to recruit and retain
students with disabilities in the engineering and science programs at the
University of Washington. The project includes four components: (1) A live-in
summer science program for secondary-level students who have disabilities; (2) A
mentoring program for the participating summer students that will rely heavily
on year-round computer-based interactions with scientists ( many of whom have
disabilities); (3) A "diversity awareness" program for university faculty and
staff and local pre-college science teachers; and (4) An information
dissemination program that will include outreach to science and math teachers in
the northwest region. Materials for recruiting and retaining students with
disabilities will be produced and distributed in a variety of forms --
videotape; audiotape; computer disks; electronic files accessible over the
Internet network; and written brochures in standard and large print, and
braille. A conference will provide an opportunity for dissemination of materials
for recruitment/retention as well as those developed specifically for the summer
program. They will be adaptable for use by other schools. The quarterly
"diversity awareness" workshops for faculty, staff, students, and local science
teachers, are intended to increase the awareness of barriers faced by students
with disabilities and to present creative and practical approaches for providing
access to instruction and campus services to students with disabilities. Methods
developed in this project will serve as models for recruiting and retaining
students with disabilities in other colleges at the University of Washington as
well as on other campuses across the country.