* 9256748
* Molecular Bioengineering Training
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1998
* Leroy Hood, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 09/30/1998
* USD 444,000.00

ABSTRACT A new Molecular Bioengineering Ph.D. program has been established.
This program provides training at the interface between the physical and
engineering sciences, and the bimolecular sciences. Trainees will be uniquely
able to contribute to: a) to apply engineering principles to the development of
new methods for the study of bimolecular systems including the human genome; and
b) to create new engineering technologies based on bimolecules, molecular
assemblies, and bimolecular processes. Support from the University and the
Whitaker Foundation have been combined with pre-existing faculty strength to
launch this program in the Center for Bioengineering. Four new faculty with
expertise in areas of molecular science have been recruited. In addition, a new
department of Molecular Biotechnology, with a core group of investigators from
Cal Tech, is being established. The Molecular Bioengineering faculty has thus
grown from 5 to 13. It is proposed that the current Molecular Bioengineering
student population of 15 be expanded to 40, using traineeships to support 21.
Given the importance of this emerging area, and Molecular Bioengineering's
demonstrated ability to attract highly qualified students (35% of whom are
women), it is expected that graduates of the Molecular Bioengineering Program
will become leaders in both academic and industry.