* 9256439
* Mathematical Sciences: Traineeships in Mathematics and      Computation in Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/2000
* Thomas Kurtz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 444,000.00

9256439 Kurtz The principal objective of the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Traineeship Program is to increase the numbers of talented
U.S. undergraduates enrolling in doctoral programs in critical and emerging
areas of science and engineering. Proposals were solicited from institutions
whose existing facilities and staff could accommodate additional graduate
students in Ph.D. programs of high quality. The program is also intended to
contribute to strengthening the Nation's human resource base across all
geographic sectors and among all under-represented groups. Graduate Research
Traineeship awards are packages of student support. The colleges and
universities that receive the awards are responsible for the selection of
trainees, retention of trainees, and administration of traineeships. The
University of Wisconsin will develop a program to train doctoral level
researchers working at the interface between the mathematical and computational
sciences and engineering. Trainees will have the capability to employ "state-of-
the-art" mathematical and computational methodology in the study of engineering
problems as well as the capability to develop new methodology in response to
these problems. The program will focus on the mathematical modeling process
including issues regarding the validity of assumptions and computational
feasibility. Breadth of knowledge and experience will be emphasized through a
wide range of course work and a variety of scientific interactions and
experiences.