* 9256824
* Graduate Training in Inorganic Materials Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1993,03/31/1998
* James Burlitch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/1998
* USD 555,000.00

Materials Chemistry is one focus of the national initiatives in Science and
Computer Science proposed by the National Science Advisor. In order to meet the
national objectives for more research and development in this burgeoning
interdisciplinary field, more PH.D.'s trained in various aspects of Materials
Chemistry are required. This Graduate Research Traineeship award will enable
Cornell to increase the size of our materials chemistry program to train
additional chemists over the next five years; women and minorities will be
especially targeted. Six faculty members, all highly accomplished in research
and teaching, will prepare these students for research in chemical aspects of
materials. Expertise in materials synthesis, characterization and theory is
represented by this distinguished group. %%% This program features an
interdisciplinary set of courses and research collaborations, and institutes a
plan targeting minority institutions for recruitment. Visitations by Cornell
faculty and students are a key component; another concerns Cornell summer
research opportunities for students and faculty from minority institutions. The
Cornell Chemistry Department will match the $3500 per student enhancement in
order to finance the recruiting and summer research efforts, including teacher
training.