* 9256781
* Mathematical Sciences: Tandem Traineeships for              Cross-Disciplinary Statisticians
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1993,06/30/1999
* Bradley Efron, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 666,000.00

The principal objective of the National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Traineeship Program is to increase the numbers of talented U.S. undergraduates
enrolling in doctoral programs in critical and emerging areas of science and
engineering. Proposals were solicited from institutions whose existing
facilities and staff could accommodate additional graduate students in Ph.D.
programs of high quality. The program is also intended to contribute to
strengthening the Nation's human resource base across all geographic sectors and
among all under-represented groups. Graduate Research Traineeship awards are
packages of student support. The colleges and universities that receive the
awards are responsible for the selection of trainees, retention of trainees, and
administration of traineeships. Stanford University plans to increase the number
of U.S. Ph.D. statisticians through a "Tandem Traineeship" program. The
objective of the program will be to produce students with the skills and desire
to (a) conduct cross-disciplinary research in science and engineering and (b)
foster undergraduate education in the mathematical sciences, particularly
probability and statistics, from a broad, interdisciplinary perspective. In
order to create a structure in which the cross-disciplinary idea is nurtured,
students will be encouraged to follow their interests and those of their chosen
faculty members in at least two departments. In order to attract a broad base of
qualified U.S. applicants, particularly women, minorities and students with
disabilities, current mentoring and recruitment efforts will be expanded.