* 9256335
* Mathematical Sciences: Graduate Research Traineeship in     Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1993,09/30/1999
* James Meiss, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/1999
* USD 555,000.00

The principal objective of the National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Traineeship Program is to increase the numbers of talented U.S. undergraduates
enrolling in doctoral programs in critical and emerging areas of science and
engineering. Proposals were solicited from institutions whose existing
facilities and staff could accommodate additional graduate students in Ph.D.
programs of high quality. The program is also intended to contribute to
strengthening the Nation's human resource base across all geographic sectors and
among all under-represented groups. Graduate Research Traineeship awards are
packages of student support. The colleges and universities that receive the
awards are responsible for the selection of trainees, retention of trainees, and
administration of traineeships. The University of Colorado at Boulder will
initiate a focused traineeship program in the areas that couple applied,
nonlinear, and computational mathematics. The initiative will integrate the
tools of high-performance computing into the educational program with
supercomputer facilities at Los Alamos National Laboratories (LANL) and the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), provide for summer internships
at national research laboratories (LANL and NCAR), and fund an industrial
laboratory seminar series. The department will continue to make strong efforts
to recruit and retain students from under-represented groups.