* 9256999
* Fire Protection Engineering GRTP
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1999
* David Lucht, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lucy Morse
* 09/30/1999
* USD 444,000.00

ABSTRACT Fires cost the American economy on the order of $128 billion per year.
In recent decades, the United States has led all industrialized nations in per
capita fire losses. Over the past 30 years, great advancements have been made in
the scientific understanding of fire behavior and the performance of fire
protection systems. Indeed, a fire protection engineering discipline is emerging
to deal with this problem of national importance. In the 1970's, Worcester
Polytechnic Institute recognized the growing body of knowledge in fire science
and the enormous potential it had to offer for the greater social good. In 1979,
it implemented the firs-of-its-kind master's degree program in fire protection
engineering to help the nation move forward in the development of this
discipline and to produce more human resources to apply new technologies to the
solution of complex fire problems. It was soon recognized that doctoral
professionals were sorely needed to write the textbooks of the future, perform
leading edge research, to teach and to work in industrial and government
laboratories, worldwide. Accordingly, in 1991 WPI launched the first-of-its-kind
doctoral degree program in fire protection engineering...building on its
successful track record at the master's level. This Graduate Research
Traineeship proposal will establish the first critical mass of Ph.D. fire
protection engineering scholars. Five candidates will be selected as a result of
an intensive nationwide recruitment campaign focusing on campus engineering
society organizations and other specialty groups networked to women, minorities
and students with disabilities.