* 9256368
* Graduate Research Traineeship Program in The Economics of   Education, Training, and Human Resources
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1993,06/30/2002
* Stephen Goldfeld, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2002
* USD 530,000.00

Recent economic and social changes have accentuated the role of education in
determining earnings, family structure, health status and other outcomes. There
is also growing concern that the US workforce is lagging behind other countries
in both the quantity and quality of education. In response to these challenges,
state, local, and Federal authorities have implemented a variety of education
reforms, including school choice programs, magnet schools, bilingual education,
and teacher certification. This proliferation of programs offers a unique
opportunity to study what works and to influence the course of education policy.
To exploit this opportunity and guide policy-makers in the design of future
reforms, the nation requires a highly-trained force of Ph.D. professionals with
knowledge of education-related issues and expertise in program evaluation. This
grant adds a total of 5 Graduate Traineeships to the Princeton graduate
economics program, concentrating in the economics of education, training, and
human resource development. The trainees will enter the existing Ph.D. program
and receive rigorous training in microeconomic theory, econometrics, and labor
economics. In addition, through a series of new and existing programs, the
trainees will receive intensive training and hands-on experience in primary data
collection, econometric modelling, and program evaluation. The trainees will be
uniquely qualified to evaluate the education programs of the past decade and
address the education issues of the next century.