* 9256735
* A Graduate Research Traineeship Program in Energy Efficiencyand the Environment
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/1993,09/30/1998
* Raymond Viskanta, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy Morse
* 09/30/1998
* USD 333,000.00

ABSTRACT The objective of the proposed traineeship program is to develop
doctoral professionals in areas that can lead to more effective utilization of
our natural resources and less impact upon the environment. The training of
doctoral candidates will be accomplished through both research and enhanced
educational activities centered around an integrated approach to addressing the
interrelated problems of energy use and its effect upon the environment.
Research will focus on innovative approaches for improving the energy efficiency
and reducing the environmental impact of systems for a number of applications
within the major energy use sectors: energy conversion, industrial, commercial
and residential, and transportation. Specific features of the training program
will include: 1) industrial collaboration and apprenticeships, 2) establishment
of a seminar series for doctoral students, industrialists, and utility
representatives, 3) development of a student-driven "research roundtable" for
exchanging ideas between participating students and faculty, and 4) the
development of new graduate courses. The research and educational program will
be in interdisciplinary effort involving eight key faculty members from five
major areas within the School of Mechanical Engineering and supported by several
well- established state-of-the-art laboratory facilities. An award of an NSF
Graduate Research Traineeship grant would provide support for ten traineeships
and would create the basis for a new, long- term program in an area of critical
national need.