* 9256332
* Graduate Research Traineeship
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1993,09/30/2000
* Jeffrey Banks, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2000
* USD 530,000.00

While politics and economics were contained in a single discipline over much aof
the period of modern scholarship, these fields were split during the 20th
century. It is now apparent that this split, while advantageous for certain
scientific developments, places artificial constraints on the study of many
important social issues. The separate development of the disciplines has worked
to make communication and joint training across disciplinary boundaries
generally difficult. The rejoining of political science and economics into
political economy has been underway for a couple of decades now. The fruits of
this research are numerous, and its promise is greater than ever. The political
scientist's emphasis on institutions affects economic performance, while the
economist's individual choice viewpoint has made political scientists examine
more critically their theories about the formation, evolution and maintenance of
institutions. The improved understanding that results from such
interdisciplinary exchange improves the way we address important policy problems
ranging from the management of firms to the design of constitutions. This grant
provides funds to develop the associated graduate training which accompanies the
on-going research activities at the University of Rochester in political
economy. The University of Rochester has made a major commitment toward
developing the perspective of political economy, the study of how individual
behavior is affected by and in turn determines institutional and political
structures. During the Spring of 1991 the University created the Wallis
Institute of Political Economy, provided it with a $3.5 million endowment for
base support, and moved to develop both research and ultimately, training in the
area, a project made possible by the current, broad based research of the
faculties of the underlying Departments and by their historically close working
and intellectual relationships. Graduate Research Traineeships allow the
development of a Ph.D. Program in Political Economy, something that is not
possible with the current Institute funding. The other activities of the Wallis
Institute will provide a rich environment for the new training program. The
program also develops innovative instructional methods having spillovers for
other activities of the Department.