* 9256350
* Graduate Research Traineeship
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1993,08/31/1999
* Thomas Heberlein, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/1999
* USD 530,000.00

This Graduate Research Training award provides support to the University of
Wisconsin for a program in Environmental Sociology. This is part of an existing
emphasis, at the graduate level, on Science, Technology, Agriculture, Resources,
and the Environment (STARE) in the graduate Departments of Rural Sociology and
Sociology at the University. A unique concentration of (10) STARE- affiliated
faculty has been assembled at the University of Wisconsin, and the STARE program
has been in place since 1988. This concentration of sociologists is located in
one of the strongest graduate departments of sociology in the U.S., one that has
frequently been the top-ranked program in the country. National Science
Foundation support will augment STARE by helping to recruit and retain minority
students and those with undergraduate degrees in the natural sciences, as well
as providing funding stability which is lacking in new areas such as
environmental sociology. There is a pressing national need for environmental
sociologists to work on social aspects and implications of environmental
problems. A secondary benefit from training environmental sociologists would be
to broaden sociological analysis and discourse in general. The program is
highlighted by a weekly training seminar, existing courses, a research
apprenticeship program, a Ph.D. qualifying exam, and a summer practicum.
Doctoral candidates will also be expected to take a natural or environmental
science minor. Building on an already-strong program and track record of
minority recruitment and retention, the STARE Graduate Training Program will
place strong emphasis on recruitment, retention, and summer training of Native
Americans.