* 9257306
* NSF Young Investigator:  Solid Base Catalysts and Quantum-  Size Photocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1998
* Robert Davis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 08/31/1998
* USD 312,500.00

This is an NSF Young Investigator award. Research covers two distinct areas of
heterogeneous catalysis: solid bases and quantum-sized photocatalysts. The solid
bases of interest are primarily metal oxides and mixed metal oxides with surface
areas in excess of 200 square meters per gram. These are studied in both
supported and unsupported form to examine the influence of carrier structure on
reactivity. Zeolite-occluded oxides are also under study. The overall aim is to
understand how the oxide surface structure stabilizes anionic intermediates
during a catalytic cycle; the approach is to correlate catalyst synthesis with
atomic structure, adsorption, and chemical reactivity. Principal techniques used
are Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy of surface intermediates,
temperature-programmed desorption and reaction of probe molecules, and steady-
state reaction studies, including isotopic labelling. Nanometer-sized
semiconductor clusters exhibit unusually high quantum efficiencies for
photocatalytic activity compared to bulk-phase material. Exploratory studies
with supported titania and other photocatalysts are performed with the goal of
creating a selective hydrocarbon oxidation catalyst by incorporating the
photoactive material onto a carrier capable of molecular discrimination and
orientation. Zeolites and related materials are suitable candidates for such a
carrier. Materials are characterized by laser Raman spectroscopy, ultraviolet
diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, and X-ray absorption spectroscopy. Adsorption
studies and steady-state photocatalytic oxidation reactions are used to probe
the surface reactivity of these novel materials.//