* 9257212
* NYI:  Studies of Ultrafast Processes Using High-Intensity   and Short-Wavelength Light
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Henry Kapteyn, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 01/31/1996
* USD 167,780.00

Recently, there has been a revolution in the field of ultrafast lasers. New
broadband solid-state laser materials such as titanium- doped sapphire make it
possible to produce pulses of unprecedented short duration and high average
power, using very simple lasers. Also, the recently-developed technique of
chirped-pulse amplification makes it possible to generate peak powers of greater
than a terawatt using a small-scale laser system. These high-power pulses, in
combination with various nonlinear- optical techniques, make it possible for the
first time to generate ultrashort pulses at ultraviolet and vacuum-ultraviolet
wavelengths. My plan is to study these techniques of generating short-wavelength
light, and then to use short-wavelength pulses of 1-100 fs duration to study
dynamic processes in material and chemical systems. Since the highly- excited
states in atoms, molecules, and solids that are accessible with short-wavelength
light typically have very short lifetimes, a source with short wavelength and
short time duration will be particularly useful as a research tool. Processes of
interest to me include carrier dynamics in high-bandgap materials and dielectric
breakdown dynamics; molecular dynamics and molecular control of organic
molecules (which typically absorb light most strongly in the deep-UV); and
surface dynamics using ultraviolet photoemission.