* 9257979
* NSF Young Investigator:  Small Depth Boolean Circuits and   Complexity - Theoretic Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1997
* Russell Impagliazzo, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 08/31/1997
* USD 155,000.00

This award funds continuing investigations into two long-term interests: the
complexity of small depth Boolean circuits, and the computational complexity
foundations of cryptography. Computational complexity as a field strives to
provide a mathematical foundation for computer science by developing techniques
to evaluate the inherent difficulty of computational problems. The Boolean
circuit seems the most natural and robust concrete model of computational
complexity. Much work has gone into developing the theory of circuit complexity
in the hope of resolving such questions as P vs. NP. There are strong
connections between bounds on circuit depth and issues in the theory of parallel
computation, logic (mostly proof theory), learning theory, and the theory of
neural nets. Continuing projects in circuit complexity are: establishing links
between circuit bounds and Frege proofs; examining the behavior of formulas
under random restrictions, (also known as neural nets). Of course, circuit
complexity is a dynamic area, and specific projects may change with new results.
Work continues on the foundations of cryptography. Recent work in developing the
structural complexity of cryptography has been so successful that perhaps all
the major, tractable questions in the area have been resolved. Indeed, there
seem to be some theoretical roadblocks to further progress in this direction.
However, there are several important open questions regarding the relationship
between average-case complexity and cryptography, and that between oblivious
transfer and secret agreement. More importantly, a large gap remains between
theory and practice. Another goal of the project is to develop theoretical tools
that will actually lead to implementable cryptosystems, and to handle such
questions as virus protection, secure electronic transfer of funds, and such
issues as privacy vs. security for electronic mail.