* 9257587
* NYI: Vector Quantization Codebook Processing and            Organization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1999
* Eve Riskin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/1999
* USD 312,500.00

Riskin New ways to use Vector Quantization (VQ) other than strictly for data
compression are being investigated, and are being applied to applications such
as image processing, halftoning, progressive transmission, and immunity against
communication channel noise. In many applications, both VQ and many image
processing operations are applied to small subblocks of an image. The image
processing step can be applied ahead of time to each vector in a VQ codebook,
with the processed vectors stored along with the codebook. If the computational
complexity of the VQ encoder is lower than that of the image processing step,
this reduces the computational complexity. This approach is being applied to
halftoning, edge detection, and histogram equalization. In a progressive
transmission system, the received image is reconstructed as an increasingly
better reproduction of the transmitted image as bits arrive. Ways to organize
and order a VQ codebook so that it can be used for direct progressive
transmission of full search VQ are being studied. In an ordered VQ, the VQ
codeword index is correlated with the codeword location in the input space. This
ordinal mapping feature of clustering codewords with similar indexes to obtain
additional reproduction vectors for the decoder is being exploited. Extentions
to progressive transmission of ordered VQ indexes over noisy communication
channels are being included.