* 9257223
* NSF Young Investigator:  Structural Tailoring of Nanoscale  Materials for Catalysis and Ceramics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1998
* Jackie Ying, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 02/28/1998
* USD 312,500.00

This is an NSF Young Investigator Award. The research addresses the processing
of nanoscale materials with unusual surface reactivity and physical properties
for catalysis and ceramic applications. One objective is to achieve highly dense
materials at relatively low sintering temperatures by exploiting the small grain
size and enhanced surface diffusion of nanometer-sized particles prepared by the
gas condensation method. Structural evolution of the nanostructured materials is
observed by X-ray diffraction, atomic force microscopy, and photoacoustic
infrared spectroscopy. Mechanical properties of these materials are also
analyzed for net-shape forming and high- temperature applications.
Nanostructural composites are synthesized as supported metal catalysts; these
materials should offer high metal dispersion and possibly enhanced catalytic
activity, and can be engineered to have a high density of uniform nanoscale
pores. The thermal stability, selectivity, and reactivity of nanostructure
catalysts in chemical manufacturing processes are studied and compared to those
of catalysts produced by sol-gel synthesis or traditional impregnation methods.
Catalysts are characterized by small-angle X-ray scattering, Moessbauer
spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, positron annihilation spectroscopy, and
calorimetry. Reaction kinetics of processes using the novel catalysts are
followed with high-temperature photoacoustic infrared spectroscopy.