* 9257514
* NSF Young Investigator:  Ultra-High Precision Engineering   Systems; Control, Metrology, Data Reduction and Quality     Assurance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Thomas Kurfess, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 02/29/1996
* USD 72,500.00

This research entails the development, construction and testing of an advanced
high speed metrology system. The major areas to be addressed by this project
are: probe/surface contact dynamics, structural vibration, probe trajectory
control, large scale data reduction, and determination of product quality for
use in feedback to production systems. Contact dynamics will be improved by
redesigning the probe's mechanical configuration, and the use of both digital
and analog filters. Probe trajectory control will be achieved via high speed
data acquisition and processing systems in conjunction with advanced control
theory. Structural vibrations generated during a scan will be addressed by using
optimally planned trajectories that minimize excitation and by employing typical
control strategies for flexible structures such as feed-forward. Advanced
statistical techniques will be used to reduced the large amounts of data
generated by the scanning process. The results of the measurements will be used
to determine both geometric deviation of the part and the quality level of the
part and/or batch of parts being produced. This will enable users to determine
the necessary modifications to machine tool trajectories to generate desired
geometries. The results will also be used to analyze and improve production
system capabilities.