* 9257578
* NYI: Design of Knowledge-Base Systems from Reusable components
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1999
* Mark Musen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/1999
* USD 312,500.00

The construction of knowledge-based systems is extremely labor-intensive.
Unfortunately, current tools for building knowledge-based systems do not allow
developers to take significant advantage of previous knowledge bases when
building new systems. The research supported by this award involves design of a
novel architecture for the construction of knowledge-based systems. The
architecture allows system builders either to select an existing problem-solving
method from a library, or to construct a new problem-solving method from a set
of predefined building blocks. The developer then maps the data requirements of
the problem-solving method to elements of reusable domain ontologies that define
models of particular application areas. Both the domain ontologies and the
problem-solving methods that are used to build knowledge-based systems are
stored in libraries that future developers can access when implementing new
applications. The research thus addresses strategies to index and retrieve
problem-solving methods and domain ontologies, and to integrate these components
within new problem-solving frameworks. The research will allow construction of
new classes of tools for building knowledge-based systems, and will define an
infrastructure that supports the reuse of knowledge-base components at
increasingly high levels of abstraction. //