* 9257750
* NSF Young Investigator
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1998
* Gerben Zylstra, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* A Berry
* 08/31/1998
* USD 320,500.00

Research in this laboratory deals with microorganisms that metabolize xenobiotic
compounds, especially aromatic hydrocarbons. New microbial strains that have
diverse capability in terms of their ability to degrade different aromatic
hydrocarbons will be isolated by various enrichment culture techniques. Emphasis
is on obtaining novel strains that have the ability to degrade a wide range of
related compounds. The metabolic pathway(s) by which the aromatic hydrocarbon is
degraded will be determined by standard biochemical assays and analytical
techniques. Unique enzymes showing varied capability will be isolated and
characterized. The genes involved in the pathway will be cloned and sequence.
Site- directed mutagenesis will be utilized to explore the molecular basis for
enzyme structure/function. The regulatory control mechanisms for the various
steps of the metabolic pathway will be analyzed at the molecular level. New
recombinant strains will be constructed that involve multiple genes from various
sources. The goal of these genetically constructed strains is to metabolize as
wide a range of compounds as possible and as efficiently as possible. Currently
the laboratory is focusing on polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, phthalate and
phthalate esters, and substituted benzenes (chlorobenzene, toluene, and
nitrobenzene). %%% This project on aromatic hydrocarbon degradation is
environmentally important in toxic waste removal. Understanding of the complex
metabolic pathway for degradation of these compounds will aid in improving
biodegradability.