* 9258026
* NSF Young Investigator:  Material Processing and            Intelligent Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,10/31/1994
* John Coulter, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 10/31/1994
* USD 62,500.00

Material processing and intelligent manufacturing will be studied in an
interdisciplinary format involving process modeling, in-situ product quality
monitoring, and real-time process control. The program will initially focus on
molded and advanced composite products. Two fundamental manufacturing science
problems will be addressed, which are (1) the majority of manufacturing
processes are not completely understood, and (2) product quality is not
monitored and optimally adjusted during fabrication. Improved process models for
molding and advanced composites will then be employed in real-time environments
to direct manufacturing processes toward optimal product quality in a feedback
control manner. Doing so will require the development of sensor subsystems for
in-situ product quality assessment and knowledge based tools for real-time
manufacturing precess adaption. Methodologies for operations will be developed.
Several sensory transducer mechanisms will be investigated, with an initial
focus on embedded optical and electronic fibers. Real-time process adaptation
will be accomplished through the development of knowledge based tools
incorporating neural networks. A novel component of the effort will be the
procurement of neural network training information from process simulation
models rather than from actual manufacturing data. Overall, the synergistic
manufacturing methodology development will decrease both process development
time and cost while improving product quality and process flexibility.