* 9258149
* NSF Young Investigator
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1998
* J. McKinnon, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* Farley Fisher
* 02/28/1998
* USD 312,500.00

There will be two major thrusts to this program. First, the chemical mechanisms
of fullerene formation in a sooting flame will be investigated, with an end-goal
of developing an optimized inexpensive path to fullerene production. As part of
this activity, a thorough parameter-space search of the variables important to
fullerene formation will be carried out, with guidance being provided by
previous thermodynamic studies. Inasmuch as these studies have indicated that
temperatures in excess of available adiabatic flame temperatures may be
advantageous to fullerene production, experiments in which additional energy is
coupled into the flames in the form of microwave or radio-frequency radiation
will be carried out. As part of this study, various possible mechanisms for
fullerene production will be modelled and tested against data obtained in the
experimental part of the study. Secondly, the use of an infrared laser system to
continuously monitor efficiency of hazardous waste incinerators will be studied.
Chemical kinetic modeling studies of incineration of chlorinated hydrocarbons
have identified intermediates of combustion on whose infrared transmissions the
lasers should be tuned; experiments to verify this approach to development of an
effective continuous monitoring system will be carried out. Both research
projects have important potential applications. In the first case, development
of means for relatively inexpensive production of fullerenes is important to
further development of potential uses for these materials. In the second case, a
current deficiency in incineration technology tending to block use of such
methods is lack of an on-line real-time process monitor which can be
incorporated in a controller scheme to minimize or eliminate escape of toxic
materials during incinerator operation transients resulting from various causes.