* 9258401
* NSF Young Investigator:  Formal Tolerance and Set-Based     Methods in Engineering Design and Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,11/30/1998
* Kristin Wood, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 11/30/1998
* USD 312,500.00

This project focuses on a balance between an academic research program,
engineering education, and industrial applications. In this program, the general
problems of engineering design and design for manufacturing will be addressed.
In particular, one part of the research program considers the development of
analytical and experimental models for determining the physical surface-
structures produced from both material removal processes and solid-freeform
fabrication. The basis for these models is fractal-based representations, or
more generally the Karhunen-Loeve method, which will provide indices for linking
manufacturing process variables to design parameters. While a fractal-based
approach is known to be applicable at surface finish scales, surface structures
that will be identified in this research are at tolerance scales (e.g., 40-300
microns for journal bearings). Tolerances usually carry the function of the
device. For example, in a rotating mechanism, the tolerances associated between
a shaft and a bearing assembly may be critical, i.e., if the shaft-bearing
assembly is misaligned or out-of-tolerance, catastrophic failure of the system
will result due to excessive wear and possible seizure. Providing design methods
and measures that link manufacturing process variables to the design parameters,
performance parameters, and functional requirements of a design is crucial,
especially if manufacturing information is to be combined with functional
considerations in the early stages of design. This research will seek to verify
the fractal-based models with experimentation, represent the results within a
formal set-based theory for design, and apply the method to rotating machinery,
structures, and microautomation. Beyond the fundamental theories of fractal
tolerances and set-based design representations, computational methods will be
developed for linking global geometric information to the design for
manufacturing techniques. The general scope for these computational methods will
be a feature-based design system, including the formal representation of spatial
relationships.