* 9258533
* NSF Young Investigator:Investigation of Sparse Resultants   and Polynomial Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Paul Pedersen, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

Two lines of research will be pursued. The first is to develop a hybrid
symbolic-numeric system for solving systems of polynomial equations numerically.
For this, symbolic algorithms for global root separation will be combined with
local numerical methods for root refinement. One task in the project is to
determine the feasibility of a hybrid Groebner basis routine which may deal with
inputs more general than ordinary polynomials. The quotient algebra module is
noteworthy because it reduces both the computation of resultants (for general
algebraic feasibility ) and the computation of trace forms (for real root
location). The other modules build up, layer by layer, the tools necessary to
effectively isolate and refine all solutions of a system of polynomial
equations. The second research direction is to analyze the structure of sparse
resultants. Sparse polynomials arise frequently in important applications, so
computational advances in dealing with them have much practical significance. It
is planned to investigate resultant equations for systems of sparse Laurent
polynomials. There are important relationships between the combinatorics of
parameters associated with such systems and the solutions of polynomial
equations. Any knowledge of such structure feeds back into computational
methods, e.g., limiting a priori the types of systems which may have solutions
of various sorts.