* 9258114
* NSF Young Investigator:  Computer-Aided Automation of       Design and Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1999
* James Oliver, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/28/1999
* USD 239,254.00

This research is aimed at computer-aided automation of design and manufacturing
processes with particular emphasis on products modeled with parametric
sculptured surfaces. Over the next five years, research will proceed
concurrently in two primary thrusts: (1) investigation of novel techniques for
conceptual design of sculptured surface models, and (2) the development of
methods to facilitate the manufacturing processes associated with such products.
The recently developed surface synthesis technique will be expanded by
investigating the development of functional design constraints based on
objective performance measures such as aerodynamics, hydrodynamics, or
kinematics, as well as on subjective characteristics such as surface aesthetics.
Research in the second category will focus on automated generation and
verification of numerically controlled (NC) machine programs. Given a geometric
model of the part to be produced and the kinematic capabilities of a candidate
machine tool, techniques based on spherical geometry will be investigated to
determine workpiece orientations which are optimal with respect to process time
and dimensional accuracy. Sculptured surface models are among the most commonly
utilized geometric representations, and their creation, modification and
fabrication can incur substantial capital investment. Thus this research may
have a profound effect on product development efficiency for a wide range of
industrial and consumer products.