* 9260700
* Temperature Stable Alternative to Li Compensation of        Silicon Radiation Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* John Walter, IntraSpec Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Silicon x-ray energy spectrometers have become very important tools for
elemental analysis in research and industry. The deep sensitive depths required
for Si x-ray detectors and some other Si detectors and some other Si detector
applications are usually obtained by a Li compensation technique commonly
referred to as Li Drifting. Unfortunately, the Li compensation, Si(Li), is only
quasi-stable at room temperature and very unstable at higher temperatures. This
temperature stability problem limits the performance and general usefulness of
these detectors by prohibiting modern device processing technologies like oxide
surface passivation and high temperature contact formation. The lack of oxide
surface passivation to limit noise from surface leakage currents places severe
restrictions on the maximum operating temperature of Li compensated detectors.
The lack of a rugged oxide passivation and rugged diffused or implanted contacts
seriously restricts the operating ambient of Si(Li) devices. We outline here an
alternative approach to compensation of Si which should allow sensitive depths
>3 mm, be compatible with high temperature oxide passivations, allow high
temperature contact formation, and be much cheaper than Li drifting. This new
technology should result in cheaper x-ray detectors which will operate well at
temperatures obtainable with thermoelectric or other simple cooling techniques
rather than liquid nitrogen. It should also make it possible to build very large
area, deep sensitive depth detectors at reasonable prices.