* 9260017
* Energy Filtered Detector for Micro-Diffraction in the       Scanning Electron Miscroscope
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1993,12/31/1993
* James Mancuso, Advanced Microscopy Techniques
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1993
* USD 49,756.00

Micro-diffraction based crystallography is essential to materials design and
process understanding in key industrial applications, such as micro-electronics,
superconductivity, solar energy, structural composites and metal forming. The
scanning electron microscope (SEM) has the potential for providing high spatial
resolution crystallographic information, but its applicability is severely
limited by the low sensitivity of existing techniques. The current methodology
cannot be easily used for dose sensitive materials, electrical nonconductors and
samples with even small amounts of surface damage. The difficulty of obtaining
micro- diffraction data is a major drawback in the SEM, which otherwise is very
useful in obtaining high resolution topographical and compositional information
and usually requires minimal specimen preparation. This Phase I program will
determine the feasibility of employing an energy filtering detector with high
gain to increase the sensitivity of micro-diffraction in the SEM. The filter
will be applied to backscattered electron patterns that can provide
crystallographic information at very high spatial resolution. This study will
require an amplifying element that is sensitive to low energy electrons, such as
a microchannel plate. The research will test the overall feasibility of this
approach as well as the specific issues of dynamic range and noise level.
Exploitation of the proposed research would improve the competitive position of
domestic industries by enhancing their capability to identify components and
define aggregate properties related to advanced materials and processes. In
addition it would extend the functionality of a large existing base of scanning
microscopes used in academic and industrial research.