* 9260163
* Novel Sources for Titanium Nitride Chemical Vapor Deposition
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Walter Kosar, Advanced Technology Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of materials chemistry and in the subfield of organometallic chemistry. The
thrust of this activity is to experimentally test the feasibility of designing
novel unimolecular source reagents that will enable the deposition of titanium
nitride (TiN) by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) at temperatures below 500
degrees C without contamination by chlorine, carbon, or particulates. TiN is
rapidly becoming an important material as a barrier layer in very large scale
integration (VLSI) direct random access memories (DRAMs), as an antireflection
coating and as a "glue" layer between noble metals and silicon dioxide in both
memory and logic devices. The TiN CVD precursors identified for evaluation
represent a novel alternative to the present physical vapor deposition
technology which, because of the high temperature required, is unsuitable for
device fabrication as device features shrink to ultra large scale integration
(ULSI) dimensions. In this size domain, CVD will be the manufacturing method of
choice. Unfortunately, no TiN precursors presently exist that allow CVD of TiN
at low temperatures without contamination problems. %%% In this SBIR Phase I
research, Advanced Technology Materials should demonstrate the feasibility of
the synthesis and utility of the proposed new unimolecular CVD source reagents
for the low temperature, contaminant-free production of TiN. The successful
identification of such precursors would allow for their demonstration in full
scale memory device fabrication in Phase II and to be rapidly commercialized in
Phase III.