* 9260330
* Electrochemical Impedance Pattern Recognition for Detection of Microbially Influenced Corrosion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Michael Schwartz, Eltron Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,987.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of
electrochemistry. The goal of this research effort is to establish the
feasibility of using electrochemical impedance pattern recognition for the
detection of microbially influenced corrosion (MIC) occurring at metal surfaces.
The approach is directed towards development of pattern recognition schemes
based upon the on-line acquisition of electrochemical impedance spectra using
fast Fourier transform electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (FFTEIS)
instrumentation at the suspect corrosion site. This will be followed by
treatment of the electrochemical impedance spectral data using the principal
components analysis (PCA) technique. The resulting PCA transformed data will
then be subjected to analysis by software based pattern recognition techniques
to classify the MIC corrosion site. Because all aspects of the proposed approach
can be handled by portable computer driven hardware and software, the ultimate
goal of the planned multi-Phase SBIR activity is the development of portable
diagnostic instrumentation for the on-line determination of MIC. %%% This Phase
I project brings together disparate technologies of electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy in the fast Fourier transform implementation, principal components
analysis, and pattern recognition for the purpose of identifying microbially
induced corrosion in contrast with abiotic corrosion. The proof of concept plan
set forth for Phase I should determine the feasibility of this approach to
diagnosing problems of enormous economic importance.