* 9260914
* Integrated Color Vision
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1993,01/31/1994
* Samuel Russ, Dickerson Vision Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 01/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

Commercial machine vision was introduced in the 1970's. To this point it has
not been used widely for automation in manufacturing due to performance,
complexity, and cost issues. Most commercial vision systems are based on video
technology with separate cameras, frame grabbers, digitizers and processors.
Reliance on video technology limits performance and requires expensive, complete
architectures. The maximum video frame rate is 30 per second and the average
complete system costs over $20,000. In 1991 DVT introduced the first commercial
Integrated Vision System. The new gray scale vision technology is simple,
compact, and inexpensive. Priced under $2,000., this technology packages the
functionality of commercial gray scale vision systems into one device, the size
of a book, weighing less than 2 pounds. The improvements offered by this new
technology are changing the market for vision as many more applications have
become economically feasible. This research will develop a color integrated
vision system. Based on currently available CCDs, the research will result in
development of a new technology for directly digitizing and processing color
optical information. Devices based on this technology will provide the ability
to perform low cost, high speed quality control and verification for automated
manufacturing.