* 9260244
* Novel Methods to Produce Nanocrystalline Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Jacob Stiglich, Materials Modification Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Nanocrystalline materials are desired in many applications due to their ability
to provide superior mechanical properties coupled with improved wear and
corrosion resistance. In this Phase I effort, the ability to develop a number of
nanocrystalline materials using pulsed reactive electrodes (PRE) either in the
form of a rod, wire, or in some cases braided wires submerged in a reactive or
nonreactive dielectric fluid, is demonstrated. Control over the processing
parameters can result in nanometer size powders with tailored size, shape and
morphology that can be characterized. The technique can be adapted for producing
carbides, nitrides, borides or oxides. The follow-on Phase II effort will
probably focus on adding reactive gases that flow alongside the electrode in a
specially designed holder and a technique for consolidation of the
nanocrystalline materials into shapes ranging from sheets, using high shear
compaction, to plates and other intricate shapes. Extensive testing of these
compacted shapes for strength, corrosion and high temperature behavior is also
planned in the Phase II effort. Methods for scaling up this technique to produce
commercial quantities of nano-crystalline powders for use in numerous
applications will be considered. Production of nanocrystalline powders can
result in a quantum jump in structural materials technology. Alloys and
nanocomposites thus produced should facilitate applications in numerous
electrical, magnetic, and packaging applications. Other uses include crucibles,
nozzles, smart materials, sensors, and several structural components.