* 9260408
* Novel Copolymers with an Improved Combination of High       Permeability and High Selectivity for Use in Making         Membranes for Gas and Vapor Separations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Dwayne Friesen, Bend Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

This study is concerned with synthesizing, for gas separations, new polymeric
membranes which will have both high permeability and selectivity. The PI focuses
on substituted polyacetylene membranes, and notes that of this class PTMSP
(poly(trimethylhysilylpropyne): Ä±(C(CH3) = C(Si(CH3)3)n!) has the highest
permeability to most gases of any known polymer. However, its selectivity is
very poor; for example its O2/N2 selectivity is only 1.8. The high permeability
is due to the stiff backbone, and to the fact that the attached trimethysilyl
group is very bulky. Both factors limit efficient packing of the polymer chains,
resulting in a large free volume which accounts for the permeability. To improve
the selectivity, the PI intends to reduce the free volume size to increase the
selectivity at the expense of some permeability. To decrease the free volume,
this study will follow two strategies; (a) The first is to develop thermal
annealing procedures which result in membranes in which the chains are in a more
relaxed state that promotes better packing and a lower free volume. (b) The
second strategy is to copolymerize high permeability low selectivity polymers
with aryl substituted polyacetylenes that have high selectivity. The idea is
that the aryl groups should promote polymer chain cohesion, and that thermally
annealed copolymers can be developed with the desired balance of values of
permeability and selectivity.