* 9260818
* An Innovative Design Concept for Noise and Vibration        Control
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* B. Walter Rosen, Materials Sciences Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Material and structural damping is required in many applications wherein
suppression of unwanted dynamic displacements can be critical. While active
control can provide such suppression, the complexity and cost penalties
associated with active systems reduce their attractiveness. Passive material and
structural damping can provide significant benefits. The research is aimed at
identifying the potentials of an innovative mechanism for inducing passive
damping. A classical method for inducing damping in a structural element is the
use of patches of constrained visco-elastic material (VEM). The VEM dissipates
energy as it is dynamically stressed. In the conventional approach, both the VEM
and the structure added to induce stresses therein are parasitic additions. The
innovation addressed is in the method for inducing stress within the constrained
VEM while retaining high structural efficiency. By tailoring the elastic
properties of composite structural materials, stress can be induced within the
VEM to enhance system damping while maintaining required stiffness properties.
The innovation also allows for multiple VEM layers within a structural element
allowing for damping over extended frequency and temperature ranges. The initial
phase of the research will address materials for use in truss type structures,
but the innovation can be applied to a range of structural elements creating
opportunities for competitive advances in noise and vibration control; e.g., for
machinery, transportation vehicles, civil structures, etc.