* 9260904
* Bienzyme Electrodes for Interference-Free Detection of      Specific Biomolecules
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1993,09/30/1993
* Leonid Boguslavsky, Moltech Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,923.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of biosensors. The
objective of this research is to evaluate the feasibility of an improved
biosensor electrode which uses a two enzyme relay that is coupled to a sensing
electrode via a modified polymer-mediator complex. The overall goal of a
multiphase SBIR effort is to develop improved amperometric biosensors based on
electrical communication between horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and several new
polymeric electrode relay systems. The design strategy is to use an electrode
modified with HRP to detect the hydrogen peroxide formed by the selective
reaction of a substrate with an oxidoreductase enzyme. Electrical communication
between the HRP and cathode is effected by several new polymer systems which
improve stability and optimize the response. Because the final reaction is
cathodic, this type of sensor has the advantage of being able to operate at
applied potentials where the detection of common electroactive interferents does
not occur. %%% The research plan for this SBIR Phase I project is designed to
account for traditional problems encountered in the assay of blood-based
analytes and should determine the feasibility of moving forward into a Phase II
effort. If successful, this technology has significant commercial potential.