* 9260382
* An Ultra-High Speed Magic Angle Sample Spinner for          Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Herbert Sixsmith, CREARE INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,953.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of magnetic
resonance spectroscopy. The objective of this research is to determine the
feasibility of constructing a novel, high speed magic angle spinning system for
use in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The approach chosen will
use both technology which is based upon gas bearing systems and technologies
previously developed by Creare personnel for incorporation into a variety of
devices, some of which have been commercialized. Current sample spinners for NMR
spectroscopy are generally limited in rotation speed to approximately 10 kHz. A
unique gas bearing system based on principles successfully employed in high
speed, miniature cryogenic turbomachines will be used to achieve a 40 kHz
rotation speed. The bearing will incorporate damping cavities and feed orifices
to provide capacity and stability. The bearing will also be configured to
accommodate unbalance from nonuniform packing of sample material. In Phase I, a
shaft will be spun to 40 kHz to demonstrate the feasibility of the approach. If
successful, a complete ultra high speed sample spinner assembly could then be
demonstrated in Phase II. %%% This research will test the feasibility of an NMR
sample spinner that is capable of stable operation at rotation speeds of up to
40 kHz. This device would significantly improve the resolution capability of
solid state NMR by reducing spectrum broadening effects caused by proton-proton
dipolar couplings.