* 9260808
* A 1 GHz Sample Rate, 100-Channel, 2-Bit, Single-Chip CMOS   Digital Correlator Spectrometer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Constantin Timoc, Spaceborne Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,756.00

The proposed correlator chip is intended for the two main application areas in
radio astronomy: cross-correlation spectroscopy in aperture synthesis arrays and
autocorrelation spectroscopy at cm and mm wavelengths. The objectives of Phase I
are to design, simulate, and layout a CMOS digital correlator chip with the
following characteristics: a) 1 GHz sample rate, b) 10 channels, c) 2-bit (four-
level) quantization, and d) 32-bit counter/accumulator. It has already been
demonstrated experimentally that the 1 GHz sampling rate can be achieved with a
combination of systolic architecture, novel pipeline differential logic
circuits, and a 1.0 um CMOS fabrication process. The objectives of Phase II are
to increase the number of channels per chip to 100 while maintaining the 1 GHz
clock frequency and the 4-level quantization scheme. Provision will also be made
for a number of features such as 1-bit correlation for solar burst observation,
blanking of correlation coefficients for pulsar observations, and phase switch
mode. The commercial market for correlator chips is estimated at two to five
million dollars in 1992 and it will grow 15% to 20% annually. Presently, most
digital correlator chips are designed by each radio astronomy laboratory for
their own internal use. The performance- to-cost ratio of the proposed
correlator chip will be up to 10 times higher than that of existing correlators.