* 9260384
* Design and Synthesis of Linear Electrooptic Effect          Smectic A* Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Michael Wand, Displaytech Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of materials chemistry and in the subfield of liquid crystals. The thrust
of this experimental activity is the synthesis of new ferroelectric (chiral)
smectic C* liquid crystals (FLCs) which will markedly enhance the performance of
electrooptic and display devices based on the surface stabilized ferroelectric
liquid crystal (SSFLC) light valve. FLCs have been shown to exhibit high speed,
multistate electro-optic and display device applications, particularly when
incorporated into the SSFLC light valve. The two state (digital) nature of the
SSFLC device possesses certain advantages in applications such as passive
multiplexed flat panel displays but does not allow for a natural gray-scale
effect due to the lack of intermediate optical states. Another effect observed
in chiral smectic liquid crystals, the electroclinic effect, is based on the
smectic A* phase and affords a linear analog response to applied voltage.
Currently available materials are limited by their sensitivity to temperature
variation, and thus, need for temperature control. This project pursues a method
to achieve temperature insensitivity, thereby greatly expanding the breadth of
usefulness of this effect. The new materials will be both pure chiral smectic A
components and mixtures of materials containing the new components with broad
temperature ranges and fast electro-optic response times. Temperature
insensitive electroclinic devices will fill the gap requiring a relatively
temperature insensitive, fast (10 microseconds) linear electrooptical effect.
%%% In this SBIR Phase I project, Displaytech should demonstrate the feasibility
of the proposed approach to improving the performance of electro-optic and
display devices based on SSFLC technology that was developed earlier by this
small business. The results of this research should provide clear guidance
regarding Displaytech's proceeding with a Phase II activity.