* 9260651
* Switched Capacitor Wavelet Filter for VLSI Implementation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Yan Zhang, InterDigital Telecom Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,817.00

Because of its dilation property, the wavelet transform is the preferred
approach for processing broadband signals in both civil and military
environments. Unfortunately, its computation requires a large number of
numerical operations. In many situations, this may be prohibitively expensive is
not unrealistic. Analog parallel processing techniques including optical methods
are either unsuitable or not accurate enough for practical applications, and
hence, for possible commercialization. Switched-capacitor techniques, which
substitute appropriate combinations of high- speed switches and capacitors for
resistors, are not used in VLSI implementations of active filter designs. The
most important property of a switched-capacitor circuit is that its clock
frequency controls the filter parameters. The purpose of this proposal is to
implement the wavelet transform using switched-capacitor circuits. What makes
this possibility is the observation that the dilation effect in a wavelet filter
can be realized by the adjusting of the clock frequency. By using current VLSI
techniques based on the proposed scheme, large numbers of wavelet filter
channels can be fabricated on a single chip. These IC chips can be used as
standard components in a signal processing unit having increased resolution.
They will also offer reliable real-time processing and full compatibility with
other state-of-the-art electronic equipment. Near future commercialization of
these devices is anticipated.