* 9261712
* A Novel 3-D Digital Holographic Instrument for Imaging Ice  Crystals in Cirrus
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* R. Paul Lawson, STRATTON PARK ENGINEERING CO INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,939.00

Cirrus clouds continuously cover nearly 40% of the earth's surface and are now
known to have a significant influence on the global radiation budget. For
example, tropical storms generate cirrus anvils that are blown hundreds of
kilometers downwind and limit warming of the sea surface. This in turn may
influence the subsequent generation of tropical storms and may even play a role
in controlling the Sourthern Oscillation (i.e., the El Nino event). Limited
aircraft observations using crystal collectors and replicators suggest that
cirrus are composed mostly of ice crystals with complex shapes that range in
size from about 10 um to 1 mm. However, the collectors and replicators used in
these studies are limited to making coarse spatial observations and do not
provide good measurements of crystal concentration. The current aircraft optical
imaging probes are not capable of making good measurements of crystal
concentrations for sizes &lt; about 150 um. This is an inherent limitation of
conventional optical systems because the depth of field (DOF), and consequently
the sample volume, decreases with the square of the crystal radius. Here, the PI
proposes a new optical instrument using a novel digital holographic imaging
system (DHIS) which increases DOF compared to conventional imaging systems by
more than a factor of 100. In Phase I, the PI performs numerical simulations and
laboratory tests of a DHIS which will provide three-dimensional information on
ice crystals in cirrus. The airborne instrument, to be built and tested in Phase
II, could provide digitized 3-D holograms at rates up to 100 Hz of ice crystals
with diameters from 5 um to 2.5 mm.