* 9261301
* Surface Acoustic Waves on Ferroelectric Superlattices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Clinton Hartmann, Hartmann Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Superlattice based acoustic wave devices are expected to form the basis of a
major breakthrough in the field of RF filters, RF signal processing, and RF
frequency sources. This technology should move the maximum operating frequency
for Surface Acoustic Wave devices well into the microwave range by overcoming
the barrier posed by the fabrication difficulties and the electrical resistance
losses associated with small electrode geometries in the 0.1 micron range. A key
technical feature of acoustic waves in a properly designed superlattice
structure is that they can have a phase velocity up to 10X higher than the
normal acoustic waves. This will remove the current high frequency limitation on
Surface Acoustic Wave devices because of the corresponding increase in the sizes
of electrode geometries required. The proposed effort is based on an innovative
method for producing the required superlattice structure. The risk associated
with the effort is that it may take more effort than can be funded under a
single SBIR program to perform a successful demonstration of this new
technology. However, the technical risk is judged to be small because the
proposed approach is based on well established physical principles. This program
should have a high payoff in that the proposed effort would mark the beginning
of a whole new field of endeaver in acoustics and is expected to yield rich
dividents in numerous areas.