* 9261401
* Organic Vapor Separation with Super-Glassy Polymer Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Ingo Pinnau, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

This study will examine the permeability and selectivity for gas transport of
isotropic polymeric membranes made of poly(trimethyl silylpropyne) (PTMSP;
ıC(CH3)=C(SiCH3)3!n). Previous research on PTMSP membranes have shown that
because of their large free volume, the solubility and diffusivity of gas
molecules through the membrane is very large, and this results in a very high
gas permeability. The high permeability is accompanied by relatively low
selectivity (i.e. the ration of the flux of one species to that of the other).
This lack of selectivity can be attributed again to the large free volume size
which facilitates the easy passage of molecules of all sizes. Consequently, to
date PTMSP membranes have not been of practical value in gas separations. The
research points out, however, that the selectivity has been measured by passing
pure gases through the membrane and taking the flux ratio under identical
driving conditions. Recent experiments have shown that the membrane exhibits
selectivity in co-permeation: In particular experiments at MTR demonstrate a
27:1 selectivity on n-butane in an n- butane/methane mixture at 24oC. The result
of this research will be built by studying pure and mixed gas transport in PTMSP
with a series of permanent gases such as methane or air, and closely related
organic solvent vapors (CCl4, CF4, a series of freons and with hydrocarbon
vapors such as butane and pentane if successful, the research will lead to
membranes which can separate butane from methane (important in the natural gas
industry), and organic vapors from air (an important separation in many
environmental concerns).