* 9261570
* Ab Initio Quantum Chemistry on Parallel and Distributed     Computers with Gaussian 92
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Stephen Weston, Scientific Computing Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,979.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the area of
theoretical and computational chemistry. This research will explore the issues
involved in parallelizing Gaussian 92, the most widely used electronic structure
software package, using the Linda programming environment for workstation
networks and multiprocessors. Since both Gaussian 92 and Linda emphasize
portability across multiple computer architectures, this project will offer
chemists electronic structure modeling with the power of parallel processing
while retaining both the range of models offered by Gaussian and the choice of
most cost-effective platform for each user. At some sites otherwise idle cycles
on existing workstation local area networks (LANs) are expected to provide a
major source of new and productive computing capacity which can be utilized as a
result of this effort. In order to achieve this, the key kernels of the
algorithms in Gaussian for various models must be identified, and methods
developed of parallelizing these computations while retaining their high
efficiency on individual processors. The Phase I research will demonstrate the
feasibility of using Linda on workstation networks for this purpose on one
critical type of model, Hartree-Fock (including gradients and second
derivatives), identify the key kernels of the other models, and develop a
strategy for parallelizing them as part of a Phase II effort. %%% This Phase I
project addresses the important questions of how Gaussian 92, the premier ab
initio code which is used by industrial and academic researchers alike, can be
run in a distributed network. The research plan should establish proof of
concept for a product that is expected to be commercially important.