* 9261543
* Improving Locality of Reference in Very Large Applications  on Stock Hardware
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* James Veitch, Franz Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Large, complex software applications are pushing the performance limitations of
today's engineering workstations. Such applications frequently require virtual
memory greatly in excess of available physical memory, and performance becomes
dominated by paging time. Paging performance is ultimately dependent on the
speed of disk I/O, which runs orders of magnitude slower than the maximum
performance possible with physical memory and CPU speed alone. Paging
performance is directly related to the number of different pages the application
touches (i.e., read or writes) per unit time. The inverse of this measure can be
thought of as a measure of "locality of reference." When the number of pages
touched per unit time significantly exceeds the amount of free physical memory,
performance begins to degrade, sometimes dramatically. This research aims to
provide a mechanism for increasing locality of reference in an existing Common
Lisp system by clustering objects in virtual memory with the goal of
significantly decreasing the number of pages touched per unit time.
Specifically, the work is in two areas: (1) prototyping tools for reporting
useful information on paging and locality of reference, and (2) to investigating
methods for automatically increasing locality of reference during application
execution.