* 9261422
* Surface Detectors for Ultratrace Levels of Toxic Hydride    Gases
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Ian Sorensen, ChemAlert Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,935.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of Analytical and Surface Chemistry and in the subfield of chemical
sensors. The objective of this research is to determine the feasibility of
detecting ultratrace levels of the highly toxic hydride gases arsine and
phosphine by taking advantage of the reversible interaction of these gases with
noble metal surfaces. Arsine and phosphine are extremely toxic with threshold
values for human exposure as low as 50 parts per billion. The lower detection
limits for existing technologies are only about 10-30 parts per billion, leaving
too small a margin for error. In contrast, the surface detectors to be developed
in this project are simple, small, relatively inexpensive, fast, and highly
sensitive. Preliminary experiments have demonstrated that detection limits may
be reduced up to three orders of magnitude over those attainable with currently
available technology. This Phase I research will focus on the dependence of
sensor response on detector type, film thickness, nature of substrate,
temperature, and interferences, so that one method can be selected for more
complete characterization and prototype development during Phase II. %%% This
research should demonstrate the feasibility of novel technology that could help
establish the U.S. as a leader in ultratrace detection. This technology could be
used worldwide by the semiconductor industry and their chemical suppliers for
improved safety and process control as well as for monitoring highly toxic
arsine in natural gas.