* 9261507
* Highly Parallel and Sensitive Holographic Planar            Waveguides for Fluoroimmunoassay
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Zonh-Zen Ho, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,934.00

Immunoassay has proven to be the most selective method for detection and
identification of biological agents. Optical fluoroimmunoassay (FIA), with
single photon counting capability, is supposed to be the most sensitive
technique. Unfortunately, due to the high autofluorescent background from bulk
samples, the sensitivity of FIA is often reduced. In response to the need for
this technology, Physical Optics Corporation (POC)C) proposes to develop a
compact, highly sensitive (0.01 picomole/ml) near-real time (less than 1 minute)
biological instrument based on optical evanescent wave detection. The scope and
versatility of this proposed method can be enhanced by combining the principles
of fluoroimmunoassay and POC's holographic planar waveguide technology.
Application of POC's proprietary transparent Moth Eye structure will increase
the surface area of the waveguide, which is the sensing area of the device. The
increase in surface area will enhance device sensitivity by two orders of
magnitude over fiber optic sensors. The advantages of the proposed system
include the conditions that it involves no wash, no analyte separation, no
autofluorescence, and it can be simultaneously used to detect multiple analytes.
The resulting device will be robust, easy to use, low cost, and will have low
maintenance and calibration requirements.