* 9261185
* Supersonic Virtual Impactor for Separating Small            Particles from Gases
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1993,09/30/1993
* William Felder, AeroChem Research Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

This study develops a new method for the separation of small (10>m. in diameter
and smaller) particles from a gas stream. In this method, the gas stream is
arranged to flow as a jet, and forced to impinge upon a conically shaped
impactor surface. The tip of the cone surface, and only a small fraction (termed
the minority flow) actually moves through the aperture. The average size of the
particles in the minority flow is much larger than that in the mainstream which
passes over the particles because the larger particles, with greater momentum,
cannot negotiate the turn and follow the small particles into the aperture. The
aperture is joined to two concentric tubes. The outer tube has a solid wall, and
the inner tube a porous wall for a short distance near its end joining the solid
plate. Gas is supplied at high pressure to the annular space between the tubes,
and passes through the porous part of the tube into the space behind the
aperture creating a counterflow. Finally suction is applied in the inner tube,
downstream from the aperture. The combination of suction and flow through the
porous tube creates a plane of zero flow which separates gas flowing out of the
bottom of the inner tube and gas flowing out of the aperture. Particles that
have traveled through the aperture must progress against the counterflow. The
ones large enough that their momentum can allow them to pass through the
counterflow and eventually rejoin the majority flow over the cone. By adjusting
the counterflow pressure the plane of zero flow can be moved, and this provides
some control of the particle size distribution collected at the downstream end.
The study will improve on this design by causing the jet gas stream impacting on
the cone to move at supersonic speeds. Supersonic speeds allow large particle
velocities, and permits smaller particles to pass through the plane of zero flow
and be collected.