* 9261385
* Silicon Based Blue Light Emitting Diode
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1993,01/31/1994
* Fereydoon Namavar, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 01/31/1994
* USD 49,967.00

Spire recently fabricated the first yellow and orange- emitting heterojunction
light emitting diode (LED) based on silicon. These devices were fabricated by
depositing a transparent n-type semiconductor (indium- tinoxide) on the porous
surface of electrochemically etched p-type Si wafers. The key to the visible
emission is believed to be the quantum confinement phenomenon in the nanometer-
sized Si crystallites in the porous Si layers. As crystallites get smaller, the
emission spectrum shifts to shorter wavelengths (blue shift). However, we have
noted that Si crystallites with light emission below yellow wavelengths are
physically too fragile and susceptible to environmental effects and thus are not
suitable for device fabrication. We propose a unique solution to the above
problem; since crystalline carbon (diamond) has a large band gap of 5.47 eV,
alloys of only a few percent C in Si will readily increase the base band gap of
the new material into the range where quantum structures of stable
dimensionality can be prepared. We shall use non- equilibrium deposition
conditions to assure epitaxial growth of Si 1-x Cx alloys without the formation
of SiC phase. In Phase I, we will use the chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
process to grow epitaxial Si 1-x Cx layers on Si substrates at low temperatures.
These layers will then be electrochemically etched to produce porous layers
capable of light emission in the blue wavelength range. The material and
structural quality of the epitaxial and porous layers will be evaluated using
various characterization techniques. The blue photoluminescence in porous Si 1-x
Cx layers will be demonstrated. We will fabricate high efficiency Si- based blue
LEDs in Phase II.