* 9261413
* Viral Amplification of Recombinant Messenger RNA in         Transgenic Plants
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Thomas Turpen, Biosource Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Plants are an inexpensive source of complex molecules. Several industries are
based on chemical feedstocks of plant origin, ranging from flavors to
pharmaceuticals. The biosynthetic pathways of plants may be more effectively
manipulated through viral gene amplification than by conventional genetic
engineering. We propose to amplify specific target RNAs in transgenic plants
based on viral RNA replication. The 5' and 3' viral replication origins of
tobacco mosaic virus will be combined with an internal target sequence to be
amplified. Recombinant messenger RNA will be synthesized from a gene inserted
into the tobacco chromosome under transcriptional control of a nominally
constitutive promoter. In the presence of helper feasibility, we will quantify
amplified gene expression using the messenger RNA for the enzyme chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) as a target sequence. %%% Because the levels of
amplification and timing of expression will be controlled by the helper virus,
this technique will significantly extend the types of genetic manipulations
possible in transgenic crops. Efficient production of high value biochemicals in
plants will create new opportunities for domestic growers and strengthen the
ability of the agricultural sector of our economy to compete internationally.