* 9261645
* Cell Growth Factor from Snake Venom
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Binie Lipps, Ophidia Products Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1993
* USD 48,450.00

Snake venom is a store-house of numerous bioreactive proteins. These proteins
are enzymes, toxins and may be growth factors. Venoms from several species of
snakes in concentrations from 100 to 6.25 ug/ml were tested on primary culture
of mouse kidney and spleen cells and established PC-12 cell cultures. Venoms
from all tested species of snakes were found to be cytolytic, except for
Crotalus atrox and Oxyuranus scutellatus, which showed growth proliferative
effects on these cell cultures. The venom of C. atrox was studied further. The
growth of primary cultures in medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) was
equivalent to the growth obtained in serum free medium, containing 50 to 25
ug/ml crude venom. The growth of PC-12 cells was accelerated tremendously in
serum free medium supplemented with venom. Thus, it is apparent that snake venom
contains a cell growth factor. Snake venom derived growth factor (SVGF) will be
isolated in purity from the venom of C. atrox by HPLC or isoelectric
electrophoresis. Each fraction will be tested for growth on PC-12 cells. The
fraction showing a cell growth effect will be tested on variety of cell lines
and with different media. Proposed research will lead to a novel cell growth
factor, which will replace the use of fetal bovine serum (FBS) in cell cultures.
Use of SVGF may be extended to grow epithelial cells from burn victim for
creating autograph.