* 9261416
* A Graphical Experiment Specification Interface: A Reasoning Support System and Experiment Generator for Behavioral      Research
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Kimberly Rodgers, PSYCHOLOGY SOFTWARE TOOLS INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,914.00

The project will provide the research foundation for the creation of a
graphical-reasoning-congruent interface and task-table-based experiment-
generator software system that enhances the reasoning processes of behavioral
researchers in the creation, running, and analyses of behavioral research. The
major projects will determine the operators and functions utilized in
computerized experiments published in the major cognitive and psychological
journals in 1992; implement a research prototype Graphical Experiment
Specification Interface (GESI); evaluate the reasoning of behavioral science
researchers working with and without the GESI system; and create and assess the
precision of hardware and software methods to evaluate critical screen timing
and display luminance. Later phases of this project could improve behavioral
research methodology in as many as a thousand university and commercial
laboratories within three years and allow the US to take a world leadership
position in distributing behavioral research software for experiment generation.
The research will identify reasoning support tools to advance scientific problem
solving that may be transferred to other disciplines and commercial graphical
user interfaces. It will enhance graphical user interface technology to provide
problem solving and reasoning aids.