* 9261664
* Polymer-Based Optical Data Bus for High Speed Data          Acquisition Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,09/30/1993
* Robert Shih, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 49,993.00

Physical Optics Corporation (POC) proposes to develop a polymer- based optical
data bus for high-speed interconnections for use in data processing and physical
measurement systems. The proposed concept will provide an optical data bus (ODB)
compatible with widely used module interconnection standar-li (e.g. CAMAC,
FASTBUS, VMEbus) while improving communication speed and parallelity. In this
program, we propose the use of a high- speed polymer-based ODB for chip-to-chip,
intramodule and module- to-module interconnection. The two-dimensional
tunability of the refractive index of the polymer microstructure provides the
capability to make a microstructured channel waveguide on any substrate of
interest. This characteristic provides an easy means of constructing optical
backplanes and printed ODB boards for system-wide communication. Furthermore,
the host material can be used to introduce nonlinear optical moiety in a
guest/host polymer system for the highly parallel processing needed for FASTBUS
interconnections. The proposed polymer ODB should be immune to EMI and nuclear
radiation. As a result, radiation hardness should be expected. In Phases I, POC
will demonstrate a board-to-board ODB system through a backplane. It will have
speed and communication distances beyond any conventional electronic system-wide
interconnections.