* 9261557
* Large Area Detector for X-Ray Diffraction Studies
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1993,11/30/1993
* Michael Squillante, Radiation Monitoring Devices Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 11/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

New techniques for digital X-ray imaging have been under investigation for
decades. Some of the most promising techniques incorporate solid-state X-ray
detectors, which are attractive because of their compactness. High-Z
semiconductor X-ray detectors have further advantages due to their high stopping
power. One of the drawbacks of high-Z semiconductor detectors was the cost of
producing large-area arrays. The usual approach was to assemble an array of
isolated, individually-fabricated detector elements. A competing technology is
to enhance large area arrays of amorphous silicon (a-Si) photodiodes by coating
them with a film of high-Z scintillating material (e.g. CsI) by evaporation.
While this technique is more effective in stopping X-rays than using "naked"
silicon photodiodes, the poor conversion efficiency of scintillators limits the
signal amplitude. We propose producing sublimed films of a new, high-Z
semiconductor (thallium bromide), and to characterize their utility as pixilated
detectors for X-ray image detection. We have made measurements of sublimed TlBr
films produced in our laboratories and have noted that these detectors maintain
surprisingly good charge carrier transport properties in spite of their poor
crystallinity. We propose that these films will be read out by depositing them
on an amorphous silicon thin-film transistor array. These detectors would yield
a larger signal than the scintillator-enhanced detectors, due to their high
conversion efficiency while maintaining high X-ray stopping power.