* 9261296
* Fundamental Studies of Interacting Droplet Combustion of    Low Grade Fuels Using Novel Laser Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1993,09/30/1993
* William Bachalo, Aerometrics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 48,284.00

This program deals with the design, development, and application of novel laser
diagnostic techniques for the study of spray/drop vaporization and combustion.
The overall objective is accurate determination of such parameters as droplet
temperature and temperature gradient profiles of the gas media surrounding one
or more interacting burning droplets to provide fundamental knowledge regarding
their combustion. The specific objectives of the Phase I program are: a) Improve
and further develop an existing test facility for burning fuel droplet streams;
b) Develop the point-diffraction interferometric technique in conjunction with
digital image processing techniques to define the gas temperature field around a
stream of burning drops; c) Apply rainbow thermometry to measure instantaneous
liquid droplet temperatures; d) Investigate the feasibility of automatically
integrating all this information to allow full reconstruction of the temperature
field surrounding the droplets; and, e) Perform a preliminary assessment of
measurement errors associated with the technique. The ultimate potential product
is an instrument which would enable acquisition of fundamental information
regarding the structure of the thermal fields surrounding interacting burning
fuel droplets (notably, low-grade fuels) which is of paramount importance in
development of future combustion systems which could utilize these fuels.
Potential applications include development/use of a novel fuel injector system
for existing internal combustion engines which would enable them to use low
grade fuels at high efficiency and with minimal production of pollutants. These
applications could significantly reduce U.S. dependency on foreign oil imports,
and would help ensure world competitiveness and environmental responsibility in
the use of low grade fuels.