* 9261537
* One-Piece Kumakhov Optics to Achieve Increased Control      of X-Ray and Neutron Beams
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1993,09/30/1993
* Qi-Fan Xiao, X-RAY OPTICAL SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Capillary-based optics (Kumakhov optics) control X-ray and low-energy neutron
beams by means of multiple reflections at less than the critical angle. Optics
have demonstrated the capability to form convergent or quasi-parallel beams.
Such controlled beams have applications in many X-ray and neutron material
analysis techniques. Although the current generation of Kumakhov optics can
provide substantial benefit, assembly constraints limit the achievable
transmission efficiency, energy range, alignment, and minimum focal spot size of
the resulting beam. For many material analysis techniques these beam parameters
affect the spatial resolution, detection limits, and measurement time. A new
generation of Kumakhov optics will be developed to improve X-ray and neutron
beam control. These optics will be manufactured as a single piece. The channels
which deflect the photons or neutrons will have variable diameters over the
length of the optic. The Phase I effort will include Monte Carlo simulations of
X-ray transmission efficiency and exit divergence with such structures, and
experimental measurements of the X-ray transmission properties of a few early
one-piece prototypes. Phase II would include development and testing of fully
functional one-piece optics. Such optics could potentially produce X-ray or
neutron focal spot sizes <10 >m and channel x-rays with energies > 100 keV.