* 8800074
* Nitrogen Fixation, Alkaloid Metabolism, and Defoliation:    Interactions in the Bush Lupine, Lupinus Arboreus (Ecology)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1990
* Barbara Bentley, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/28/1990
* USD 85,706.00

Nitrogen fixation can be a very important source of new nitrogen in both
agricultural and natural ecosystems. This study proposes an investigation of the
impact of nitrogen fixation in a natural ecosystem---the lupine-dominated
grassland of coastal California. The study will focus on two aspects of
fixation: first, what is the pattern of variation in fixation rates among the
plants? and second, how does defoliation impact on both nitrogen fixation rates
and levels of alkaloids in the plants? Lupines synthesize alkaloids, nitrogen-
containing toxins effective against both vertebrate and invertebrate
herbiovores. Because alkaloids contain nitrogen, nitrogen fixation rates can
affect alkaloid synthesis as well. On the other hand, damage to foliage can
increase alkaloid concentrations, often independent on the source of nitrogen.
Dr. Bentley will participate in a UC (Davis) ecology field course given at
Bodega Marine Laboratory (BML) during the winter/ spring break, a Davis-based,
fall-quarter graduate course in ecology (given by the Graduate Program in
Ecology there) and provide counseling and advice to undergraduate students in
the course in Coastal and Field Ecology. In addition she will participate in a
weekly seminar program and graduate student seminar series. This project
furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women
to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science
supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and
engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers
employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.