* 8800579
* Dissertation Research: Thermal and Hydric Effects on        Incubation in Sceloporus merriami Eggs
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Warren Porter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 01/31/1991
* USD 8,533.00

Current attempts to study life history evolution have begun to focus on
multiple causality: demography, behavior, physiology, biophysics, and ecology
all interact to shape life history phenotypes. Emphasis has been placed on
evaluating energetic, behavioral, and environmental factors, within a
demographic context, in an attempt to generate testable predictions from life
history theories. Accordingly, the effects of different soil moisture potentials
and temperatures on hatchability, hatchling size (mass and length), and
development time in the iguanid lizard, Sceloporus merriami will be evaluated.
This will be integrated with the particular pattern of female territoriality and
home range use seen in these animals. Females aggressively defend their
territories from males and other females, while males direct their defense
against other males. Yet for either sex, territories appear to be inherited en
bloc. Furthermore, specific territories are "hot spots", where the inhabitants
invariably live far longer than the average cohort generation time.
Additionally, both large males and large females have more eggs and larger males
tend to control more females. Factors affecting size should, then, be important.
This integrated approach allows behavior (territoriality), physiology and
biophysics (egg requirements), and demography, to be evaluated in an integrated
manner with regard to lifetime reproductive success. Any attempt to evaluate
minimum areas required to maintain breeding populations of reptiles needs to
employ the above multiple causality approach. Such considerations are becoming
pivotal to conservation attempts to maintain and restock rare or valuable
species. In a very extreme conservation measure, data generated by the above
approach can be used to captive-breed decimated populations to use as seed stock
in the wild.