* 8800108
* The Geochemical Consequences of Fluid Immiscibility on      Ore Deposition (Earth Science)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Teresa Bowers, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1989
* USD 87,661.00

Fluid inclusion evidence exists in a number of economic ore deposits suggesting
a link between the onset of fluid immiscibility and initiation of ore
deposition. The effects of fluid immiscibility on mineral equilibria and ore
deposition can be assessed by incorporation of a modified Redlich-Kwong activity
model for H2O and CO2 from Bowers and Helgeson (1983) into the EQ3/6 chemical
equilibria and mass transfer computer code (Wolery, 1978, 1979, 1983). This
model will account for loss of components from the system and the effects of
two-phase separation on pH and chemical speciation of the fluid, as well as
mineral stabilities and deposition. In addition, stable isotope partitioning
between liquid and vapor phases and simultaneously forming mineral phases will
be considered. Preliminary calculations for a fluid intersecting the H2O - CO2
miscibility gap by a drop in pressure at 250oC are presented. The model predicts
the expected rise in pH upon CO2 loss from the system as well as deposition of
carbonate minerals. One of the paths results in deposition of substantial
amounts of metal sulfides at the onset of fluid immiscibility. Dr. Bowers will
teach a course entitled Thermodynamics of Geologic Processes, present a series
of graduate lectures on various aspects of her work, and bring to Harvard
complete computer capabilities for geochemical modeling appropriate to the
course and for further student use on their own research projects. This project
furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women
to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science
supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and
engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers
employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.