* 8800885
* Dynamics of Mid-Ocean Ridge Hydrothermal Systems: A         Time-Series Pilot Study of Earthquake Activity, Venting, andPlume Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1990
* John Delaney, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/1990
* USD 296,411.00

This is a project to support a six week time-series measurement program of sea
floor seismicity, and monitoring of a number of high and low temperature vents.
The instruments will be deployed on the Endeavor Segment of the Juan de Fuca
Ridge; ALVIN will be used for emplacement and recovery. The deployment will
consist of an array of ocean bottom seismometers, operated by J. McClain of UC,
Davis under a subcontract to the University of Washington, conventional
thermocouple arrays, and instrumented water column moorings involving standard
rotary current meters. In addition "innovative" instruments such as a time-lapse
video camera, and an electromagnetic flow meter will be emplaced. The hope is to
obtain a record of temporal variations in thermal and fluid output from the
vents and that can be correlated with observed seismicity. This work is seen as
an excellent opportunity to deploy and test some new types of instruments for
monitoring hydrothermal vents. The project is part of the RIDGE Initiative, a
component of Global Geosciences. If successful, this work would be an important
step toward characterizing temporal variability in hydrothermal output from an
ocean ridge vent field and could lead to significant advances in long term
monitoring of ridge crest hydrothermal activity.