* 8800361
* Serial and Parallel Algorithms for Large-Scale Nonlinear    Network Flow Problems (Engineering)
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Anna Nagurney, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1989
* USD 138,828.00

Many problems in engineering can be modeled and studied as nonlinear network
flow problems. Examples include such large- scale systems as congested
transportation networks, telecommuni- cation and computer systems, and resource
distribution networks. Since such applications require timely solution, network
algorithms must be designed for efficient computation and, hence, take advantage
of any special problem structure and high- performance computer architectures.
In this project, several serial and parallel equilibration algorithms will be
developed for pure and generalized nonlinear network flow problems, with and
without capacities. The node-link formulation of the problems, rather than the
path, will be used for both fixed and elastic demand problems to substantially
reduce the computer storage requirements of such algorithms. First,
equilibration algorithms will be derived for quadratic networks, and then for
more highly nonlinear networks, and convergence conditions established. Network
topologies will then be defined to construct specialized algorithms. All
algorithms will be computationally tested on different architectures using real-
world data arising from a variety of applications, to demonstrate empirically
their performance. Dr. Nagurney will develop and teach a course for upper-level
undergraduates and graduate students on network equilibrium taught from the
standpoint of competitive equilibrium problems and variational inequalities, in
the spring 1989. She will conduct a series of lectures to faculty and students
about her research on equilibrium algorithms for nonlinear network flow
problems. In addition, Dr. Nagurney will organize a distinguished lecture series
in which senior female scholars will be invited to M.I.T. to relate their
experiences as female researchers. This project furthers VPW program objectives
which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to
encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.