* 8800716
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  High Energy Heavy Ion    Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Jere Lord, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1991
* USD 17,930.00

This award will support ongoing collaboration between U.S. and Swedish
physicists on the topic of high energy heavy ion interactions. Drs. R. Jeffrey
Wilkes, Thompson H. Burnett and Jeri J. Lord of the University of Washington
will continue their research efforts with Dr. K.N. Ingvar Otterlund and his
laboratory group at the University of Lund. Experiments will be performed at the
CERN heavy ion facility in Geneva, Switzerland, and Brookhaven National
Laboratory in the United States, and the analysis and reduction of the data will
be conducted at the respective individual universities. The heavy ions Si-28 and
S-32 will be accelerated to energies of 15-200 GeV/nucleon and then directed
onto emulsion chamber detectors, which are arrays of nuclear emulsion plates
permitting extremely precise observations of produced particle tracks. The major
purpose of the experiment will be to search for the new state of nuclear matter,
the quark-gluon plasma, which is predicted theoretically to be most likely
created in heavy ion collisions. The experiment represents a unique opportunity
to study this high density phase of matter, since the new CERN sulfur ion beam
will be nearly 50 times more energetic than any previous accelerator beams of
particles having atomic numbers greater than Z=16. This project combines the
expertise of two of the leading international research groups in the use of
emulsion techniques for the study of nuclear interactions. The proposed
investigation is important and timely in making use of newly available energetic
beams of heavy ions.