* 8800394
* First International Meeting on the Cell and Molecular Neurobiology of Aplysia, September 28 - October 2, 1988, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1989
* USD 13,000.00

Because of the extraordinarily large size of its nervous system cells (some of
which are almost a millimeter in diameter|) and the ability to recognize these
cells as unique individuals, the sea hare (a mollusc, Aplysia) has proven
extremely useful for studying the properties of individual cells, the patterns
of interconnections, modulation of synaptic strength, behavior, learning and
development. The most fundamental advances in our understanding of the human
nervous system largely began with studies of animals with very simple nervous
systems, such as Aplysia. The purpose of this meeting is to bring together, for
the first time, the Aplysia neurobiology community throughout the world and to
initiate meetings that will subsequently be held in alternate years. The first
meeting will provide a format for discussing new methods and findings that have
emerged in the cell and molecular biology of Aplysia. These findings will be
considered in seven different sessions, each concerned with a different level of
analysis: 1. Ion channels and channel modulation 2. Peptides, small molecule
transmitters, and synaptic transmission 3. Cell imaging 4. Circadian rhythm 5.
Neuronal circuitry and behavior 6. Learning 7. Development This symposium
represents an unique opportunity to determine the direction of invertebrate
research well in to the next decade.