* 8800298
* Surveying a Slice of the Universe:  The Charge Coupled      Device (CCD) Transit Instrument (CTI) Survey
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/1988,09/30/1992
* Michael Cawson, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 09/30/1992
* USD 562,700.00

The Charge-Coupled Device (CCD)/Transit Instrument (CTI) surveys nightly about
15 square degrees of the sky in two optical colors to a limiting magnitude of
visual brightness greater than 21 signal to noise S/N greater than 5). Each
night the V magnitude is measured as well as one of Ultraviolet (U), Blue (B),
Red (R), or Infrared (I). The colors will be selected to optimize S/N relative
to the sky brightness. An infrared CCD will provide nightly K magnitudes for
about four square degrees of the same strip. The observing program of CTI is to
remain on the same strip of sky for several years, intensively observing the
same 45 square degrees per year for several years (12 square degrees in the IR),
both to monitor the brightness changes of the objects in the strip and to
acquire deeper images by adding data from multiple nights. Data derived from
this instrument will be used to address a variety of astronomical problems
ranging from discovery of nearby stars to measurement of variability of distant
quasars. Three scientific programs will be addressed by project astronomers.
These programs are : 1) the discovery and monitoring of quasars on the basis of
variability and color, 2) a determination of the supernovae production rate, and
3) discovery of supernovae for use as distance indicators.