* 8800595
* Structural Covariates of Crime Rates: Studies of Invariance
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Lawrence Cohen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 11/30/1990
* USD 75,000.00

Social scientists have long sought to explain both the variation of criminality
and personal victimization across individuals and, as importantly, across time
and space. Despite the fact that numerous studies of structural covariates of
crime rates for various subnational units have been published over the past
several decades, little is known about the extent to which empirical
relationships found in one study with one level of analysis and at one
particular point in time generalize to other levels of analysis at other time
points. To date, most studies focusing on crime rate variation have capitalized
on rather unique patterns of association related to particular samples. In this
research, Drs. Land and Cohen examine the social structural (economic,
demographic, social) determinants of crime rates across levels of aggregation
and time. They will use a data set created as part of a previous NSF project
which contains information on seven FBI Index crimes and numerous structural
covariates for 1960, 1970, and 1980 and at three levels of aggregation (cities,
SMSA, states). Several statistical techniques will be used to test the empirical
regularities between social indicators and crime rates. On the basis of an
assessment of the status of each covariate, additional thought and work will go
into consideration of possible aggregation effects that might account for
discrepancies across the levels. The research should result in the most
comprehensive study of crime rates in the U.S. over this period. In addition,
the questions that will be addressed are fundamental to theory construction and
methodology in criminological research. As a contribution to theory, the study
will provide tests of the constancy in relationships offered by proponents of
several different causal orientations. As a contribution to methodology, it will
demonstrate the inherent limits to regression-based explanations of crime rates
and the problem of using highly correlated measures to understand differences in
crime rates. Also, the study should add to research practice by inspecting
relationships between panel and cross-sectional models.