* 8800892
* Dissertation Research: Rhizodeposition Control on Spatial   Compartmentalization of Active Microorganisms and Nitrogen  Mineralization/Immobilization
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1988,08/31/1990
* Mary Firestone, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 08/31/1990
* USD 9,142.00

The movement of plant carbon from roots into the soil and the effects of this
carbon on nitrogen mineralization and immobilization processes in the soil will
be studied. Experiments will be performed using radioactive and stable isotope
tracers to follow the movement and transformations of 14CO2 and 5NH4 in root
chambers (rhizotrons) planted with Pinus ponderosa and Bromus mollis. The mass
and activity of microorganisms will be a central focus of the research. The
spatial distribution of microbial biomass will be determined in relation to
plant roots. The metabolic state of these microorganisms will be assessed using
vital stains and microautoradiography. Nitrogen mineralization and
immobilization will be determined using short-term 15N pool dilution
experiments. Results from these studies will be used to compare the metabolic
status of rhizosphere and bulk soil microorganisms and to determine the
importance of microbial competition for plant nutrients at the soil-root
interface for these model systems. The significance of this project is that it
should yield a valuable data base for future work on the relationship between
plant carbon from roots and the amount of N available to plants; that is, it
will lead to insight as to what controls N availability in soil systems. This is
an important issue since N is often the nutrient limiting plant growth in
ecosystems world- wide. The facilities at the University of California,
Berkeley, are excellent for this type of research. Dr. Firestone is a first-rate
scientist and teacher and this area of research is one of her specialties. Ms.
Norton shows all evidence of being a promising student with three publications
to her credit even before beginning her doctoral work.