* 8800584
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Numerical            Methods to Problems in Geometric Function Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* James Hummel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1990
* USD 40,000.00

This project seeks to develop further the methods and theory of numerical
techniques applied to the study of problems arising in geometric function
theory. While the basic numerical methods are generally available, their
application to specific problems such as seeking global trajectory structures
for quadratic differentials are far from perfected. Many fundamental questions
can be reduced to those of solving for properties of a particular conformal map
which is known to satisfy a particular differential equation. These equations,
the result of applying variational techniques to single out extremal functions,
are of apparent simple type. But the parameters they contain are defined by
awkward side conditions. This makes the equations into functional differential
equations - equations which first appeared in the theory of automorphic
functions and now occur in the study of Riemann surface moduli and in various
questions concerning ordinary differential equations of complex arguments. In
addition to the development of general methods and, eventually, programs, work
will be done on specific problem areas where new approaches should flow from the
computational development. These areas include studies of the space of bounded
nonvanishing univalent functions defined in a disc. This subject has been the
focus of intense research in recent years but now is short of fresh new
approaches to the resolution of many important questions. Work will also be done
analyzing the class of univalent functions whose range covers a fixed disc.
Finally efforts will be made to sharpen upper and lower estimates for the
universal Bloch constants. There is known to be considerable room for progress
here.