* 8800505
* Safety-Critical Software Development (Computer Science)
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Nancy Leveson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1989
* USD 123,174.00

A system or subsystem may be termed "safety-critical" if a run-time error or
failure can result in death, injury, loss of property, or environmental harm.
One approach to building such systems is to eliminate or minimize the
probability of hazardous conditions occurring that could lead to accidents. The
long-term goal of this research is to provide a methodology, including an
integrated tool set; for building such systems that ensures that the risk of
harm caused by the computer is acceptable. Previous work has involved formal
modeling and analysis procedures for identifying software hazards and safety-
critical software requirements, analyzing software requirements for completeness
and robustness, verifying and assessing safety, and designing safety into
software including run-time support environments and software fault tolerance.
This research will extend these techniques to distributed systems and apply the
requirements analysis procedures to a family of requirements specification
languages. The interactive component involves teaching a graduate course in
software reliability and safety, giving guest lectures at area universities, and
initiating productive interaction on safety-related work in the field of testing
with women faculty and researchers. This project furthers VPW program objectives
which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to
encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.