* 8800114
* Studies in the Private Provision of Public Goods
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Theodore Bergstrom, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1991
* USD 144,119.00

This project studies the following three problems in the theory of public goods
and public decision making: 1) the problem of inducing voters in a democracy to
vote intelligently when information gathering is costly; 2) the analytics of
rent-seeking by individuals and alliances; and 3) the economics of quality and
diversity in the newspaper and television industry. The three lines of research
share a common fundamental framework-- a formal model of a Nash equilibrium in
which "public goods" are supplied voluntarily by individuals. The public goods
in these three problems are respectively informed decision making by voters,
military expenditures or lobbying activities in the case of rent seeking, and
the "quality" of television programming or newspaper writing. Television signals
are a standard example of a public good. Once a television signal is produced,
any individual can watch the signal without imposing any costs on others.
Newspaper technology is similar to that of television in that the amount of
skill and effort required to produce stories of given length and quality is
independent of the number of people who read the paper. The project determines
the quality and price in the provision of newspapers and television and
oligopolistic markets with and without exclusions and with the possibility of
support by private advertising. Lobbying efforts of a special interest group are
treated as contributions to the supply of a pure public good which benefits
group members and harms members of competing groups. This project extends
previous work on the competition of individual agents for rights to a prize,
e.g., disputed land, trade restrictions, etc., to the case of alliances among
groups which are held together non-coercively and whose interests may coincide
only partially. The results should improve our understanding of political,
economic, and military alliances. The staple problem in the theory of public
choice is the "paradox of not voting." If voting is costly, then it has been
argued that since there is negligible probability that one vote affects the
outcome in a large electorate, it is irrational to vote in most elections. A
possible explanation for the fact that so many people vote is that they enjoy
"psychic benefits" from voting that are sufficiently large to overcome the cost
of visiting the polls. But even if it is cheap to vote, it may not be so cheap
to vote intelligently. This project rigorously studies information acquisition
by voters and delineates plausible circumstances in which the accuracy of an
election decreases with the size of the electorate. The project analyzes the
choice of a small subset of the electorate to make certain kinds of social
decisions, or government by jury, as a way of dealing with the problem of
uninformed voting.