* 8800504
* Regulation of Photosynthesis During Nitrogen Fixation in a  Filamentous Cyanobacterium (Biological Science)
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Teresa Thiel, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 06/30/1991
* USD 178,881.00

The reduction of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia, termed nitrogen fixation, is
inhibited by oxygen; hence, oxygen-evolving photosystem II and nitrogen fixation
cannot coexist. Some of the filamentous cyanobacteria, which have photosystem
II, can differentiate cells, called heterocysts, that are specialized for
nitrogen fixation. Many structural and biochemical changes occur during
heterocyst differentiation, including loss of photosystem II (PSII) activity.
Dr. Thiel will study the mechanism of inactivation of the components of this
photosystem during heterocyst differentiation. She will identify in a
heterocyst- forming cyanobacterium the genes for PSII components by Southern
hybridization and the protein components of PSII by Western blots, and will
study the regulation of transcription of these genes and the turnover of these
proteins during heterocyst differentiation. These studies should provide
information on the cellular mechanisms that allow an organism that has oxygen
evolving PSII to also fix nitrogen. Dr. Thiel will team teach courses in
Microbiology and in Bioenergetics, give lectures in graduate seminar courses,
and direct the research of graduate students. She will also give formal seminars
and have informal discussions on opportunities for women in science through the
Women's Resource Center at Washington University. This project furthers VPW
program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance
their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF
and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by
providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in
industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.