* 8800534
* The Linguistic Representation of Grammatical Relations:     Subjects and Anaphora in Hindu-Urdu (Linguistics)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Alice Davison, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 06/30/1990
* USD 92,485.00

Grammatical relations such as subject and object are central concepts in the
description of human languages, because they are crucial inthe encoding of form-
meaning correspondences. Such relations, particularly subject, are difficult to
define formally, since all languages permit some divergence of external features
and grammatical/semantic role, such as passive clauses. Subjects in Hindi-Urdu
are an extreme case of such divergence, as both agent and dative-experiencer
phrases may have the external coding of non-subjects, but retain syntactic and
semantic features of subjects. Sentence data from Hindi-Urdu will be used to
explore the syntax of the language, particular with reference to dative
experiencers, and to find an explanation for the mixed behavior of subject-like
phrases. This will be based on the hypothesis that the level of Logical Form is
where syntactic restrictions are stated. As the statement of form/function
correspondence is an issue on which current syntactic theories differ, the
analysis of dativesubject phrases in this language has interesting implications
for syntactic theory and language universals. Dr. Davison will teach two courses
in the Department of Modern Languages and Linguistics and collaborate in
research on grammatical relations and linguistic theory. She will also organize
a colloquium on factors adversely affecting the careers of women in linguistics.
A report of the result of this meeting will be circulated. This project furthers
VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to
advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported
by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering
by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in
industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.