* 8800627
* Labor Markets and Sex-Based Wage Discrimination
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Robert Nelson, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1990
* USD 60,917.00

Among the most significant questions concerning laws against employment
discrimination are the conditions under which employers are liable for sex-based
wage discrimination when male and female workers hold different jobs. Much of
the debate has centered on the concept of comparable worth, under which women
claim legal entitlement to increased wages based on the evaluated worth of their
jobs compared to those of men, even though the market price of predominantly
female jobs is less than that of predominantly male jobs. Thus far, the courts
and enforcement agencies largely have adopted the view that the wage differences
between predominantly male and female jobs primarily are the result of
competitive labor market conditions and, as such, that employers have relatively
little discretion in (and relatively little responsibility for) setting male and
female wage rates. There is considerable labor market research which suggests,
however, that large segments of the work force are employed in firm-specific,
internal labor markets or bureaucratic personnel systems where employers may
retain substantial discretion in establishing pay levels, and the discretionary
component of pay policies may systematically work to disadvantage jobs held
predominantly by women. Drs. Nelson and Bridges seek to advance the empirical
analysis of these issues through an intensive analysis of a set of Title VII
cases that involved claims of between-job wage discrimination against women.
Considerations of inter-job labor market decisions will provide the theoretical
contrast for explaining different wages which are paid for predominantly male
and female jobs of comparable worth. Using court records, interviews with those
involved, and statistical and archival records on the firms involved and their
external labor markets, the study will focus on the extent to which wages of
large organizations are influenced by internal organizational factors rather
than external market conditions, whether internal organizational factors have a
depressive influence on female jobs, and whether courts have adequately
considered the evidence and empirical issues. This research is important from
many theoretical perspectives. Given the relative absence of research that
directly examines the wage-setting practices of large organizations, this study
will develop a more systematic empirical understanding of organizational pay
systems. It will lay the foundation for broader analyses of organizational wage
systems and their impact on male-female earnings differences. It also will
inspect a fundamental issue relating to equal opportunity and the doctrine of
equal worth. The results of the research should have clear relevance to the
development and application of antidiscrimination law. Exploring these issues in
the context of completed cases may lead to a new perspective on the meaning of
existing case law and to a more sophisticated approach to these empirical
questions in future work.