* 8800475
* Electrochemical Amination Reactions for Amino Acid Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Anthony Sammells, Eltron Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 11/30/1990
* USD 199,740.00

The overall purpose of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) is to
develop an efficient electrochemical process for the commercial production of
amino acids. Emphasis of the Phase I program was directed towards determining
the technical feasibility of two electrochemical amination reactions to produce
dl-dopa (used in the preparation of the artificial sweetener Nutrasweet) and dl-
phenylalanine (used in the treatment of Parkinson's Disease in the elderly).
Work performed demonstrated the viability of this amino acid synthesis route to
produce dl racemic mixtures. This Phase II effort will be directed towards the
synthesis of optically active amino acids using polymer derivatized electrodes.
Two additional commercially important amino acids will be synthesized, l-alanine
and l-valine. Specific technical emphasis during Phase II will include: o
Incorporating the Ti3+/Ti4+ redox couple into polymer derivatized electrodes to
achieve high Faradaic efficiencies for aminyl radical formation. o Providing
optically active sites on the polymer derivatized electrode for inducing optical
activity in the precursor molecule subject to amination in close proximity to
the electrode/electrolyte interfacial region. o Preparing and electrochemically
testing prototype electrolytic cells using electrode components and experimental
conditions optimized during Phase II. The application of electroorganic
synthesis technology for the preparation of specialty chemicals can have
advantages over conventional chemical synthesis routes including: providing
greater selectivity than an equivalent chemical process, being environmentally
more benign, and providing the opportunity for a simplified overall industrial
process where one or more steps normally found in conventional chemical
processes can be avoided. The research will also increase understanding of
electrochemical reaction mechanisms and electrolytic cells.