* 8800471
* Asymmetric Oxidations Using Optically Active 2-Sulfonyl-    oxaziridines (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,01/31/1994
* Franklin Davis, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 01/31/1994
* USD 553,374.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting this research
which is aimed at studying the ability of novel three-membered ring compounds to
introduce oxygen atoms into a variety of organic substrates in a highly specific
fashion. These reagents are characterized by being relatively stable, easily
handled, crystalline compounds which can be used to oxidize both acid- and base-
sensitive compounds. The major objective of the ongoing research is to
understand the origins of asymmetric induction (molecular recognition), in
particular those forces that control the asymmetric oxidation of
nonfunctionalized substrates (alkenes, sulfides and selenides). The ultimate
goal of these investigations is the development of reagents and methodologies
for the reagent-controlled asymmetric oxidation of prochiral substrates in high
optical purity and with predictable stereochemistry. These goals are being met
through the use of chiral nonracemic 2-sulfonyloxaziridines. These reagents,
which have different active site structures, are uniquely qualified for studies
of the origins of molecular recognition because they i) have well defined active
sites, ii) are easily modified and iii) are stable. A second goal of this work
is the development of catalytic oxidizing systems based on the high selectivity
of 2-sulfonyloxaziridines. The prime objective here is to devise an optically
active catalytic system, which mimics the efficiencies and stereoselectivities
of enzymatic oxidations,i.e., artificial-enzyme catalysts.
2-Sulfonyloxaziridines are aprotic and neutral oxidizing reagents. This feature
makes possible studies of unusually acid-sensitive molecules and studies of the
hydroxylation of carbanions. In this regard, the chemistry of the alpha-alkoxy
and alpha-amino epoxides is being explored. The oxidation of organometallic
reagents (RM, vinyllithium compounds) as new routes to alcohols, phenols,
lactones, enolate stereoisomers and optically active alpha-hydroxy carbonyl
compounds is being pursued.