* 8800855
* Development of a Flow Cytometry/Cell Sorting Facility
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Clarice Yentsch, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 02/28/1991
* USD 222,111.00

The Flow Cytometry and Cell Sorting Facility at the Bigelow Laboratory of Ocean
Sciences will further develop the operation and methodology of flow cytometric
applications to marine biology/oceanography. This multi-user facility has been
instrumental in adapting flow cytometry, a technology developed for use in the
biomedical research community, for ocean science research. With this technique,
a stream of phytoplankton cells or other microscopic particles is passed through
a laser light beam. Different cells and particles can be enumerated and
classified according to how they fluoresce or react in response to the laser
light. Analysis of the fluoresced signal can yield important information on cell
size, cellular constituents, and metabolic condition. Work will continue to
develop appropriate flow cytometry standards and items useful for
intercalibration of phyto- plankton data. The Facility will be available for use
by guest investigators. Coordination with industry will promote further
development and modifications to basic flow cytometry instrumentation for
oceanographic research. Improvements and modifications will be directed towards
towards a) expanding dynamic range of the instruments (4-decade log representa-
tion), b) increasing the specific volume analyzed, c) incorporating volume
sensing as well as light scatter, d) automating an on-line sampler for a pump
profiling system, and e) making the system more rugged for shipboard use.