* 8800121
* Marine Oscillatoria (Trichodesmium):  Development and Use   of Algorithms for Remote Sensing
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Edward Carpenter, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1990
* USD 90,000.00

The cyanobacterium Oscillatoria (Trichodesmium) is the most abundant and active
N2 fixing species in the plankton of tropical and subtropical seas. The
frequency of blooms, distribution of the species and the estimates of rate of N2
fixation and primary production could be assessed more accurately by use of
remote sensing when future satellites such as the ocean color scanner and Modus
I satellites are launched. Trichodesmium has some ideal properties, a unique
spectral signature and gas vesicles which bring it at or near the surface, thus
facilitating remote sensing. This study will use an airborne spectrometer to map
the spectral signature and ocean color in a field program at Barbados, West
Indies. Ground truth data will be collected on density of Trichodesmium as well
as rate of N2 fixation (acetylene reduction) and primary production while the
spectrometer is operated in overflights. This information will be used in
developing algorithms for the measurements of Trichodesmium distributions and
rates of C and N2 fixation. In addition to the field studies, a search of
existing images from the LANDSAT, CZCS, and manned spacecraft will be made to
determine whether any images were taken during literature reported blooms. These
images will be processed to determine the best modes of quantifying blooms.
Results from this research will be directly relevant to the Global Ocean Flux
(GOFS) program. The microscopic plants that are responsible for most of the
ocean's biological production contain pigments for absorbing sunlight just as
their terrestrial counterparts do. These pigments have long been used to
quantify marine phytoplankton through direct chemical analysis of the
chlorophyll present in a given body of water. Recently, the discovery that
phytoplankton distributions can be measured remotely based on the color they
impart to the water has opened up exciting opportunities for the large scale
analysis of marine biological production. Dr. Carpenter and his co-workers seek
to extend the use of remote biological sensing by developing optical methods for
determining the spatial extent of a unique type of tropical microorganism known
as Trichodesmium. Not only is the distribution of this organism of importance to
the nutrient cycling and biological productivity of tropical areas, but the
ability to differentiate among the different groups of floating organism in
surface ocean water is an important area for future research.