* 8800795
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential and Integral Equations  for Physical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Richard MacCamy, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1992
* USD 71,663.00

Work on this project continues mathematical research on models of physical
systems in which emphasis is placed on effects which are non-local in time, in
space or both. Applications are expected in the analysis of thermal and elastic
properties of materials with memory, electromagnetic and elastic scattering and
population models. The mathematical formulations involve differential equations,
Volterra and Fredholm integral equations and combinations of these. Three areas
will receive attention. The first concerns models which involve operators
influenced by memory effects and are represented by integral operators with
singular kernels. Efforts will be made to understand relations between problems
and solutions as the order of the singularity changes. Both qualitative behavior
as well as numerical approximation of solutions will be sought. Another line of
investigation will consider interface problems in which parabolic-hyperbolic
equations describe the same phenomenon on either side of a region's boundary. In
trying to understand these problems a new concept of absorbing boundaries has
evolved which shows great theoretical as well as numerical promise - but at this
time there is no firm understanding as to why the boundaries work so well.
Finally, in work related to population diffusion, studies will continue on
reaction-diffusion processes in which directed diffusion rather than random
diffusion is the controlling hypothesis. Models of this type have been used to
analyze single species populations diffusing to avoid crowding, extensions to
age-dependent situations, models for epidemics and for predator- prey
situations. Much of the theoretical work has lagged behind the numerical because
basic existence questions remain unanswered. The search will continue.