* 8800931
* Fundamental Aspects of Catalytic Carbon Formation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* R. Terry Baker, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 10/31/1991
* USD 227,725.00

This is an investigation of the chemistry occurring on and within catalyst
particles that causes carbon filaments to grow in various conformations.
Filaments can be formed in three basic conformations: whisker-like, branched,
and multidirectional. Specific issues include the effects of the
crystallographic features of the catalyst particle on the mechanism of the
hydrocarbon decomposition reaction; how reaction conditions influence the
structural characteristics of carbon filaments produced from a given catalyst
hydrocarbon system; and the effects that the introduction of a second metal into
the catalyst has on carbon diffusion pathways. A combination of techniques are
used to study these aspects including controlled-atmosphere electron microscopy
(CAEM), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) with in-situ
electron diffraction, specialized in-situ surface spectroscopy, carbon-13
nuclear magnetic resonance, and bulk kinetic studies. The notion of growing
carbon filaments onto the surfaces of primary fibers by catalytic decomposition
of a hydrocarbon offers the potential of producing a new generation of
composites with unique physical, chemical, and electronic properties. Carbon
filaments are produced by the catalytic decomposition of hydrocarbons on small
metal particles. Iron, cobalt, or nickel promote this process. The filaments
have a duplex structure - a graphitic skin surrounding a core that is more
easily oxidized.