* 8800324
* Survey of Graduate Science and Engineering                  Students and Postdoctorates
* SBE,NCSE
* 11/01/1987,01/31/1991
* George Nozicka, MACRO INTERNATIONAL
* Contract
* Mary J. Golladay
* 01/31/1991
* USD 735,242.00

This contract is for the conduct and data processing of the Survey of Graduate
Science and Engineering Students and Postdoctorates conducted annually to yield
data on the field distribution, sources and types of support, sex, citizenship,
and racial/ethnic background of students enrolled in graduate programs in
science and engineering fields, and on the number, sources of funding, sex, and
citizenship of postdoctorates employed by institutions of higher education. The
contractor will generate detailed statistical tables displaying survey results
and provide technical support as needed. As part of its requirement under the
National Science Foundation Act, as amended, to provide a central clearinghouse
for the collection, interpretation, and analysis of data on the current and
projected availability of scientific and technical resources and personnel in
the United States, NSF collects and disseminates statistical data on detailed
characteristics of graduate science and engineering enrollment in academic
institutions. Data derived from this survey series are used by internal NSF
management and the National Science Board, as well as by analysts at the
Federal, State, and institutional levels to predict changes in the supply of
scientists and engineers and, in combination with demand projections based on
other sources, to generate early warning of possible imbalances of supply and
demand.