* 8800073
* Fluid Inclusion and Stable Isotope Study in Mid-Crustal     Rocks of the Coastal Orogen, British Columbia and Alaska    (Earth Science)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Maria Crawford, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 08/31/1990
* USD 48,283.00

A mobile fluid phase forms an important component of the crust in orogenic
zones. The late Mesozoic-early Tertiary Coastal Orogen of British Columbia and
Alaska provides a setting that includes low to high grade metamorphic rocks and
tonalite to granodiorite plutons for investigating fluid-rock interactions. This
project focuses on: the character the fluids associated with the metamorphic
rocks, with the plutons, and with the quartz and pegmatite veins that cut these
rocks; the paths followed by fluids as they are produced and move through the
crust; relative timing of fluid evolution, vein formation and deformation; and
estimates of fluid volumes and thermal consequences of fluid flow. Major results
that can be expected from the study include a better understanding of the nature
of the fluids in this portion of the crust, of the mechanism by which fluid
moves and transports both dissolved matter and heat, and of the role fluids play
in rock deformation in orogenic zones. Professor Crawford will participate as a
guest in courses or seminars in metamorphic petrology, isotope geochemistry,
fluid inclusion techniques, regional geology and tectonics. This project
furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women
to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science
supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and
engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers
employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.