* 8800735
* Prediction of Pore Pressure Generation in Soil Foundations  Using Data from Molikpaq I-65:  I
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1987,11/30/1989
* Jean Pierre Bardet, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 11/30/1989
* USD 75,000.00

The objective of this research program is to evaluate several different methods
for predicting pore water pressure buildup in saturated cohesionless soils when
subjected to cyclic shear stresses. Such stresses are generated as a result of
the strong ground motions resulting from a large earthquake. The buildup in pore
water pressure can result in the failure of building foundations, as well as of
underground lifelines such as water, sewer, power, and telecommunication
lifelines. The damage results from the liquefaction of the soil when the pore
pressure reaches a critical level. Thus, it is very important to be able to
predict the generation of pore water pressure, and the potential for the soil to
liquefy. Considerable effort has gone into the development of prediction
methods, but the validation of these methods is far from complete due to a lack
of data against which to check them. In April 12, 1986, the Molikpaq, a
hydrocarbon exploration island in the Beaufort Sea, was subjected to ice loads
which had not been predicted, and which caused the sand core to partially
liquefy. The structural performance of this sand island was closely monitored by
the owner, Gulf Canada, and as a result, an excellent data set exist against
which to check the methods proposed for calculating pore pressure generation and
liquefaction. This data set is being made available for research purposes, and a
research program has been initiated by the following Canadian Government
organizations: The Geological Survey, the Subcommittee on Marine Development of
the National Research Council's Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research,
and the Panel on Energy Research and Development. A similar study supported by
the National Science Foundation is closely coordinated with the Canadian
initiative. This joint effort between the University of Southern California, and
The Earth Technology Corporation, is part of this study. It is evaluating
several methods, especially constitutive models, and computer algorithms which
analyze the pore pressure buildup and liquefaction generated by cyclic loads.
The results from both the Canadian and NSF studies will be presented at a
workshop to be held in Vancouver in August, 1988.