* 8800759
* U.S.-Singapore Cooperative Research: Experimental and Ana-  lytical Studies of Nonlinear Structural Systems Under Earth-quake Loads
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Sami Masri, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 12/31/1991
* USD 17,536.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Mihran S. Agbabian, Dr. Sami F.
Masri, and Dr. James C. Anderson, Department of Civil Engineering, University of
Southern California, to pursue with Dr. Seng-Lip Lee, Dr. Somsak
Swaddiwudhipong, Dr. Ser-Tong Quek, Dr. Chi Young Liaw, and Dr. Thambirajah
Balendra, Department of Civil Engineering, National University of Singapore, for
a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative experimental and analytical
research on nonlinear structural systems under earthquake loads. The following
three research topics will be studied: ductility demand for short period steel
frames; behavior of steel frames subjected to earthquake motions in both
vertical and horizontal directions; and beam-column moment connections for
severe earthquakes. The main goals of this project are to evaluate the need to
include stiffer plates in box columns at the connection to beams, to evaluate
the ability of current element codes to predict the nonlinear behavior occurring
at the joint under limit loads, and to accurately predict the capacity of
building structures to resist damaging earthquake motions without failure or
collapse. The research will add an international cooperative dimension to
ongoing research at the University of Southern California (USC) supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. ECE8617623. The proposed cooperative
research should provide valuable data to the earthquake engineering profession
on structural response to severe earthquake shaking. This cooperative project
will make available to the USC team a large scale test facility on which full-
size building components can be tested rather than half-scale, as at USC.
Comparison of results obtained at the two facilities would provide valuable
information on scaling effects in such tests. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and
their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of scientific
information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems
of mutual benefit. Both groups of collaborators are highly respected scientists
who have productive publication records in the field of the proposal.