* 8800329
* A Multidisciplinary Deep-Water Station North of Oahu,       Hawaii:  GOFS Component
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1993
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/1993
* USD 1,678,656.00

This effort will establish a time - series hydrographic station in the central
North Pacific Ocean approximately 100km north of the island of Oahu as part of
the Global Ocean Flux Study (GOFS) program. This deep water oceanographic
station will comprise a Pacific Ocean analogue to Station S (Panulirus Station)
located in the North Atlantic Ocean near Bermuda. Monthly visits will be made to
this station over an initial five-year period to begin a comprehensive study of
the distribution, production and flux of biogenic particulate material in the
obligotrophic ocean. The scientific objectives are: (1) to observe and interpret
the seasonal and interannual variability in the biology and chemistry of the
mixed layer and the euphotic zone, (2) to observe and interpret the seasonal and
interannual variability in the rates of particle flux and apparent rates of
particle remineralization over the entire water column and (3) to understand the
interrelationships between the processes mentioned in (1) and (2) above and the
physical characteristics of the water column. Water column physical
characteristics will be analyzed as part of the World Ocean Circulation
Experiment (WOCE) during joint GOFS-WOCE cruises. The collective data obtained
at the Hawaii time series station will also be used to support GOFS level-2 and
level-3 studies on biogeochemical fluxes and ocean circulation and will
contribute to the Hawaiian Ocean Experiment (HOE), a co-ordinated
interdisciplinary study of the Hawaiian Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).