* 8800799
* Barbados Accretionary Prism: A Seismic, Geothermal, Geochemical Study of Fluid Explusion Features
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Philip Froelich, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 09/30/1990
* USD 228,535.00

This study is a renewal of an earlier study of accretionary processes and
related phenomena on the Barbados Ridge accretionary complex. This work began as
a joint program between scientists at Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory in
the U.S. and the University of Birmingham, in the U.K. The principal objective
of work under this extension is to further explore fluid expulsion features,
heat flow and pore water geochemistry near the tow of the Barbados accretionary
complex, which deep ocean drilling and geothermal surveys are shown to be
prevalent on the lower slope of the complex. The objective is to quantify the
flux from and define the geometry of pathways for fluid flow. The proposed
research will be carried out on a cruise that is already planned for University
of Birmingham scientists to work on the R/V CONRAD. %%% When oceanic lithosphere
is subducted, some of the sediment lying on top of the lithospheric plate is
scraped off and forms the accretionary wedge complex. Deformation of the
accretionary wedge complex is often associated with the expulsion of pore fluids
and sites of pore fluid expulsion have been shown to be locales of biological
communities. This project is directed towards understanding the nature of pore
fluid chemistry and fluid pathways in a variety of environments on an
accretionary wedge complex that is readily accessible to east coast scientists.