* 8800887
* Studies of a Catecholamine Transporter in Catecholamine     Storage Granules
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Jean Deupree, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1990
* USD 20,000.00

Neurotransmitters are chemicals which allow nerves to communicate with other
nerves and organelles. Adrenaline (epinephrine) is a catecholamine type of
neurotransmitter stored in the adrenal gland and released in times of stress.
The adrenaline is stored inside chromaffin cells in small vesicles known as
chromaffin granules. The concentration of free adrenaline in the cytosol of the
cell is low (micromolar range). In contrast, the inside of the chromaffin cell
is packed with adrenaline molecules at concentrations as high as 0.5 M. When the
nerve is stimulated, the granules migrate to the cell membrane, fuse with the
membrane and release contents into the bloodstream. The long range objective of
this project is to determine the mechanism by which adrenaline is transported
into these chromaffin granules. What is known so far is that a transporter
molecule located in the membrane of the chromaffin granule acts to shuttle
adrenaline across the chromaffin granule membrane against a high concentration
gradient. Not much is known about this molecule at all, except that it needs
energy to function. This energy is provided by a Mg-ATPase enzyme. The Mg-ATPase
enzyme uses the energy produced from the hydrolysis of ATP to shuttle protons to
the inside of the granule. These protons act to produce a pH gradient between
the inside of the granule and the cytosol. In addition, the protons act to
produce a positive charge on the inside of the granule resulting in a membrane
potential. The driving force for the transport process appears to be both the
membrane potential and the pH gradient. Major questions to be addressed are:
What are the characteristics of the transporter molecule? How does this membrane
potential and pH gradient act to drive the transporter? Is this transporter
regulated directly by some chemical or is the synthesis of the transporter
regulated? How do the characteristics of this transporter compare to those of
other transporter molecules transporting adrenaline, other biogenic amines or
molecules in general? Biogenic amines (neurotransmitters similar in structure to
adrenaline) are stored in vesicles in the brain, and are transported into
platelets; the biogenic amine histamine is stored in mast cells. Is the
transporter in these vesicles different from that in the chromaffin granule?
Knowledge of transporter molecules in general is limited. Studies on the
adrenaline transporter will provide added insight into the general methods by
which cells transport chemicals across biological membranes. One of the first
steps necessary for studying the transporter is to purify the transporter and to
identify the gene which codes for the transporter. The studies proposed in this
research project are initial steps needed for the purification of the
transporter and identification of the gene coding for the transporter.