* 8800899
* Dissertation Research: Systematics and Evolution of the     Genus Waltheria (Sterculiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Janice Saunders, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1990
* USD 9,570.00

Faculty adviser Dr. Beryl Simpson and graduate student Jan Saunders will study
the tropical tree genus Waltheria and related species, using herbarium specimens
and new field collections made in Brazil. Because the genus is poorly known,
work will focus on improved species descriptions, maps of geographic
distribution, identification keys, and inferences about evolutionary
relationships of the estimated 50 species, 25 of which occur in Brazil. The
resultant taxonomic monograph will also resolve the nomenclature of the 120
scientific names currently applied to these plants worldwide. In addition, the
unusual breeding system of distyly (two floral forms, on separate plants) will
be studied. Pin plants bear flowers with long styles and short stamens, whereas
thrum plants bear flowers with short styles and long stamens. The floral
dimorphism typically is linked by a supergene to a diallelic sporophytic
incompatibility system which reduces the amount of inbreeding that can occur
within a plant population. In this study, the morphological differences between
pin and thrum forms in several species will be analyzed extensively, especially
the pollen. Possible stages in the evolution of distyly will also be studied, in
the course of comparative analyses of Waltheria and related genera of the
Sterculiaceae family.