* 8800262
* PRF: Factors Influencing Individual Diet Selection in Two   Polyphagous Orthopteran (Insecta) Species
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1981
* Jerome Howard, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Althea Ball
* 03/31/1981
* USD 52,800.00

Individual feeding patterns in two species of polyphagous grasshoppers will be
studied to evaluate the impact of genetic and non-genetic factors on diet
selection. Feeding by polyphagous grasshoppers is currently viewed as selective
among plant species, but generalized among any of several preferred,
substitutable hosts. Local abundance of preferred food plants is thus generally
thought to affect individual diet breadth. This idea will be tested against the
alternatives that plants consumed by generalist feeders are complementary
resources, and that specialized feeding is due to genetic adaptation to host
plants or to preferences induced during development. In order to determine the
breadth of individual diets and relative proportions of specialist and
generalist feeders in each population, occurrence of plant species in fecal
pellets of marked individuals within enclosures will be quantified. Measures of
variation in fitness-related characters in full and half-sib families of
grasshoppers (derived from insects with known dietary histories, raised on
different diet treatments) will be taken. Such data will provide information on
the degree of individual polyphagy within populations, clarify the reasons why
individuals feed as they do, and permit detailed analysis of the genetic
structure of two hemimetabolous insect populations. Research will be done during
a two-year postdoctoral fellowship tenure at the University of California,
Berkeley.