* 8800353
* Summer Institutes in Analytical Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Maurice Bursey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 11/30/1991
* USD 154,954.00

This project is in the area of analytical and surface chemistry, broadly
defined. During the ten week period between 1 June 1988 and 9 August 1988, five
faculty members from colleges that do not offer the PhD degree in chemistry will
carry out collaborative research with seven analytical and surface chemistry
faculty members at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC).
Research participants from the undergraduate institutions will be selected from
among applicant who respond to UNC's announcement of the summer research
program. This activity is analogous to the support of faculty from undergraduate
institutions through NSF Research Opportunity Awards (ROAs) and represents one
of UNC's attacks on the national crisis in production of PhD chemists with
expertise in the area of analytical and surface chemistry. In this project,
participating faculty from the undergraduate institutions will not necessarily
have prearranged their summer research activities with UNC analytical faculty
members, rather they will establish their collaborative arrangements after they
have had an opportunity to consider fully all of the research programs of the
host institution participating faculty members. In addition to the research
focus of the activity, UNC faculty and scientists from industrial laboratories
in nearby Research Triangle Park will present a series of lectures covering
frontier research tools and topics that constitute modern analytical and surface
chemistry and discuss research opportunities in this broad field. Also,
representatives from funding agencies from both Federal and private sectors that
have a strong commitment to the support of quality research programs in
undergraduate institutions will address the participants and describe the
mechanisms whereby such support can be competitively sought. One particularly
important goal of this project is to assist the participating faculty from
undergraduate institutions to begin to establish a network of vital academic
analytical chemists in four-year institutions in the southeastern United States
that can help to address vigorously the problem of attracting outstanding young
talent to the challenging and technologically important subfield of analytical
and surface chemistry.