* 8800076
* The Importance of Inter-species Predation among Marine      Ciliate Protozooplankton
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1990
* John Dolan, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/1990
* USD 125,034.00

Ciliate predation on other ciliates is common among members of the
protozooplankton and may be a significant pathway through which secondary
production is transferred. The impact of inter- species ciliate predation in
Chesapeake Bay will be studied through a combination of laboratory experiments,
manipulations of field populations, and surveys of ciliate protozooplankton
abundance, species composition, and dietary habits. It is proposed that: 1)
inter-ciliate predators are a consistent and locally abundant component of the
marine protozooplankton community; 2) a significant amount of secondary
production by bacterivorous and herbivorous ciliates is consumed by ciliate
predation; 3) grazing and growth rates of inter-species ciliate predators are
sufficient to exploit and potentially control locally dense prey populations.
The abundance and widespread occurrence of ciliated protozoa among the marine
protozooplankton suggest that they play a pivotal role in the planktonic food
web of the ocean. The importance of ciliates as consumers of phytoplankton and,
to a lesser extent, bacterioplankton has been well studied and is now generally
accepted. While large zooplankton have been viewed as the predominant consumers
of ciliates, there is little evidence indicating that grazing by metazoa has a
substantial impact on ciliate populations. Therefore, uncertainty still exists
as to the fate of secondary production by ciliates. Coats has designed a series
of prey switching experiments to examine the hypothesis that certain species of
the ciliates themselves consume much of this secondary production. It has
recently become apparent that much of the plant - animal interactions in the sea
are dominated by the activities of such microbial organisms and this novel work
will clarify the role of inter - ciliate predation in marine food webs.