* 8800299
* Oxidation Potentials and Chemical Reactivities
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Frederick Bordwell, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 05/31/1991
* USD 199,062.00

This grant in the Organic Dynamics Program provides support for the research of
Dr. Fred Bordwell of Northwestern University. This work is divided into four
areas: (1) the measurement of the acid strength of neutral and positively
charged organic compounds, (2) the estimation of the energy required for the
homolytic breakage of C-H, N-H and S-H bonds, (3) the effect of substituent
groups on this latter, bond breaking process, and (4) organic reaction
mechanisms involving the transfer of an electron. This work will provide insight
into the pathway of organic reactions, especially those involving negatively
charged species. The ease with which a molecule H-A can be cleaved thermally
into two radical fragments, i.e., H-A giving H atom and A atom, provides an
important insight into its reactivity. The Bordwell group has recently devised a
method of estimating the size of such bond dissociation energies (BDE's) by
combining the oxidation potential of the anion and the acidity constant of its
conjugate acid, both measured in dimethyl sulfoxide solution. This method will
be used to estimate BDE's for a large number of important weak acids for which
BDE's have hitherto been inaccessible. By combining the oxidation potentials of
the acid and the anion, and the acidity constant of the acid, the acidities of
radical cations have been estimated. No previous information of this type has
been available despite the importance of radical cations as intermediates.
Finally, redox potentials combined with rate studies are expected to reveal
significant new details concerning the role of single electron transfer in
reactions of anions with electrophiles.