* 8800316
* An Intercalcated-Spiral Dual Circuit Hollow Fiber Bioreactorfor the Culture of Human Hybridomas
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Pao Chau, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 06/30/1992
* USD 130,440.00

The objective of this work is to develop a hollow fiber bioreactor which makes
use of an intercalated-spiral wound dual circuit construction. The hollow fiber
system is used to produce human monoclonal antibodies specific to tumor-
associated antigens. Human monoclonal antibodies should be superior to
monoclonal antibodies as in vivo diagnostic and therapeutic reagents. Many human
hybridomas secrete monoclonal antibodies at a much lower rate than murine
hybridomas. Hence it is crucial to develop processes which can produce human
monoclonal antibodies effectively. Problems in continuous production are
investigated. Data and system analyses are complemented by mathematical models
which incorporate hydrodynamics, membrane transport and cellular kinetics. This
project applies the principles of bioreactor engineering to mass cell culture.
As demand for biochemicals from mammalian cell cultures increases, there is a
corresponding need to develop advanced bioreactor technology to produce not only
in large quantitie, but also effectively, biological compounds. One important
example is the making of monoclonal antibodies. Monoclonal antibodies are very
pure and have specific biochemical reactivities. They have proven to be very
useful in many diagnostic and therapeutic applications. Antibodies are big and
complex protein molecules which can best be synthesized by (fusion) mammalian
cells cultured in an advanced hollow fiber bioreactor which mimics an artificial
organ in the sense that the bioreactor has a very uniform distribution of
arterial and venous capillary networks. This is an attempt to understand the
fundamental aspects of fluid mechanics, nutrient transport, and cell physiology.
It is necessary to merge information from these different areas to solve the
general problem.