* 8800515
* Synthesis and Studies of Selected Metal Carbonyl and        Boron-Metal Carbonyl Clusters
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1991
* Sheldon Shore, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 08/31/1991
* USD 431,668.00

This grant from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is in the area of organometallic chemistry. The project is concerned with
expanding the chemistry of and gaining further insights into the properties of
selected transition metal carbonyl and boron metal carbonyl cluster systems. Of
particular interest is the chemistry of these metal cluster compounds on
surfaces, where they serve as catalysts for the interconversion of organic
compounds and as models of surface-supported metal clusters, which constitute
another important class of heterogeneous industrial catalysts. The synthetic
effort of the project is designed to provide several new heteronuclear cluster
materials which contain triangular or higher polyhedral cores of mixed metals,
or metals plus a main group element such as boron. Chemistry of the formation of
triosmiumnonacarbonyl clusters containing BCO or B3O3 groups will be studied to
gain insights into the reaction pathways by which they and some of their
derivatives are formed. The surface organometallic chemistry of a number of
these mixed metal and metal boron clusters will be examined on hydroxylated
magnesia and conversion to heteroatomic metal clusters will be attempted. In
principle, a study of such particles can provide interesting correlations and
basic understanding of highly dispersed heteroatomic catalysts and of the
influence of one type of atom on the catalytic properties of the other. Some
modelling of clusters on oxide surfaces will be attempted also.