* 8800303
* The Transformation of Early American Technology:            Mid-Atlantic Perspectives
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Judith McGaw, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 02/28/1991
* USD 104,993.00

America became the leading industrial power in the world in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries. It continues to play a leading industrial role today
though the United States has moved into the "post-industrial" age. While there
has been a proliferation of secondary literature in related historical
disciplines, a number of critical problems remain to be investigated concerning
the roots of the American industrial power. Drs. McGaw, Cooper and Smith are
examining these roots through their study of significant aspects of American
technology in the period 1750 to 1850. Dr. McGaw will be examining the domestic
origins of the American Industrial Revolution, specifically how changes in
agriculture and household food processing affected production and consumption
behavior and created both the raw materials supplies and the demand that
permitted industrial innovation. Dr. Cooper is examining the technology for wood
working, the diffusion of changes in that technology, and the social effects on
technological innovation by the patent management system. Dr. Smith is examining
the "first stage" of the American Industrial Revolution entailing the
mechanization of industry. He will then relate these developments to the "second
stage" of science-based industrialization which followed. Through their common
focus on early American technology and its mid-Atlantic development, their
regular meetings with one another to discuss research problems and strategies,
and their participation in several on- going scholarly projects devoted to the
social and economic history of the mid-Atlantic region prior to 1850, their
collaboration promises greatly to enhance their individual work. They also plan
to interact with other historians participating in the "Transformation of
Philadelphia Project" with which this study is associated, to bring in a series
of visiting scholars, and to hold concluding conference and publish a volume of
articles on early industrial technology and how it shaped the development of
American industrial strength.