* 8800334
* U.S.-Australia Joint Seminar: Remote Sensing of Biosphere   Functioning / Honolulu, Hawaii / July 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Harold Mooney, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 11/30/1989
* USD 9,498.00

This award will support the participation of eight U.S. scientists in a seminar
on the "Remote Sensing of Biosphere Functioning," organized jointly by Dr.
Harold A. Mooney of Stanford University and Dr. Richard J. Hobbs of the
Australian CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Rangelands Research. United States and
Australian participants will meet at the East-West Center in Honolulu, Hawaii
during July 1988. The seminar will address how remote sensing technology can be
used to make coordinated measurements on a global scale of various physical,
chemical and biological parameters. Discussions will focus on the capabilities
of remote sensing hardware, the assessment of physical, chemical, and biological
parameters based on remotely sensed reflectance data, the ability to quantify
processes such as photosynthesis, decomposition and species succession, data
handling requirements, and the types of experiments needed to relate ground
based and remotely sensed measurements. The United States and Australia are both
leaders in the development and utilization of remote sensing technology.
Australian scientists, faced with understanding and managing vast landscape
units, have pioneered in the development of remote sensing technology to meet
this challenge. The United States, through its large space program, has fostered
extensive new technology for remote sensing of features of the earth's surface.
This seminar will take advantage of this expertise in identifying the
requirements for a remote and continuous monitoring of the functioning of the
earth's biosphere.