* 8800344
* Improvement of the Entomological Collection of the Natural  History Museum of Los Angeles County
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Charles Hogue, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 01/31/1992
* USD 267,540.00

The entomological collection of the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles
County is amoung the largest in North America, containing over 4.5 million
specimens. Many singular collections, and its extensive use by scientists and
technical investigators, make it important internationally, nationally, and
locally. The collection is now properly housed in a compactor with space for
some 15 years expansion. Much of it remains in need of preparation and curation
in spite of great improvements by such treatment under a prior NSF facilities
grant. The needs addressed under the present award are the completion of further
curatorial projects on material of prime significance to current and anticipated
research. The curators, aided by three full time technicians and visiting
researchers, will mount, label, identify, sort, and organize specimens in three
major areas: (1) LEPIDOPTERA: mostly neotropical moths, and special collections
of North American material of historical, ecological, and taxonomic value. (2)
FORMICIDAE: George & Jeanette Wheeler lots of North Dakota and larval ants; Adis
collection of Amazonian ants; ongoing accessions of Costa Rican ants; and
miscellaneous voucher series. (3) COCOS ISLAND INSECTS: virtually all material
extant from this zoogeographically strategic island. Visiting researchers will
also assess other portions of the collection for future attention.