* 8800705
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Photo-        dissociation on MgO(001)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Eric Weitz, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* robert miller
* 12/31/1991
* USD 354,120.00

This grant, funded jointly by Special Projects in Chemistry and the Division of
Materials Research provides support for the research of Profs. Stair and Weitz
at Northwestern University. The objective of the research is to study, both
experimentally and theoretically, the photodissociation dynamics of small
molecules adsorbed on single-crystal insulator surfaces. Such information is of
importance to the understanding of photochemistry at the gas-solid interface. In
addition to studies of the adsorption and surface chemistry of the adsorbed
molecular species, the experimental program will also focus on measurements of
the angular distribution, the kinetic energy distribution and the rotational and
vibrational distributions of the photodissociated fragments. The molecules to be
studied were selected as representative examples of rapid direct and
predissociative photodissociation mechanisms on the basis of gas phase
photodissociation measurements. They also provide both atomic and molecular
fragments that are amenable to high sensitivity detection as well as theoretical
description. The magnesium oxide adsorbant surface was selected for its
insulating properties,ease of handling and characterization and its chemical
stability. Theoretical models to be developed will aim at calculating the
experimentally measured fragment distributions.