* 8800662
* Electromyographic. Histochemical and Mechanical Properties  of the Shoulder Muscles in Alligator Mississippiensis:      Implications for the Evolution of Flight(Biological Science)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Jane Peterson, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1989
* USD 64,300.00

This study will determine the function and neuromuscular organization of
shoulder muscles in Alligator mississippiensis. These data are relevant to 1)
the biomechanics of locomotion, particularly to speed-correlated changes in limb
mechanics, 2) to functional interpretations of the origin of avian flight, and
3) an understanding of evolutionary patterns and constraints in complex
functional systems. The research will focus first on the mechanical properties
and neuromuscular organization of the pectoralis and supracoracoideus muscles
using data on histochemistry, architecture, innervation pattern and contractile
properties, and second on the neuromuscular activity pattern (determined by
electromyography) and its relationship to the kinematics of the forelimb over a
range of locomotor speeds. The significance of the expected results is as
follows: 1) The analysis will, for the first time, provide detailed information
on muscle function in a generalized reptile over a range of speeds. 2) The
pectoralis and supracoracoideus muscles are homologous to the primary flight
muscles of birds. The results of the study, when compared to those already
available for avian muscles, will permit, for the first time, a detailed
analysis of the functional differences associated with the evolution of flight.
3) It has been proposed that the neural control mechanism for shoulder function
during locomotion is relatively conservative and constrains or canalizes
functional change. Testing of this hypotehsis is significantly furthered by the
results of the proposed study. Dr. Peterson will co-direct a course in
Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy, and a graduate (advanced undergraduate) seminar
on scaling (allometry), or co-teach a graduate (advanced undergraduate) seminar
on the neural control of locomotion. In addition she will counsel and advise
students. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.