* 8800101
* Present and Past Food Web Structure on Georges Bank:        Resolution of Combined C and N Stable Isotope Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Brian Fry, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1990
* USD 149,998.00

Recent studies indicate that phytoplankton can be significantly enriched in 13C
during bloom conditions. This study seeks to confirm this association in shelf
and slope waters of the northern Middle Atlantic Bight and Gulf of Maine. High
precision carbon isotope ratio measurements will be done on preserved samples
from quarterly cruises as well as on laboratory phytoplankton cultures and
extracted chlorophyllide a from live phytoplankton. In addition to these primary
objectives, initial studies of the utility of the nitrogen and carbon isotopic
signatures in analyzing food web structure will be made. Isotopic analysis of
selected higher trophic level organisms will be made for this purpose. An
element may exist in more than one atomic weight, and these various forms are
called isotopes of that element. Although chemically similar, the ratios among
the elemental isotopes vary among pools because of fractionation processes
associated with chemical and physical transformations. Isotopic signatures have
long been used in other areas of earth science, and this study attempts to
extend this usefulness into marine ecology. This study examines the hypothesis
that variations in productivity are associated with isotopic variations. This is
an exciting prospect, in that such a relationship would serve as a useful
adjunct to (or even replacement for) current tracer techniques of measuring
productivity, as well as serve as a tracer for marine food web studies. The
study consists of both laboratory work and field sampling in Georges Bank, a
productive fishing ground off the U. S. New England coast.