* 8800088
* Isotopic Studies Investigating the Petrogenesis of          Continental Rhyolitic Magmas (Earth Science)
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Gail Mahood, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 06/30/1990
* USD 87,709.00

There is remarkably little consensus on the origins of continental rhyolites,
due in part to the relative scarcity of isotopic studies of silicic volcanic
systems and to the difficulty of detecting upper crustal contamination when wall
rocks have little isotopic contrast with magmas. This Nd, Sr, and Pb isotopic
study of the Long Valley system to be carried out in the Radiogenic Isotope
Geochemistry Laboratory (RIGL) will determine how the proportions of mantle,
lower crustal, and upper crustal material change with time during the growth and
evolution of a major crustal magma chamber. If rhyolitic magmas contain a
significant mantle component, as opposed to being entirely recycled older crust,
it is important for models of crustal growth and evolution. The second part of
the research project investigates the utility of argon as a tracer for upper
crustal contamination, taking advantage of the fact that there is generally a
large contrast between magma and wall rock in argon concentration and
composition. Laser fusion 40Ar-39Ar analyses of individual phenocrysts will be
used from a suite of volcanic samples known to have extraneous argon, which may
have been incorporated when roof blocks foundered on caldera collapse. The
interactive component of this proposal has several parts: (1) to introduce her
to the department, Dr. Mahood will give a general interest talk during the
regular lecture series; (2) during Spring semester she will participate in
Geology 535, an interdisciplinary geochemistry seminar; (3) at the beginning of
Fall semester Dr. Mahood will host a dinner for women graduate students,
following which she will present the results of Zappert and Stansbury (1985),
using it as a starting point for a discussion of their graduate school
experiences; (4) Fall quarter she will teach a formal course in physical
volcanology for upper division and graduate students; and (5) during her entire
stay at University of Michigan, she will supervise analyses for one of the
iotopic systems in the RIGL. This project furthers VPW program objectives which
are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to
encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.