* 8800560
* U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research on    Pointwise Quasi-Newton Methods (Applied Mathematics)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1992
* Carl Kelley, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1992
* USD 8,800.00

This award supports several short visits by Dr. C. T. Kelley of North Carolina
State University to the University of Trier, Federal Republic of Germany, for
collaborative research on pointwise quasi-Newton methods with Dr. E. W. Sachs.
Their joint work has already produced new algorithms for solution of nonlinear
problems in integral equations, differential equations, and control. They will
continue their collaboration with emphasis on highly nonlinear problems, global
convergence, and analysis of discretization strategies. The strengths of Dr.
Kelley in nonlinear equations and of Dr. Sachs in optimal control and
optimization, together with a joint strength in functional analysis, are
important to the continued success of this research. Quasi-Newton methods are
iterative schemes for solution of nonlinear equations and optimization problems.
They have become a powerful tool for rapidly convergent calculations on
computers. Such methods are useful when Newton's method is impossible or too
costly to implement, for example, when the Jacobian matrix can not be computed
at reasonable cost. Performance of these methods can be enhanced if the
structure of the problem is taken into account. Drs. Sachs and Kelley have been
studying a new class of methods that consider structure when the problem is a
discretization of an infinite dimensional problem, such as a differential
equation or optimal control problem. The methods considered perform better than
application of standard methods to a finite dimensional approximation of the
original continuous problem.