* 8800888
* Dissertation Research: An Analysis of Plethodon Hybrid      Zones: Ethology and Isolation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Lynne Houck, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 12/31/1990
* USD 8,000.00

This is a proposal to study the processes by which new species are formed. the
project focuses on two key processes: (1) the origin of incompatibility in
mating behavior, and (2) the origin of hybrid inviability and hybrid sexual
incompetence. Woodland salamanders (genus Plethodon) are being used for the
proposed work because, of all land-based animals with backbones, their hybrid
zones are the best known. Furthermore, initial work (over 4000 pair mating
trials) has shown that the proposed behavioral studies are feasible. The overall
plan is to conduct studies of mating compatibility and hybrid viability in (1) a
series of mountain- top isolates of one species (P. jordani) and (2) a series of
contact zones between two species (P. jordani and P. teyahalee). In some of
these zones, the two speices do not hybridize (overlap zones), while in others
they form relatively narrow hybrid zones or extensive hybrid swarms. The
evolutionary predictions that will be tested are: (1) Sexual incompatibility
evolves as a by-product of differences in sexual behavior that evolve in
spatially separated populations. (2) Sexual incompatibility is strengthened if
two spatially separated populations come back into contact with each other. (3)
Sexual incompatibility is more pronounced in overlap zones than in hybrid zones,
and is greater in relatively narrow zones than in extensive hybrid swarms. (4)
Hybrid inviability evolves as a by-product of evolutionary change in spatially
separated populations.