* 8800480
* Stereochemical Purification of an Anti-Inflammatory Drug    in an Enzyme Membrane Reactor
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Stephen Wald, Sepracor Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/28/1991
* USD 211,620.00

Enzymatic resolution is a potentially powerful approach for the separation of
the stereoisomers. Lipases and carboxyesterases have been extensively studied
for this purpose. Many lipase substrates, complex molecules with chiral centers,
are poorly soluble in water. Thus bioconversions must be performed in
multiphase, emulsion-type enzyme reactors with three phases present--organic,
aqueous, and immobilized enzyme. Multiphase and extractive membrane reactors,
based on hollow- fiber modules, offer several engineering advantages over
conventional reactors by promoting efficient mass transfer and simplifying phase
and product separation. This Phase II proposal seeks to optimize membrane
bioreactor performance (productivity and enzyme stability), demonstrate
enzymatic resolution in a large-scale module, and conduct both a technical and
economic evaluation of an integrated important analgesic, (S)-Ibuprofen. New
drugs under development are increasingly more complex in structure and require,
in many cases, more elaborate purification schemes. The body is highly specific
in regard to the recognition of the three-dimensional structure (i.e.,
streoisomers) of a pharmaceutical and, therefore, the drug needs to be of high
stereochemical purity for it to be active. Extensive research has been conducted
on the use of enzymes for the separation of mixtures of steroisomers. However,
the commercialization of this technology must overcome certain engineering
roadblocks to be economically feasible. The use of a novel enzyme reactor, based
on membranes, has been shown to successfully address many of these problems in
Phase I studies. This Phase II proposal seeks to optimize membrane bioreactor
performance, demonstrate enzymatic resolution in a large-scale system, and
conduct both a technical and economic evaluation of an integrated, enzymatic-
resolution process for the production of (S)-Ibuprofen.