* 8800603
* Rationality, Equity or Deliberation in Mock-Jury Damage     Awards
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Elizabeth Loftus, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 08/31/1991
* USD 103,952.00

Previous research on the civil jury has focused on the magnitude of damage
awards as an indicator of perceived liability and has not addressed the
processes and strategies used by jurors in determining appropriate damages. This
program of experimental research being undertaken by Drs. Loftus and Goodman
seeks to examine the ways in which jurors and juries make decisions based on
ambiguous and incomplete evidence on economic damages. Using potential jurors
drawn from a list of registered voters, two mock-jury experiments are planned
that focus on (a) the influence of general versus specific verdict forms on how
juries go about awarding economic and non-economic damages and (b) the influence
of perceived level of liability and the magnitude of the damages being sought on
ultimate damage awards. These experiments promise important scientific
contributions to the field: They should illuminate our knowledge of jurors'
abilities to follow standard jury instructions distinguishing economic and non-
economic considerations. In particular, the experiments should valuably speak to
whether an actuarial verdict form is more likely to yield evidence-driven
deliberation and a general verdict form more likely to yield verdict-driven
discussion. Also, the work should add substantially to our understanding of
whether jurors are able to separate issues of liability and damages and whether
deliberation enables making that distinction. Finally, by obtaining pre- and
post- deliberation data from jurors as well as full deliberation data from
juries, these studies should contribute broadly to our knowledge of the impact
of group process on legal judgments.