* 8800033
* The Effects of Mesoscale Eddies on Phytoplankton Community  Structure, Total Production, and the F-Ratio in Open-Ocean  Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1989
* Edward Laws, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 10/31/1989
* USD 60,000.00

Mesoscale Cyclonic Eddies Formed Near the Hawaiian Islands will be utilized to
study the effects of upwelling events on the productivity, composition, biomass,
and physiology of open-ocean phytoplankton populations. Recent technical and
methodological advances will be utilized to more accurately determine the ratio
of new production to total production (f-ratio) and the temporal and spatial
variability of that ratio in the open ocean. Both simple empirical models and
more sophisticated compartmental models will be tested for their ability to
describe and explain observed f-ratio variations. Estimates of new production
will be obtained using a recently developed nitrate analysis method with a
precision of +/- 2nM. Total production will be estimated from the incorporation
of C-14 labeled inorganic carbon into protein. This experimental approach will
eliminate many of the potential artifacts and problems associated with
traditional f-ratio studies, including perturbations caused by the addition of
non- tracer amounts of N-15, isotope dilution of the substrate pool, difficulty
in measuring ambient substrate concentrations, the need to measure uptake of at
least three forms of dissolved N, and the fact that bacteria may account for a
significant fraction of the uptake of ammonium. The biological productivity of
the ocean varies geographically to a great degree. In mid-basin subtropical
areas such as thevicinity of the Hawaiian Islands, production is typically
relatively low. However, physical features of the local waters such as the
circular eddies found to the west of the islands can enhance productivity by
increasing the supply of nutrients for plant growth to surface waters. Laws and
Bienfang will use state of the art techniques to measure these variations in
biological production and relate it to the structure of the planktonic
community. They will make sensitive measurements of new production, a parameter
that is critical in estimating the flux of organic material from surface waters
and its availability for harvestable resources. Conducting the studies in an
area where oceanic eddies are found will provide a wide range of biological
oceanographic conditions likely to be found in the open ocean.