* 8800665
* Particle Flux in the Central Subarctic Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Kozo Takahashi, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/1991
* USD 167,767.00

It is proposed to investigate seasonal fluxes of particulate matter in the
subarctic Pacific where primary productivity is relatively high and particle
flux appears to be correspondingly high. The amplitude of seasonal material flux
is expected to be large due to significant changes in water column stability
throughout the seasons. The high flux values in this region, apparently related
to characteristics of the ecosystems including abyssal circulation, are
important in material cycles of the world's oceans. This study will involve
collaboration with Japanese colleagues since they have useful hydrographic,
nutrient, biological, and other relevant data from the subarctic Pacific
accumulated over the last several decades as well as new data from their ongoing
research programs. The logistics of shiptime provided by Japanese scientists
will enable both parties to conduct a long-term, joint sediment trap program.
Two single trap mooring systems will be deployed during the summer, 1988, one at
subarctic Station SA-1 (49.5'N, 175'W) and the other at Aleutian Basin Station
(AB; 53.5N', 177'W) in the Bering Sea. Seasonal trap samples from these two
stations will be recovered in summer, 1989. Laboratory analyses of the time-
series samples include organic C, N, H, P. CaCO3, opal, lithogenic matter, and
an initial listing of planktonic components. These data will be related to in-
situ hydrographic, nutrient, and biological data as well as to satellite-derived
temperature and chlorophyll data for synthesis.