* 8800675
* Separation of Complex Materials by Field-Flow Fractionation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* J. Calvin Giddings, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 11/30/1991
* USD 499,100.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of separation science. The objective of this research is the
continuing development of the science and technology of field-flow fractionation
(FFF) and related methods; this work will be carried out in four subareas. (1)
Thermal FFF Characterization of Polymeric Materials. In this area, the
underlying thermal diffusion processes that are essential to thermal FFF will be
characterized. A coupled column- channel system will be developed using a
combination of thermal FFF and size exclusion chromatography to characterize the
composition and molecular weight distribution of copolymer blends. Thermal FFF
will be optimized for high-speed polymer analysis and the applicability of this
technique to ultra-high molecular weight polymers will be explored. (2) High
Speed Flow/Steric (Hyperlayer) FFF. Work on this recently developed technique
will be performed with the objective of optimizing, calibrating, extending the
range, improving the repeatability, exploring practical applications, and
understanding the basic forces that govern the performance of these new systems.
(3) Split-Flow Thin (SPLITT) Continuous Separation Cells. In this thrust, SPLITT
separations based on diffusive, sedimentation, and electrical transport
processes will be explored with special emphasis on scale-up to a practical
preparative level. (4) New FFF Theory and Methodology. Here, Professor Giddings
will continue his pursuit of new FFF techniques along both theoretical and
experimental lines. Continued attention will be paid to refining the theoretical
basis for FFF separations. This research continues the Principal Investigator's
development of analytical and preparative separations of complex, high molecular
weight materials by several FFF variants. Each of these FFF methods offers
unique advantages which, when appropriately matched to the problem at hand, can
give rise to enhanced analytical capability. Whereas the complexity of
implementation of these techniques has thus far impeded their broad adoption,
the sheer power of the methods places them significantly above competitive
approaches for the characterization of polymeric substances of key importance to
materials and biotechnological processes. The continued development of FFF
techniques will provide a formidable arsenal of analytical and preparative tools
for use in these technologically important areas. Additionally, Professor
Giddings' continued demonstration of the broad applicability of these tools
should expedite their adoption by the materials and bioscience communities.