* 8800399
* The Effects of Pigment Photooxidation and Biogenic Source on the Absorption of Light by Detritus Derived from Phytoplankton
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* James Nelson, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1991
* USD 104,779.00

Processes affecting the pigment content, spectral absorption, and photochemical
properties of biogenic detritus derived from phytoplankton will be investigated.
It is hypothesized that the rates of photooxidation of detrital chlorophylls,
pheopigments, and carotenoids are coupled through a degradation, and the
question of mechanism will be addressed in laboratory experiments, some
employing a model system for detrital pigments. The effect of grazer community
composition on the spectral character of biogenic detritus will be examined.
Pigment content, spectral absorption, and the rates of light-dependent pigment
bleaching will be determined for the particulate wastes of copepods and
heterothrophic protozoans. Pigments will be analyed by high performance liquid
chromatography. Particulate absorption spectra (filtered material) will be
partitioned into component spectra by solvent extraction. The potential
absorption of a relatively light-stable detrital fraction, of humic-like
spectral character, will be assessed. The microscopic plants that are
responsible for most of the ocean's biological production contain pigments for
absorbing sunlight just as their terrestrial counterparts do. These pigments
have long been used to quantify marine phytoplankton through direct chemical
analysis of the amount of chlorophyll present in a given body of water.
Recently, the discovery that phytoplankton distributions can be measured
remotely based on the color they impart to the water has opened up exciting
opportunities for the large scale analysis of marine production. Nelson's work
on the pigment differences associated with various marine grazing environments
may result in the ability to extract much more ecological information from
remotely collected optical data than just the static differences in plant
biomass. The approach of examining the mechanisms of pigment degration may allow
for the actual analysis of biological dynamics such as marine food web dynamics
and particle flux.