* 8800686
* FAH/REU:  The Influence of Environmental and Nutritional    Event on Recruitment Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Richard Radtke, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1991
* USD 271,302.00

Fluctuations in fish recruitment can be precipitated by relatively small
variations in mortality rates, growth rates or stage durations in the early life
stages of fish. The analyses of growth rate variability which may be more
reliable than survey estimation of mortality rates, can provide important
insights into the problem of fluctuating recruitment levels. To understand
recruitment, it is essential to identify which variables (growth rates,
temperature, nutrition) significantly affect larval survival, and subsequent
recruitment into the adult population. The use of microstructural otolith
analyses, as well as stable isotopic composition of both otoliths and body
tissues, will be used as indicators of past environmental temperatures and food
conditions. And, through the execution of controlled laboratory experiments,
variables which may alter the microstructure of otoliths and the chemical
composition of otoliths and of body tissues will be investigated. In addition,
the rearing of larvae will provide a unique opportunity for the study of growth,
feeding, physiology, and settlement during this important, but elusive phase.
The refinement and application of emerging methodologies of otolith analyses
will not only further develop and advance the technology, but will also provide
answers to applicable fisheries problems.