* 8800193
* PRF:  Molecular Phylogeny and Systematics of the Matisieae  (Bombacaceae), A Tribe of Neotropical Rain Forest Trees
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1990
* William Alverson, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* James E. Rodman
* 10/31/1990
* USD 52,800.00

The Matisieae consists of 10 genera and about 80 species of trees distributed
throughout most lowland, neotropical rainforests. Taxonomic studies on the tribe
are underway but the relatively abundant morphological, chemical and
biogeographic data are presently insufficient to determine unambiguously the
correct phylogeny. This two-year postdoctoral fellowship research effort will
include the collection of leaf and seed material of representative Matisieae and
other Bombacaceae in Colombia, Panama and Costa Rica, with subsequent use of
restriction endonuclease analysis of the chloroplast genomes. These analyses
will generate statistically robust phylogenies that will allow resolution of
historical problems of classification within the Bombacaceae and will provide,
for the first time, a certain evolutionary framework upon which to evaluate
traditional data. An understanding of the evolutionary polarities of
morphological character states within the Bombacaceae will permit re- valuation
of its evolutionary and taxonomic relationships with the economically important
cotton (Malvaceae) and cacao (Sterculiaceae) families and other members of the
order Malvales. From a broader perspective, two additional benefits will result.
First, evolutionary studies in this lineage of trees may be applicable to many
other woody groups of wet, neotropical forests. Secondly, data on the
chloroplast genomes of these long-lived woody plants with good fossil records
will benefit our understanding of the role of generation time in chloroplast DNA
evolution.