* 8800487
* Evolution of Senecio and Lobelia in the East African        Mountains
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1989
* Eric Knox, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 10/31/1989
* USD 36,944.00

The mountains of East Africa provide a unique opportunity to study the mode and
tempo of evolutionary events. The mountains are sufficiently numerous, tall and
isolated that, given the altitudinal zonation of vegetation, they form a
stratified system of habitat-islands which is amenable to mathematical analysis
and the formulation of testable predictions concerning the adaptive radiation of
plants. The giant senecios (Senecio ser. Arborei) and the giant lobelias
(Lobelia sect. Rhynchopetalum) have undergone sufficient geographic and
altitudinal radiation (resulting in much endemism and convergent evolution) to
allow assessment and comparison of their evolutionary responses to the physical
characteristics of the mountain system. These plants also display several
unusual morphological features associated with the giant-rosette life-form,
namely (1) daily opening and closing of the massive terminal leaf-rosettes, (2)
retention of an insulating jacket of old, dead leaves, (3) greatly enlarged pith
volume which provides an internal reservoir of water, and (4) secretion of
polysaccharides that affect the freezing characteristics of water impounded by
the leaf-rosettes and the hollow inflorescences of Lobelia. The purpose of
research by Dr. Palmer and Mr. Knox is to reconstruct the evolutionary histories
of these two groups. Phylogenetic hypotheses based on restriction-site variation
in chloroplast and nuclear ribosomal DNA will be used to test the predictions
derived from mathematical analysis of the mountain system and to interpret the
patterns in adaptive morphology. This research will provide insight into the
frequency of geographic versus altitudinal radiation, the relative importance of
migration versus long-distance dispersal, the extent of evolutionary
convergence, the rate of evolutionary divergence, and several points of
particular taxonomic interest. If the pattern of geographic radiation for
Senecio or Lobelia corresponds to the sequence of volcanic mountain formation,
then the established geochronology may provide an independent line of evidence
for evaluating the operation of a molecular clock.