* 8800992
* Spectroscopic Investigations of Problems in Thin Film       Materials Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Paul Bohn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 02/28/1991
* USD 306,810.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of thin film materials. Although thin films comprise an extremely
interesting and important class of materials, techniques for chemical analysis
which are specific to thin films are currently inadequate. In this research
activity, Professor Bohn and his students will build on their progress under NSF
grant CHE-8508722 to extend the use of nonclassical excitation phenomena for
optical spectroscopy in thin films at size scales from 5 angstroms to 5
micrometers. This will be accomplished by pursuing two separate research
thrusts. In one, gallium arsenide and aluminum-substituted gallium arsenide
heterostructures will be used as dielectric optical waveguides to perform
frequency modulated cross section measurements at photon energies just below the
III-V bandgap. The absorption measurements require the long pathlengths
available only in optical waveguides, because the cross sections of the impurity
related transitions in the sub-bandgap energy region of high purity III-V
semiconductors is extremely weak. In the second thrust, structure-function
relationships in molecular monolayers will be examined at dielectric surfaces. A
portion of this effort will use surface plasmon mediated optical second harmonic
generation and high precision reflectivity measurements to follow the dynamics
of monolayer formation. Additionally, the capability for examining Raman
scattering from molecular monolayers on dielectric surfaces that is resident in
Professor Bohn's laboratory will be used to probe the relationship between
adsorbate molecular structure and film architecture on the supermolecular level.
This research impacts broadly on the technologically important area of III-V
semiconductor devices. These studies are expected to yield new techniques for
the characterization of trace impurities that determine the behavior of high
purity semiconductors. Additionally, this work should lead to an enhanced
understanding of the interfacial structure of these materials and to insights
into the dynamics of formation of these multi-layered molecular structures which
are of prime importance to the electronics industry.