* 8800962
* Dissertation Research: Virus Infection in Field Populations of a Terrestrial Isopod
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Wayne Sousa, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 11/30/1990
* USD 6,000.00

One of the major objectives of the field of ecology is understanding the
mechanisms by which biotic and abiotic forces determine the abundance and
distribution of organisms. Although previous studies have examined various
genetic and enviromental factors that predispose individual host organisms to
infection by parasites, few attempts have been made to understand how population
level characteristics of the host affect their susceptibility to parasites in
natural habitats. The proposed research will experimentally examine the ways in
which characteristics of terrestrial isopod populations affect their
susceptibility to a lethal virus. Experiments in natural habitats will examine
the interaction of isopod density and nutritional state with physical
characteristics of the habitat which in turn affect their patterns of
aggregation and movement. Current theoretical models of host and parasite
population dynamics suggest that fragmentation of a host population into smaller
groups may be very important in determining the rates of transmission of viruses
through the host population. Viruses have become important biological control
agents in recent years and their full potential has yet to be realized.
Understanding the factors that determine the effectiveness of a given control
agent is important to ensure the success of that agent, and this study may
increase our understanding of how and when applications of control agents will
be most effective. Also, since isopods are very general in their feeding
habitats and can disperse over significant distances, they are likely to be one
of the most important soil organisms in terms of their ability to disperse
genetically engineered microbes. As the use of genetically engineered organisms
increases, more attention must be paid to the degree to which these microbes are
dispersed by isopods and other soil biota.