* 8800527
* Natural Products from Blue-Green Algae (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Richard Moore, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 08/31/1991
* USD 312,733.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Program is supporting research dealing with the
production of chemicals from blue-green algae that exhibit important and unusual
biological properties. These microorganisms lie near the bottom of the food
chain in marine systems, and, therefore, exert a strong effect on the course of
life in the oceans. The secondary compounds produced by these organisms often
have strong effects on other species. This research is aimed at identifying
these chemicals and attempting to understand how the producing organisms go
about synthesizing such unusual chemical compounds. The first major aim of this
project is to isolate and identify unusual, bioactive natural products that are
found in cultured blue-green algae. Research to date has concentrated mainly on
the rapid-growing, relatively abundant cyanophytes found in terrestrial
ecosystems and belonging predominantly to the Nostocales. This research is
focusing on the slower-growing and rarer blue-green algae, particularly those
found in marine environments, for new leads. Screening of extracts of the blue-
green algae cultured to date for a wide range of pharmacological and
agrochemical activities indicates that these prokaryotic microorganisms
represent a good source of new commerical products. Relatively little is known
about the chemistry of secondary metabolites in blue-green algae. Many extracts
of cultured cyanophytes already on hand show interesting fungicidal, algicidal,
antiviral, and other activities. This research is concerned with studying the
natural products that are responsible for these activities. The second area of
research in this project is the study of the biosynthesis of natural products
found in blue-green algae. Studies are being carried out on several potentially
important classes of compounds that have been isolated to date, such as the
hapalindoles and scytophycins.