* 8800507
* Final Vowel Length in Hausa:  A Lexical, Morphophonological,and Phonetic Study (Linguistics)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1990
* Roxana Newman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 07/31/1990
* USD 87,231.00

The research project is an integrated study of final vowel lengths in Hausa, a
widely spoken language of Nigeria and Niger, one of the rarer languages of the
world with contrastive length in word final position. The findings should throw
light on the structure of the lexicon, contribute to a deeper understanding of
shortening, lengthening, and neutralization processes in the morphosyntactic
component of the grammar, and provide instrumentally determined descriptions of
these differences operating at various levels of the language. The study will
contribute to current interest in the theoretical status of length in phonology
by providing a comprehensive case study on which to test such notions. Dr.
Newman's interactive activities will include teaching courses in her
specializations (Hausa language and lexicography), supervising graduate students
in Hausa linguistics, presenting guest lectures at various forums, and generally
providing a role model to the female academic community as a scientist working
in a subfield of linguistics where women tend to be underrepre- sented. This
project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of
science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science
and engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and
engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By
encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment
in the Nation's future scientific vitality.