* 8800704
* Collaborative H-Alpha and Radar Measurements of the Coupled Thermosphere, Ionosphere and Exosphere--University of       Michigan Participation
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Sushil Atreya, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 09/30/1991
* USD 138,454.00

The outermost atmosphere of the earth consists of hydrogen, the lightest gas,
which is produced by the dissociation of water vapor and methane in the
altitudes of above 500km, where the H atoms travel on free ballistic orbits out
to distances of as much as 10 earth radii before returning. Some of the H atoms
have sufficient energy to escape the earth completely, and it is in this way
that the primitive earth lost the large amounts of hydrogen to make possible the
present oxygen rich atmosphere. The hydrogen provides a background medium
through which energetic charges particles trapped in the earth's magnetic field
(the ring current and Van Allen belts) travel, and collisions with the H atoms
are the main loss process for the trapped ions energized during magnetic storms.
The energetic neutrals resulting from such collisions travel on straight line
trajectories, and can provide, with suitable detectors, "images" of the ring
current in an analogous way to photons entering a camera. Collisions with low
energy ions are an important cooling process for the very numerous low energy
ions that also populate the near earth space threaded by the earth's magnetic
field (the Magnetosphere). Thus it is important to know the distribution of
hydrogen around the earth (the Geocorona) to be able to model the interactions
with the ions; interpret "images" in energetic neutrals; and quantify the escape
rate. This information can be obtained by ground based observations with Fabry
Perot interferometers, and a number of observers and theoreticians at three
universities (Wisconsin, Michigan, and Alaska) and the Aerospace Corporation
have formed a group to carry out simultaneous measurements from sites ranging
from Puerto Rico to Spitzbergen, to determine the latitude variation, and the
height distribution of the Hydrogen.