* 8800610
* Mathematical Sciences:  Geometric Function Theory in SeveralComplex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1989
* Jean-Pierre Rosay, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1989
* USD 22,547.00

Three main mathematical themes will be developed in this project, built around
the theory of several complex variables. In the first, techniques from partial
differential equations, especially real variable microlocal techniques, will be
applied to provide insight into the relationship between the smoothness of a
function and the type of curve (surface) which contains the curve. In one
complex dimension one either concludes that the function must be smooth or else
its Fourier coefficients decay slowly. In higher dimensions this phenomenon is
believed to be related to the nature of the wave front set. Related work will
involve questions of uniqueness for Cauchy -Riemann functions. Emphasis will be
placed on the characterization of functions vanishing of infinite order along
curves which are not complex tangential and on the relevance of the hypothesis
of nonflatness as it relates to the regularity of CR-mappings. Additionally,
work will be done on fundamental questions concerning holomorphic maps from
complex n-dimensional space to itself. Typical of these are maps whose Jacobian
is unity having images of finite volume (they exist) and automorphisms which,
for reasons unknown, do not distinguish countable dense sets, but act
differently on discrete countable sets. This research will have application to
the general understanding of the geometry of complex space and to complex
partial differential operators defined on manifolds.