* 8800221
* PRF: An Empirical Test of Energetic Compromise at the Whole Organism Level
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1989
* Catherine Loudon, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 06/30/1989
* USD 26,400.00

The objective of this research is to evaluate the energetics of an inducible
chemical defense in an insect. The species that will be used, Diploptera
punctata (a Pacific Island cockroach), is known to synthesize and store a
mixture of quinones which it sprays at predators. It has recently been shown
that this chemical defense is under endogenous control. Therefore, it is
possible to obtain individuals with and without defensive quinones. How the
total energy budget of a polymorphic organism is affected under different
expressions of the trait will be determined. Of particular interest is a test of
energetic compromise: the idea that because organisms operate under limited
energy budgets, an elaboration or hypertrophy in one part must be accompanied by
a reduction elsewhere. The total energy budgets for defended and undefended
cockroaches in two different feeding regimes will be estimated by oxygen
consumption measurements. Size and fecundity will be measured to assess a
possible reallocation of energy between growth or reproduction and chemical
defense. The results will show whether reallocation of energy occurs within a
fixed energy budget or whether the total energy budget is increased to
accommodate the costs of an induced chemical defense. The project will be
supported by funds provided for a one-year postdoctoral research fellowship to
Dr. Catherine Loudon, who will conduct the studies at Cornell University.