* 8800813
* Synthetic, Mechanistic, and Catalytic Actinide              Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Tobin Marks, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 09/30/1991
* USD 364,384.00

This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
provides renewed support for a project concerned with the organometallic
chemistry of the actinide and lanthanide elements. The actinide elements include
the very heavy metals, such as uranium, whereas the lanthanide elements, also
known as the "rare earths," include the less familiar metals, such as neodynium
and yttrium which find practical uses in lasers. These elements are of
substantial current interest to organometallic chemists because they have been
found to react in unusual and synthetically useful ways with organic compounds.
The project is a broad exploration of the chemical properties and mechanisms of
reactions of organometallic compounds of the f-group elements. The goal is to
develop and understand new chemistry based on the unusual structural and
thermodynamic properties and reactivity of these metal ions. Chemical
transformations (both stoichiometric and catalytic) to be studied include metal-
centered H-H, C-H and C-C activation processes, as well as olefin insertion,
modification and oligomerization processes. Emphasis will be placed also on the
synthesis and properties of complexes having new types of ligands and new formal
oxidation states. The long range goal is to understand those structural and
electronic factors which control chemical reactivity of these elements, and to
capitalize on features which stimulate new or enhanced modes of reactivity.