* 8800411
* REU and ROA:  Ionic Interactions in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Frank Millero, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/1991
* USD 230,690.00

Dr. Millero proposes to continue his study of how ionic interactions affect
chemical processes in seawater and other natural waters. In the next two years
he will examine how the major components of seawater affect the rates of
oxidation of metals and nonmetals. Measurements of the rates of oxidation will
be made in seawater as a function of pH, salinity and temperature. Kinetic
measurents will also be made in mixed ionic solutions (Na-Mg-Ci, Na-Cl-SO4,
NaC1-NaC104, etc.) at a constant ionic strength to elucidate the ionic
interactions. Studies of the products and intermediates of the oxidation will be
made in an attempt to elucidate the mechanisms of the reaction. During the next
two years he also plans to continue measurements on the oxidation of Fe(II),
Cu(I) and H2S with H2O2 in seawater and the major sea salts. New measurements
will be initiated on the oxidation of H2SO3 with H2O2. Thermodynamic pK1 and pK2
measurements for the ionization of H2So3 in NaC1, NaMgC1, and KC1 will be
completed as a function of temperature (0 to 50degrees C) and ionic strength (0
to 6m). These measurements will be used to examine the effect of pH on the
oxidation of H2SO3. He will participate in field studies in the Black Sea
(1988), direct measurements will be made on the oxidation of H2S in these waters
to compare field measurements with laboratory results. Differences are expected
due to the coupled oxidations of Fe(II) and Mn (II) and catalytic effects of
micro-organisms. Laboratory measurements using metal saturated HS- solutions
will be made to examine the catalytic effects that may occur in natural waters.
The effect various parameters have on the formation of intermediates SO32- will
also be examined.