* 8800176
* REU:  An Aeromagnetic Survey of the Northern Juan de Fuca   Ridge and the Sovanco Fracture Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1988,08/31/1989
* Harlan Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/1989
* USD 68,524.00

This is a project to study the Northern Juan de Fuca Ridge using high-density
aeromagnetic data. Approximately 2600 sq. mi. were covered at a track spacing of
1 nm. during a survey performed by the Canadian government in 1986. The area
included the Endeavor and West Valley segments, the Middle Valley and the Heck
and Heckle seamount chains. The analyses of the magnetic data will address a
number of scientific questions. Among them are the variation of the Central
Anomaly Magnetic High along strike of the Endeavor Segment, thermal or
alteration demagnetization of the crust in the high-temperature sedimented
Middle Valley, and magnetization of the Heck and Heckle Seamounts. To constrain
the forward modeling, magnetic property determinations of existing samples will
be made. The PI will also perform forward modeling of the magnetic signature of
the 10-15 km scale blocks located in the Sovanco Fracture Zone in order to
determine whether competing hypotheses for the nature of these blocks can be
resolved by high-density magnetic data. These studies are important for
determining the cost effectiveness of high-density aeromagnetic data as a tool
for marine geophysical studies. The sites chosen for study are important because
the data will help us understand how small tectonic plates evolve near a
subduction zone.