* 8800730
* Chloroplast DNA as a Tool in the Systematics of Vernonia    (Vernonieae: Asteraceae)  (Systematic Biology)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Sterling Keeley, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 07/31/1990
* USD 105,878.00

A systematic survey of DNA variation in the genus Vernonia
(Vernonieae:Asteraceae) will be undertaken using comparative restriction site
mapping and DNA sequencing in chloroplast DNA. Restriction site maps will
provide the first direct genetic evidence for relationships between New and Old
World taxa within the large tribe Vernonieae, and make it possible to construct
a genetically based phylogeny. No such phylogeny current exists. Phylogenetic
relationships based on cpDNA structure will contribute to an understanding of
biogeographical relationships with Vernonia and the Vernonieae, and would be of
value in understanding the processes of evolution which have caused the
Asteraceae to diverge into distinct tribes. The Asteraceae is the largest family
of flowering plants with ca. 20,000 species worldwide, an understanding of
evolutionary processes within this family has significance to our overall
understanding of evolutionary processes responsible for past and present floral
diversity. The interactive phase of this project involves a combination of
professional activities as a visiting teacher and researcher in Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology and participation in programs in Women's Studies and the
Women's Center at University of Connecticut. A seminar program jointly sponsored
by Ecology and Evolution and the Women's Center to bring visiting women
scientists to campus will be used to integrate coursework in Molecular
Systematics and Women in Science courses. This project furthers VPW program
objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their
careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and
(2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.