* 8800130
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Warren Wogen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1990
* USD 44,762.00

Operator theory has its origins in the mathematical foundations of quantum
mechanics. There, one needs infinitely many degrees of freedom (best realized in
infinite-dimensional Hilbert space) and a way of representing physical
quantities by objects that do not obey the ordinary laws of arithmetic.
Operators on Hilbert space serve the latter purpose quite well. A given operator
moves around pieces (subspaces) of the underlying space. One of the fundamental
questions in the subject is, how much can you tell about the operator just from
its invariant subspace lattice (the collection of subspaces that are mapped into
themselves by the operator)? Important discoveries by the principal investigator
on this project have shown that the relationship is more subtle than was
hitherto conjectured. This work will be followed up. Another aspect of the
research to be performed has to do with a particular way of realizing Hilbert
space and certain operators on it. Namely, the space comes as a space of
analytic functions of several complex variables, all of them defined on some
common domain, and the operator comes from composing the functions with a
transformation of the domain. When more than one complex variable is involved,
well-behaved transformations of the domain can give rise to composition
operators that are not well behaved. Exploration of this mysterious phenomenon
is part of the agenda of the project.