* 8800159
* Hormonal Regulation of Gene Expression in Lymphocytes       (Biological Science)
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Diane Eardley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1990
* USD 109,972.00

This project tests the hypothesis that insulin and insulin- like growth factor
1 (IGF-1) can inhibit gene expression in lymphocytes. This laboratory recently
reported that the growth inducing properties of Interleukin-2 (IL-2) for normal
T and B cells can be inhibited by superphysiologic doses of insulin and
physiologic doses of IGF-1. Since large doses of insulin are required in
comparison to those required for IGF-1, we have postulated that the growth
inhibitory properties of insulin are mediated through the IGF-1 receptor on
lymphocytes. The experiments will be in two areas: the ability of insulin/IGF-1
to modulate IL-2 gene expression in T cells will be tested, and the ability of
insulin/IGF-1 to modulate immunoglobulin M (IgM) J chain gene expression in the
BCL1 B cell lymphoma system will be analyzed. The studies will establish whether
insulin/IGF-1 are important hormones for inhibition of gene expression, cell
growth, and differentiation of T and B cells. The interactive component involves
guest lectures in undergraduate and graduate Immunology courses and a special
topics course on the molecular and cell biology of T cells. Additionally, Dr.
Eardley is organizing a weekly discussion group, including a Saturday workshop,
relating to issues concerning women in science. This project furthers VPW
program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance
their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF
and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by
providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in
industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.