* 8800920
* Dissertation Research: Effects of Enriched CO2 Environments on Plants and Insects: Herbivory and Resource Allocation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Fakhri Bazzaz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 11/30/1990
* USD 10,000.00

The ability to simulate enriched CO2 atmospheres provides a unique opportunity
to: 1) study the dynamics of plant/herbivore interactions under these
conditions; and 2) examine plant allocation patterns under controlled carbon and
nitrogen availabilities. The nutritional ecology and fitness of herbivores
feeding on plants grown in enhanced CO2 environments over several generations
will be investigated. In addition, the effects of herbivores on plant fitness
under different CO2 conditions will be compared. Plantago lanceolata
(Plantaginaceae), a herbaceous perennial which contains iridoid glycosides, and
a specialist herbivore, Junonia coenia (Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae), which uses
these compounds as feeding and oviposition stimulants, will serve as an
excellent system to study these interactions. To examine trade-offs in
allocation of carbon and nitrogen resources to growth, reproduction, and
defense, individuals of two plant species, differing in the classes of
allelochemicals they contain, will be grown under varying carbon (CO2) and
nitrogen availabilities. Growth, reproductive output and allelochemical content
will be determined for P. lanceolata (which contains iridoid glycosides) and
Penstemon digitalis (Scrophulariaceae) which contains both nitrogen-based
(alkaloids) and carbon-based (phenolics and iridoid glycosides) allelochemicals.