* 8800499
* Models of Constituency Influences and Issue Configurations: Analysis of Progressive Era Roll Call Voting, House of Representatives (Political Science)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Eileen McDonagh, Radcliffe College
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/28/1990
* USD 88,135.00

This project analyzes how legislative constituencies and issue configurations
are related to the formulation of social policy legislation in the House of
Representatives during the Progressive Era decades of 1900-1920. Legislative
constituencies are defined on the basis of state legislative action on social
policy issues that then subsequently reach a roll call vote at the National
level. By examining the relationship between state level legislative roll call
voting and subsequent voting outcomes in the Federal legislature, it will be
possible to investigate how social policy formulation shifts from the state to
the National level in these decades, thereby setting the stage for the New Deal
Era to follow. Issue configurations will be assessed in terms of whether the
Progressive Era, noted for democratic reform, produced issue clusters that were
unidimensional or multi-dimensional in structure. Of particular importance will
be the alignment of civil rights and social welfare issues, the former
representing legal and procedural principles of democracy and the latter
economic and outcome principles of democracy. With the recent decades of the
social and political change of the 1960s in mind, we will evaluate how the
social and political change defining the inauguration of the twentieth century
linked these dual principles of democratic demands for social policy
formulation. With these perspectives in mind, passage of the Nineteenth
Amendment--enfranchising women--will be examined as a case in point. The
particular issue alignments on this legislation as well as the influence of
state level constituencies will be examined in the context of civil rights and
social policy issue dimensions. Dr. McDonagh will also conduct a lecture series
on Gender and Social Science, serve as a mentor and advisor to undergraduates in
the Women's Studies Concentration at Harvard/ Radcliffe, and supervise an
undergraduate research assistant. This project furthers VPW program objectives
which are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to
encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.