* 8801287
* International Conference on Raman Spectroscopy - Calcutta,  India, November 1988, Group Travel Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1989
* Herbert Strauss, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1989
* USD 41,250.00

Description: This project supports travel by 15 U.S. scientists to the
International Conference on Raman Spectroscopy to be held in Calcutta, India,
Nov. 1988. The conference is planned to commemorate the 100th birthday of C.V.
Raman and the 60th anniversary of the discovery of the Raman Effect. The U.S.
participants comprise chemists and physicists. Their work covers the range of
Raman Spectroscopy from small molecules in the gas phase to nucleic acids. Most
of them are well known scientists, but some are younger scientists doing
exceptional work in their fields. Each has provided a title for the topic to be
presented at the conference. Participants from India and from other countries
are expected to be similarly well selected. The Indian organizer is Dr. C.N.R.
Rao, Director of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India, aided by
some of that country's most eminent scientists. It is expected that the
proceedings of this major conference will be published for permanent reference.
Scope: The U.S. and India have a significant number of well known scientists who
have worked, and continue to do research, utilizing this field of investigation,
first identified by Raman. They work in materials, biology, physics, chemistry
and other fields. The meeting is very likely to result in considerable exchanges
of information and possibly lead to future research collaboration in these
areas.