* 8801717
* RUI: Growth Equations for Sporiangiophores of Phycomyces:   Transpiration
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Joseph K. Ortega, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 11/30/1991
* USD 190,800.00

The sensory system of the sporangiophores of Phycomyces blakesleeanus has been
of interest for many years. The sporangiophores are large single cells that
detect and respond to several different environmental stimuli with either a
symmetric or an asymmetric change in elongational growth rate. Thus, fundamental
to a detailed understanding of the sensory system is an in-depth quantitative
understanding of the regulation of the sporangiophore's growth rate. The long-
term objective of the proposed research is to establish quantitative
relationships (Growth Equations) for sporangiophore growth rate and water
transport rate, for all stages of sporangiophore development. Previously, it was
demonstrated that the sporangiophore may transpire up to 85% of its water
uptake, thus transpiration is an important process which must be included in the
quantitative relationships. The immediate objective of this project is to extend
the Growth Equations to include transpiration, and to study the transpiration
process as a function of development and environmental conditions. The results
obtained may provide new insight into the transpiration process, water
transport, plant cell growth and growth regulation, plant cell development, and
sensory transduction. %%% Dr. Ortega proposes to experimentally determine the
magnitude of, and changes in, biophysical and biochemical properties of the
giant single cells of the fungus Phycomyces in order to establish a quantitative
mathematical model for the growth rate and behavior of these cells. These large
cells detect and respond to several different environmental stimuli such as
light, with either a symmetric or asymmetric change in elongational growth rate
and have thus been used as a model system for elucidating the sensory
transduction process. He here will determine the effects of transpiration (water
retention or loss) on growth rates and incorporate this information into his
mathematical models. The results will have a wider significance in understanding
the mechanics of cell wall growth and water transport in other fungi and also in
green plants.