* 8801486
* Mathematical Sciences: Qualitative Behavior of Solutions    of Elliptic and Parabolic Partial Differential Equations.
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Sigurd Angenent, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1990
* USD 31,401.00

This work pursues two fundamental problems in the mathematical analysis of
elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations of nonlinear type. The
first concerns the dynamics of degenerate parabolic reaction diffusion
equations. These equations occur in models of population dynamics with diffusion
depending on the density. The main objective here is to construct and classify
connecting orbits between equilibria. A theory of abstract parabolic equations
of DaPrato and Grisvard will be used in this effort. A second objective is to
determine when the principle of linearized stability applies and to seek
replacement principles when it fails. Application of the proposed method has
worked successfully in past work on related degenerate parabolic equations. The
other main theme, which derives from differential geometry, concerns the motion
of a curve on a surface governed by the curvature vector (of the curve). A
parabolic partial differential equation represents the motion connecting the
flow along the curve with the product of the normal and the geodesic curvature
vectors. In differential geometry, this equation arises formally as the gradient
flow of the length function. The equilibria of the differential equation are the
geodesics on the surface. Earlier results on nodal properties of solutions of
linear parabolic equations will be used in attempts to shed light on the
intersection properties of solutions of the curvature shortening equation.
Related to this will be the study of intersections of properties of geodesics
within the same homotopy classes. Variations of this problem occur in the theory
of dendrite formation in metallurgy.