* 8801923
* Cellular Control of Bioluminescence by a Primitive          Epithelial Conduction System
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Paul Brehm, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/29/1992
* USD 213,700.00

The goal of this research is to understand the control of bioluminescence in
the hydrozoan coelenterate, Obelia, as part of a more general understanding of
how epithelial action potentials control effector responses in lower
invertebrate species. In this animal all of the behavioral responses are under
the control of action potentials in electrically coupled epithelial cells,
rather than under neural control as in higher animals. Luminescence in these
organisms results from the activation of a calcium-dependent photoprotein which
provides an endogenous intracellular calcium indicator. Previous experiments
using a combination of patch clamp analysis and video image analysis have shown
that calcium entering nonluminescent epithelial cells during an action potential
results in the passage of a chemical signal into the luminescent cells via gap
junctions. This signal (hypothesized to be calcium, itself) then results in
activation of the intracellular photoprotein. Experiments are proposed which
will establish the identity of the chemical signal. In addition to the
demonstration that luminescence is triggered as the result of a chemical signal
passing across gap junctions, other experiments have disclosed the existance of
a novel type of voltage independent calcium channel within the luminescent cell
itself. Like the initiation of luminescence, the activation of this current is
also dependent on chemical signalling through the gap junction. In further
studies, whole cell and single channel recording techniques will be used to
characterize this channel which represents a novel mechanism of calcium entry
across the plasma membrane. This research on the physiological mechanism
controlling light emission by a luminescent marine organism has already produced
important insights into the function of junctions that mediate communication
between cells. "Gap junctions" are structurally specialized appositions between
cells and are found in many tissues of animals at all levels of complexity. Much
indirect evidence has led to the belief that these junctions serve in
transmission of chemical signals between cells. The results of this research
have provided the first clear demonstration that chemical signal transmission
across gap junctions is involved in an important physiological function. In
addition, a novel type of channel for calcium entry into cells has been
discovered. A continuation of the study of this interesting system will surely
expand our understanding of the control of light emission by these small marine
organisms, but this study is also likely to provide further fundamental insights
into the general mechanisms of cellular communication.