* 8801457
* Mathematical Sciences: Linear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1988,04/30/1992
* Michael Taylor, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1992
* USD 119,283.00

Work will be done on problems arising in the linear theory of partial
differential equations. The research involves continued efforts to analyze
boundary problems for wave equations. Current investigations focus on classes of
operators, known as Airy operators, which describe reflections of waves by
boundaries in the presence of grazing or gliding rays. This work has numerous
applications to problems in scattering theory. Studies have focused on a symbol
calculus for the Airy operators which arise when hyperbolic equations reduce to
boundary problems via a parametrix construction. The operators are considerably
different if grazing rays or gliding rays are present. Despite these differences
a good operator calculus and even a useful symbol calculus is developing which
will be sufficient to treat natural boundary problems in the presence of rays. A
second area of emphasis in this project concerns various ways in which
noncommutative harmonic analysis applies to problems in partial differential
equations. Two particular directions of research are the spectral theory of
Schroedinger operators associated with gauge fields and noncommutative
microlocal analysis. Specific applications to chaotic behavior of classical
dynamical systems are possible through knowledge of the spectral behavior of
Schroedinger operators. Tools necessary to treat these problems include
geometric invariant theory and group representations. Other work will
concentrate on the application of noncommutative microlocal analysis in the
study of hyperbolic equations with double characteristics, a more difficult
subject than the hypoelliptic case. A calculus of Fourier integral operators
will be developed using noncommutative harmonic analysis to extend recent work
on pseudodifferential operators. The Heisenberg group has been central to much
of the current research in this area. There is a wealth of other Lie groups
which must be tried out for versions of noncommutative microlocal analysis. This
line of research will undoubtedly be developed in the coming years. Numerous
applications of this work to diffraction of waves, hyperbolic systems with
viscosity and propagation of singularities can be expected.