* 8801048
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Economic):  Reform and     Productivity in China's Industrial Economy
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Gary Jefferson, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 01/31/1991
* USD 69,100.00

This proposal, between Drs. Thomas G. Rawski and Gary H. Jefferson of the
University of Pittsburgh, and Professors WANG Hongchang ZHENG Yuxin of the
Institute of Quantitative and Technical Economics of the Chinese Academy of
Social Sciences, focuses on productivity and reform in China's industrial
economy, critical factors in assessing the success of China's economic reforms
since 1978. The investigators' initial analysis shows that multi-factor
productivity in state industry, previously thought to have stagnated in the mid
1950's, rose slowly before 1978 and accelerated sharply during the post 1978
reforms. Because aggregate results hide a wide range of sectoral and regional
performance, the investigators will use newly available data to begin a detailed
survey of sectoral and regional productivity trends; to investigate compilation,
aggregation and pricing problems; to pursue a production function approach to
specifying the technological properties of Chinese studies that might expand the
variety of institutional arrangements available for systematic empirical
analysis. They want to describe the efficiency of various segments of Chinese
industry; to identify what determines unusual productivity; and eventually to
use these empirical results as a basis for examining policy alternatives and
institutional arrangements to improve industrial productivity and efficiency.
This proposal is jointly sponsored by NSF and the Chinese Academy of Social
Sciences.