* 8801886
* Heterogeneous Kinetics of the Major Thermomonospora fusca   and Trichoderma reesei Cellulases
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* David Wilson, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1989
* USD 24,912.00

During enzymatic hydrolysis, cellulose particles are attacked by cellulases
resulting in the production of fermentable sugars. However, prior to the
production of significant amounts of fermentable sugars, considerable
fragmentation of the initial cellulose particles occurs. Although several
investigators have reported on this phenomena, there has been very little effort
at assessing the rate and extent of fragmentation, nor have there been analyses
of the influence of cellulose structural features and cellulase characteristics
on the rate and extent of fragmentation. The purpose of this investigation is to
experimentally and mathematically analyze cellulose fragmentation. The influence
of mean particles size, cellulosepore volume and crystallinity, and the
characteristics of cellulases of Thermomonospora fusca on the rate and extent of
fragmentation will be analyzed. Cellulose is the most abundant carbohydrate
produced by the biosphere. It is a major component of plant cell walls. In
addition, cellulose represents 40 percent of the municipal solid waste generated
across the country. Over the last 10 years there has been considerable interest
in taping these renewable resources for industrial chemicals and foods. Part of
this interest is stimulated by the relatively low cost of cellulosic materials.
A number of microorganisms produce enzymes (cellulases) that are capable of
converting cellulose to fermentable sugars. Part of this conversion process is
the break-up of cellulose particles into smaller particles. This fragmentation
process is one of the least understood aspects of enzymatic hydrolysis. The
purpose of this investigation is to analyze and to mathematically model the
fragmentation process associated with the enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose. The
model to be developed would be useful for assessing the feasibility of using
cellulases for the production of dietary fibers and provide more insight into
the overall mechanism for producing fermentable sugars.