* 8801599
* Cell Differentiation in Uromyces: Role of the Plamma        Membrane in Topographical Signal Reception
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1993
* Harvey Hoch, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/28/1993
* USD 345,800.00

Many fungi develop specialized infection structures, termed appressoria, which
are necessary for successful penetration of their hosts. Formation of these
appressoria, a cell differentiation event, occurs when the fungus perceives
specific signals from the host. In the bean rust fungus, Uromyces
appendiculatus, such signals are entirely topographical and are located at
stomata, the only sites at which the fungus can successfully penetrate the leaf
of the host plant. Previous research with this fungus has shown that the
cytoskeleton is involved in mediating the signal for cell differentiation. More
recent data suggest that the plasma membrane is involved in initial reception of
the signal. In the proposed continuation of this research the role of the plasma
membrane in signal reception will be examined in greater detail.
Electrophysiological studies of the membrane during signal reception will be
done to determine whether stretch-activated ion channels or ATPase pump
activities are primarily involved in the reception process. Possible changes in
the distribution of intramembrane particles during signal reception will also be
characterized. Finally, biochemical pathways known as membrane signal
transducers in other systems will be sought in the plasma membrane of Uromyces.
These studies will advance our knowledge of the mechanisms involved in the
sensing responses that result in the accurate placement of the invading fungal
appressorium over the host leaf stomate during colonization of the host plant by
the fungus. The significance of these experiments extends beyond the fungus-host
plant interaction, however. Little is yet known about the mechanisms by which
cells, in general, sense and respond to the physical features of their
environment. Stretch-activated ion channels in cell membranes have only recently
been discovered, and their function in cellular sensing of mechanical stimuli
has been proposed, but not clearly established. Studies in this interesting
system, could therefore shed light on the general problem of the mechanism of
mechanical sensitivity of cells, and the possible role of stretch-activated ion
channels in this process.