* 8801766
* Roles of Cell Surface N-Linked Oligosaccharides             in Intercellular Cohesion in Dictyostelium Discoideum
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Ellen Henderson, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Brady
* 08/31/1991
* USD 120,987.00

There are dramatic differences in processing of glycoprotein N- linked
oligosaccharides (OLS) at different stages during development of D. discoideum.
Recent studies with wild type and mutant strains have provided strong evidence
for a role of two cell surface-derived OLS in intercellular recognition and
cohesion during late aggregation. These OLS are not detectable at earlier and
later developmental stages. The proposed research will establish the chemical
structure of these glycans, using a combination of fast atom bombardment/mass
spectrometry in collaboration with Dr. Catherine Costello at M.I.T. and using
specific glycosidase treatments. These results will be extended to analysis of
structure/function relations by specific degradative treatments to ascertain
effects on cohesion inhibition by the OLS and by study of specific mutant
strains conditionally defective in both OLS assembly and cohesion. The exact
contribution of these OLS to cohesion, in comparison with known glycoproteins
implicated in cohesion, will be tested by efforts to inhibit aggregation with
combinations of glycans and other perturbing agents, including antibodies.
Monoclonal antibodies will be generated by immunization with glycopeptides
carrying the OLS, after covalent conjugation to a carrier protein such as BSA.
These antibodies will also be used for identification of the in vivo
glycoproteins which carry the OLS and for isolation of mutants lacking them and
of revertants which have recovered them. %%% A large proportion of the proteins
in higher organisms carry complex sugar molecules (oligosaccharides) as part of
their structure. These oligosaccharides contribute to the functional properties
of the proteins in ways that are not well characterized but are known to be
important in cell-cell adhesion. Dr. Henderson has undertaken a
structure/function analysis of oligosaccharides known to be involved in the
aggregation of cells during development. She is using the simple organism, D.
discoideum, as a model system