* 8801439
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential Geometry and Function   Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* C. David Minda, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1990
* USD 68,875.00

This project continues mathematical studies on the role of hyperbolic geometry
in the theyro of complex function theory. The goals of the work are to relate
hyperbolic geometry to Euclidean quantities such as Euclidean estimates of the
hyperbolic metric and descriptions of Euclidean properties of hyperbolic
geodesics. Results of this type have application to questions on distortion of
univalent functions and estimates for Bloch and Landau constants. Geometric
notions of symmetry and reflection play a central role in this research. Typical
of the type of problems to be undertaken is establishing the existence and exact
values of natural constants associated with classes of functions. The Bloch
constant, for instance, measures the largest schlicht disk in the Riemann image
surface of a function, whereas the Marden constant measures the size of the
largest disk in the domain where a function must be univalent. These fundamental
values have been obtained for some classes but not for some of the more
important univalent functions. Work also continues in the study of hyperbolic
geometry of regions where results point to appropriate generalizations to
multiply connected regions. Two main goals are pursued here, the first being one
of finding lower bounds for the density of the hyperbolic metric in terms of the
distance to the boundary. The second goal is to obtain estimates for the
Euclidean curvature and center of curvature for a hyperbolic geodesic. Much of
this work will concentrate initially on special domains such as those which are
spherically k-convex or hyperbolically k-convex before moving on to multiply
connected ones.