* 8801912
* Sensitivity Analysis and Real-Time Control of Discrete      Event Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1988,08/31/1992
* Christos Cassandras, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1992
* USD 173,367.00

The two major objectives of this project are (a) to establish a general
framework for estimating performance sensitivities of discrete event dynamic
systems (DEDS) on-line, and (b) to integrate sensitivity information into
optimization algorithms with real-time applicability. The proposed research will
pursue some new directions in sample-path-based methodologies, using efficiently
constructed "augmented systems." Augmented systems are intended to capture the
stochastic behavior of both a nominal and perturbed DEDS, using only information
directly observed. For a broad class of models and performance criteria, this
framework is expected to provide sensitivity estimates with respect to
parameters which may be real (e.g. job flows) or integer-valued (e.g. thresholds
used in optimal dynamic policies). Algorithms will be developed for dealing with
fundamental DEDS control problems, such as dynamic routing, scheduling, and
adaptive resource sharing. Sensitivity analysis will be integrated into static
and dynamic distributed algorithms for addressing performance optimization
problems in the presence of real-time constraints (deadlines). The results of
this project are expected to contribute to the growing effort towards general
methodologies for DEDS analysis. They are also expected to provide workable
algorithms for on-line optimization of complex systems with no available
analytical models. The results from this work are very promising for dealing
with control issues for such emerging technological environments as automated
manufacturing, distributed processing systems, and computer networks. The PI is
well qualified and the institution provides an excellent environment for the
research. A three-year award is highly recommended.