* 8801909
* Molecular Analysis of a "Cadherin Related Molecule"
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Jack Lilien, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1991
* USD 110,000.00

All embryonic cells thus far examined bear both calcium independent and calcium
dependent adhesive systems. The calcium dependent systems are mediated by a
family of molecules referred to generically as calCAMs. Dr. Lilien has shown
that the calCAMs are divisible into at least two structural types on the basis
of their two dimensional peptide maps. One group of calCAMs have peptide maps
with over 60% of the spots being similar to N- cadherin related molecules. The
second type is represented by L- CAM and shares only 20% of its peptides with
the first group. Embryonic chick liver has both a cadherin related molecule,
CRM- L and L-CAM. Dr. Lilien proposes to further compare the structure of CRM-L
with N-cadherin and L-CAM. To accomplish this he will use molecular genetic
techniques isolating cDNA clones of the cadherin related molecules in liver. He
will screen liver cDNA libraries with antibodies recognizing all cadherins and
oligonucleotide probes based on the known sequences of L-CAM and N-cadherin.
Additionally he will attempt to prepare antibodies which are specific to CRM-L.
To generate these he will use synthetic peptides chosen from sequence
information for immunization of rabbits. These antibodies along with monoclonals
will be screened immunohistochemically and ultimately analyzed for their effect
on liver cell adhesion. %%% The development of the organs in an embryo involves
movements of cells and groups of cells relative to each other. These movements
require that cells make and break adhesions with neighboring cells. This
proposal is an investigation of a class of molecules potentially important for
adhesive interactions between cells.