* 8801572
* Does a Cardiac Hormone Play a Role in Fish Osmoregulation   and Euryhalinity
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1990
* David Evans, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 05/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

For 25 years, indirect evidence has been accumulating that animals produce a
hormone that can reduce blood presure by prompting the dilation of blood vessels
and the excretion of salt and water by the kidneys. In the past 7 years it has
become apparent that the heart itself can secrete such a hormone, and it has now
been determined that the hormone is a peptide containing 28 amino acids. The
hormone, atriopeptin, affects vascular resistance and kidney excretion both
directly and indirectly, via inhibition of other hormones. Fish face chronic
salt and water loads because their body fluids are more or less concentrated
than sea water or fresh water repectively. The organs involved in maintaining a
relatively constant salt and water content of the blood include the kidney, the
gills, the gut, and the urinay bladder. Our hypothesis is that the ability of
fish to maintain this homeostasis (osmoregulation) when presented with varying
environmental salinities (euryhalinity) is dependent upon an atriopeptin from
the heart. It is the intent of our study to extract and purify this putative
fish atriopeptin, determine if immunoreactive atriopeptin is in the blood, heart
and brain of various species, and if its amount changes with alteration of
environmental salinity. Our reseasrch will give some insight into the evolution
of structure and the function of this important vasoactive peptide.