* 8801154
* Dissertation Research: Costs and Benefits of                Intraspecific Brood Parasitism
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1990
* Bruce Lyon, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 05/31/1990
* USD 7,000.00

Providing parental care to offspring is the usual mode ofnurturing in birds.
However, in a variety of species, some females lay eggs in the nests of other
individuals of their own species, which then rear the offspring. There is
increasing evidence that this intraspecific brood parasitism is a widespread
phenomenon in birds. However, the adaptive significance of this behavior remains
unclear. For almost all of the seventy odd species where intraspecific brood
parasitism been documented, the identity of the parasitic females, or what they
gain by laying eggs in the nests of other females, is unknown. The widespread
occurrence of intraspecific brood parasitism raises some fundamental questions
about the costs and benefits of providing parental care to offspring in
particular, and about the optimization of life history strategies in general.
Tounderstand the ecological and evolutionary significance ofintraspecific brood
parasitism in birds, a population of American coots in central British Columbia
will be studied. Brood parasitism is common in this population and nearly a
quarter of all nests were parasitized in 1987. Research to date has revealed
that most parasitic females are territorial birds with nests of their own. Thus,
parasitic females can be trapped at their own nests, individually marked, and
their laying histories can be followed across years. The costs and benefits of
brood parasitism to these parasitic females, and the behavioral, demographic and
ecological factors associated with the behavior will be examined. Detailed
studies like this are necessary if the broad patterns of intraspecific
parasitism are to be understood.