* 8801880
* Hormonal Mediation of the Light Control of Internode        Extension Using Pea Genotypes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Peter Davies, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 11/30/1990
* USD 140,000.00

Light causes a pronounced decrease in stem growth rate. Dr. Davies proposes to
investigate the kinetics of hormonal changes in relation to the growth kinetics
following the transition from dark to red light in order to determine to what
extent, and in what manner, changes in endogenous hormones may mediate light-
induced changes in stem growth rate. Red light will be used to reduce the
complexity inherent in white light. Dr. Davies will use a range of pea length
genotypes whose gibberellin (GA) content is known. All of the genotypes grow
faster in the dark than in the light but vary in the proportional reduction in
their growth rate in the light. In some genotypes GAs are absent yet they are
tall; in such plants he finds a very high indoleacetic acid (IAA) level. He has
considerable evidence that GA may act via the induction of tryptophan racemase
causing the production of D-tryptophan, which is then the precursor of IAA. The
kinetics of growth are recorded by position transducers under darkness and
illumination of known spectral composition, and following hormone and inhibitor
applications. GAs, IAA and IAA conjugates, will be measured by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry and components of the IAA synthesis pathway
assayed. This will show the point(s) in the GA and IAA metabolic pathways at
which light acts, and whether a light induced change in GA levels in fact
operates by altering the level of IAA. %%% Light causes a decrease in the growth
of stems of plants previously grown in the dark. The mechanism by which this
occurs is unknown. One possibility is that light alters the level of plant
hormones. To determine whether plant hormones are involved one need to know the
rate at which light induces a decrease in growth, and then examine the changes
in the internal levels of the plant hormones to see if they change at the same
time. Dr. Davies will measure the rate of growth change and hormonal content in
pea varieties which have different stem lengths. The difference in stem lengths
is genetically controlled, and has been shown to be due to changes in levels or
responsiveness to plant hormones called gibberellins. There is also evidence
that this hormone may interact in some way in the synthesis of another hormone,
indoleacetic acid. Dr. Davies will measure the changes in the internal levels of
gibberellin and indole acetic acid to determine if and how light causes a
decrease in stem growth. This will improve our knowledge of how plants grow.