* 8801032
* Mathematical Sciences:  Geometric and Analytic Theory       of Holomorphic Functions of Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Edgar Stout, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1991
* USD 82,080.00

Work focusing on the mathematical theory of several complex variables will
concentrate on four major directions. The first concerns removable singularities
for first order d-bar boundary operators. These differential operators emulate
conjugate differentiation on the boundary of domains, reducing holomorphic
boundary values to zero. The ideas may be traced back to Riemann's celebrated
discovery for the removable singularities of bounded holomorphic functions of
one variable. Some sharp results have been obtained for the case of a ball in
two complex dimensions, but nothing for higher. In addition, work will be done
in comparing removable sets for bounded solutions of the d- bar operator against
sets removable for all solutions. A second thrust will seek to expand earlier
work on polynomial convexity from totally real submanifolds to simply real
manifolds. The place to begin will be real manifolds passing through the origin.
The goal of such research is to provide geometric criteria which guarantee
polynomial approximation of arbitrary continuous functions. In general, real
holomorphic functions on real analytic manifolds do not extend to be complex
analytic. If one reduces the requirement of analyticity to that of
subharmonicity or even pluriharmonicity, extensions are possible. This work will
seek to describe the obstructions to extension in terms of the geometry of the
manifold. Finally, efforts will be made to obtain boundary uniqueness results
for analytic varieties of dimension at least two. The source of this line of
investigation is a simple observation: two analytic discs in a two (complex)
dimensional ball, bounded by curves whose boundaries lie on the surface of the
ball either coincide or the boundaries intersect in very thin sets. The proper
statement of this result for higher varieties has been elusive, although recent
work points to the concept of peak sets as the proper context for the boundary
intersections.