* 8801885
* RUI: The Mechanism of mRNP Activation at Fertilization
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1988,08/31/1992
* James Grainger, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1992
* USD 257,024.00

The broad objective of this proposal is to elucidate the mechanisms that
control the activation of protein synthesis at fertilization in sea urchin eggs.
The increase in protein synthesis is mediated by both the activation of stored
maternal messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNPs) and an increase in the activity of
the translational machinery. Dr. Grainger proposes to do a detailed study of the
factors that control the repression and activation of stored maternal mRNPs.
Proteins that are involved in the translational repression of egg mRNPs will be
identified by comparing the protein pattern of inactive egg poly(A)+mRNPs and
active fertilized poly(A)+mRNPs. In addition, potential candidates for masking
factors will be isolated from in vitro activated mRNPs. Antibodies against these
mRNP masking proteins will be used to monitor changes in mRNP proteins as egg
mRNPs become activated at fertilization. Changes in intracellular calcium and pH
trigger ugg activation and the increase in the rate of protein synthesis. Dr.
Grainger will alter the calcium and pH levels of unfertilized eggs and measure
the effect of these changes on the translational activity of egg mRNPs. Using
antibodies against the mRNP masking factors, he will determine which proteins
are modified or released by these treatments. %%% The unfertilized egg is a
metabolically quiescent, non- dividing cell. Fertilization results in the
activation of a series of pathways, including those leading to an increase in
the rate of protein synthesis. Dr. Grainger proposes to study the biochemical
processes involved in this activation of protein synthesis upon fertilization
using the sea urchin as a model system.