* 8801669
* Table-Oriented Reference and Working Libraries for Economic and Social Research
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Catherine Ruggles, Prospect Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/28/1990
* USD 220,080.00

Statistical offices have always had the problem of how to distribute the data
they generate. Despite advances in computer composition, printed publications
remain expensive and time consuming to produce. Printed media also do not easily
lend themselves to re-use in extracts, newly generated tables, or calculations.
Data provided on computer tape not only require access to a mainframe computer,
they also generally involve investment in specialized ad hoc programming
services. With the spread of personal computers, some statistical offices are
providing their data on diskettes that can be read by these machines. However
such diskettes are often simple downloads from mainframe computer tapes, and
most users do not have the programming support needed to utilize the data or to
understand and analyze them in the absence of extensive accompanying
documentation. As a result, sales have been small and the productive use of data
much curtailed. The research carried out under Phase I of the present project
successfully tested the feasibility of developing a form of electronic
publishing that would integrate statistical data with their documentation so
that users could read the output directly, as in a printed publication, and the
computer could utilize it directly for processing and analytic purposes. Phase I
also successfully developed prototype software that would allow users to list,
retrieve, and browse through tabular data and documentation, make extracts from
them, and print them out or translate them into forms suitable for processing by
other software packages. The recommended award will support the final (Phase II)
stage of a project funded under the Small Business Innovation Research Program.
Phase II will be concerned with advancing the accomplishments of Phase I into a
generalized reference library system capable of serving the varied dissemination
practices of different statistical agencies, providing facilities for retrieving
and merging data from different databases, including bases containing diverse
types of data, and furnishing processing and analytic tools that meet the needs
of the casual user at the same time as they satisfy the more complex
requirements of advanced users, including data providers. Phase II will also be
concerned with creating modifications to the basic software that adapt its
operating characteristics and special features to the changing landscape of
computer technology and electronic publishing. The products and services to be
developed under Phase II research will be undertaken in cooperation with
statistical offices of various sorts both at home and abroad. The resultant
technology will thereafter be offered to such data sources via direct sale or
leasing arrangements. Since large corporations face many of the same data
handling problems as statistical offices in the public sector, extension of the
technology to corporate users will be explored.