* 8801699
* ESR Dating of Pleistocene Hominid Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* F. Clark Howell, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1990
* USD 99,450.00

In collaboration with Drs. Schwartz and Grun at McMaster University, Dr. Howell
will work to improve the ESR dating technique, apply it to tooth enamel, and
determine the ages of a series of significant archaeological sites. The ESR
dating technique is based on the measurement of energy stored in crystal
lattices which results from the bombardment by environmental radioactivity. The
amount of stored energy can be determined by electron spin resonance (ESR)
spectroscopy. The age of the crystal is then determined from the ratio of the
accumulated energy dose to the dose rate, which is a function of the
concentration of radioactive elements in the environment. This method can be
applied to the tooth enamel of large mammals and is thus applicable to most
Pleistocene prehistoric sites for ages up to a few million years. This project
includes two stages. In the first, the accuracy of the technique will be
assessed through analyses of materials of varying ages which have been dated by
other means. For several European sites uranium series dates are available over
a time span of the last several hundred thousand years. In East Africa, sites
dating to millions of years have been aged by K-A and these provide a second
controlled context. In the next stage of the research, ESR determinations will
be made on undated sites of outstanding anthropological significance. This
research is important for two reasons. Reliable and widely applicable dating
techniques are lacking for most archaeological sites over 40,000 years in age
(this is the effective time limit for radiocarbon dating). If ESR can be
established as a workable technique, many archaeological sites could then be
dated and the information derived from them would be greatly increased. The
technique would also be useful to geologists, paleontologists and other
scientists concerned with the past. Secondly, the specific sites which Drs.
Howell, Schwartz and Grun plan to examine are important in their own right.