* 8801750
* Role of Calcium in Mitosis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Patricia Wadsworth, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/29/1992
* USD 138,400.00

It is widely assumed that Ca is a regulator of mitosis. Changes in the
intracellular free ?Ca! could modulate a variety of processes that control the
formation and/or function of the mitotic apparatus. Recent studies show that
free ?Ca! changes during mitosis; however, there are reported differences
concerning the timing, kinetics, and location of these changes. The problem will
first be clarified by comparing the timing and kinetics of Ca transients in a
single cell type (Tradescantia stamen hair) using two different Ca reporting
techniques: differential absorbance measurements from arsenazo-III-loaded cells,
and light emission from aequorin-injected cells. Second, the timing and kinetics
of Ca transients will be compared in cell types of different origin, including
Tradescantia stamen hair, Haemanthus endosperm, newt lung epithelium, and
cultured kangaroo rat (PtK1) cells, to see if there are biological variations.
Third, the role of G-binding proteins and components of the phosphatidylinositol
cycle in regulating the metaphase/anaphase transition will be examined. Fourth,
the roles of Ca and calmodulin in regulating the rate of chromosome movement
will be studied, by microinjecting Ca, calmodulin, GTP-gamma-S, inositol
triphosphate, or Ca chelators directly into the living cells. Fifth and finally,
the possible occurrence of ultrastructural changes in the mitotic apparatus
during anaphase that might be related to chromosome movement will be addressed,
using rapid freezing and freeze-substitution techniques to elucidate the
structure and periodicity of microtubule connections to other microtubules or to
the membrane and to see if changes can be related to chromosome movement. Cell
division is a fundamental aspect of life on earth. In eukaryotic cells, the
orderly distribution of genetic material in the form of mitotic chromosomes to
daughter cells at each division event is absolutely necessary for normal
maintenance of individual organisms and populations at all stages of life. The
mechanism whereby this orderly distribution occurs is a complex phenomenon
involving structural and regulatory aspects. In the proposed studies, Dr. Hepler
will extend his previous work on mitosis, as well as definitively address a
current technical controversy in the field.