* 8801104
* Fine and Coarse Grain Incremental Compilation of Optimized  Code
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Mary Lou Soffa, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 01/31/1991
* USD 162,198.00

Incremental compilers in programming environments attempt to reduce the
recompilation effort by reusing analysis and code from a previous compilation.
Because of the complexity, these compilers typically limit the machine
independent optimizations and register allocation strategies to the incremental
unit of granularity; a module for coarse grain and a statement for fine grain.
This project addresses the design and performance of both coarse and fine grain
incremental compiling techniques that permit optimizations and register
allocation across the incremental unit. Techniques for performing fine grain,
coarse grain and a combination of the granularities will be designed,
implemented and experimentally evaluated. Issues such as the overhead of
incremental systems, the appropriate granularity unit and the trade-off between
the amount of information maintained and the preciseness of the recompilation
detection process will be investigated. The research will initially utilize the
notion of optimization and register histories previously developed for fine
grain techniques. An important aspect of this work will be the investigation
into the performance of incremental data flow techniques which are capable of
incrementally updating both intraprocedural and interprocedural information. The
results on the data flow investigation are also important to compiling
techniques for parallel architectures, for data flow must be continually updated
as code is transformed to increase parallelism.