* 8801521
* RUI: Development of a Unified Classification Scheme for     Decapod Hemocytes
* BIO,DCB
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Jo Ellen Hose, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1990
* USD 43,000.00

Although recent research has expanded knowledge of the myriad physiological
roles played by crustacean hemocytes, synthesis of this knowledge is impossible
at present because of the lack of a coherent, unified classification scheme for
these cells. Using the penaeid shrimp, Sicyonia ingentis, as a prototype for the
decapod crustaceans, a hemocyte classification system was developed which
relates cellular morphology and cytochemistry with three essential functions,
clotting, phagocytosis, and encapsulation. The overall goals of this research
are to develop a unified hemocyte classification system for the decapods to
include taxonomically diverse species, taking into account possible variability
in hemocyte morphology, cytochemistry, and function throughout the molt cycle,
which is known to affect hemocyte abundance and function. Two experiments are
proposed for the coming year. The first, using methods developed for the shrimp,
will explore the relationships between hemocyte morphology, cytochemistry, and
the physiological functions of clotting, phagocytosis, and exoskeleton
hardening, using a macruran, Panulirus interruptus, and a brachyuran,
Loxorhynchus grandis. The second experiment will determine whether there are
temporal changes related to molting state in the abundance, production, and
activity of hemocytes. Using the shrimp, changes in total hemocyte abundance and
differential proportions at various points during proecdysis, ecdysis, and post
ecdysis will be correlated with the proportions of hemocytes participating in
clotting, phagocytosis and hardening of the exoskeleton. Abundance of hemocytes
comprising each category will be correlated with their production within the
hematopoietic nodules. This information should permit correlation of specific
features of decapod hemocytes with their ability to perform specific functions
essential to survival of the organisms throughout the molt cycle. The results of
this research will broaden our understanding of the self recognition and self
defense mechanisms of crabs and shrimp, and, since it will be pursued at an
undergraduate institution, it will provide bright and motivated students with
the opportunity to gain first hand experience with research.