* 8801213
* Industry/University Collaboration: Transport Properties of  Molecular Fluids and Mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Peter Cummings, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 111,000.00

The major thrust of this project is to predict and understand the transport
properties (shear viscosity, thermal conductivity and diffusivities) of several
representative classes of simple fluids, liquid metals and molecular fluids and
mixtures in terms of the microscopic forces between molecules. The project
includes a critical evaluation of several semi-empirical and theoretical methods
currently used to predict transport properties in condensed systems. Recently
developed non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulation techniques are employed
to calculate the transport properties. The project is an Industry/University
Collaborative Research Program between the research and development department
of ICI Americas, Inc. located in Hopewell, Virginia, and the University of
Virginia. ICI Americas will periodically review the progress of the principal
investigator and suggest for study phenomena and systems of generic interest in
the polymer processing industry. The prediction and understanding of the
thermodynamic properties of molecular fluids and mixtures has received
considerable attention in recent years through the application of modern
statistical mechanics techniques. By contrast, there has been relatively little
research performed to predict and understand the fundamental basis for non-
equilibrium transport properties (viscosity, diffusivities and thermal
conductivity) in pure fluids and mixtures. Consequently, the proposed research
is novel in its focus and in the breadth of the systems which will be examined.
A significant part of the reason for the relatively small effort in
understanding transport properties of molecular fluids has been the absence
(until the last five years) of rigorously justified computationally efficient
simulation techniques. Thus, the innovative aspect of the proposed research is
that algorithms developed and published only very recently in the physics
research literature will be applied to the problem of predicting and
understanding transport properties of industrially important fluids, a problem
of enduring interest and practical utility to the chemical processing industry.