* 8801744
* Ir Gene Control
* BIO,DCB
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Paula Hochman, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 12/31/1990
* USD 180,000.00

The Ia glycoproteins encoded by the I region of the murine major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) play a critical role in the generation of the T
cell repertoire, and in T cell recognition of antigen. The goal of the proposed
research is to analyze at the cellular and molecular level, the selective
pressure Ia molecules impose on the generation of the T cell repertoire. The
model to be studied is the Ia mutant B6.C-H- 2bm12 (bm12) mouse and its wildtype
counterpart, the C57Bl/6 (B6) mouse, since the bm12 mutation in Ia has created
functionally distinct Ia restriction sites. To understand how Ia molecules
influence the T cell repertoire, Dr. Hochman proposes to: 1. define precisely
how the bm 12 mutation has altered the restriction and specificity of antigen
specific T cell recognition, and 2. to begin to analyze how the bm12 mutation
alters the selection and rearrangement of V genes from shared (bm12-B6) T cell
receptor gene pools. B6 and bm12 T cell hybridomas specific for peptide
fragments of well defined protein antigens will be prepared and assessed for
their ability to recognize antigen fragments in the context of Ia epitopes
unique for or shared by Ia of b and Ia of bm12. This will allow for the
definition of the multiplicity of restricting epitopes a unique Ia molecule can
express. She will then begin to undertake molecular analyses of the alpha and
beta genes encoding the antigen receptor of these cells by constructing cDNA
libraries, isolating alpha and beta gene clones, and sequencing variable regions
of these genes to understand how Ia molecules control the construction of
diverse repertoires when choosing from shared T cell receptor gene pools. An
animal's ability to respond to a particular antigen is controlled by immune
response (Ia) genes which are associated with the major histocompatibility
complex. The mechanism by which these genes regulate responsiveness is
controversial. Although many laboratories are undertaking structural analyses of
immune response gene function, this mutant mouse model provides a unique tool
with which to study the selective pressure that Ia genes impose on the selection
and rearrangement of T cell antigen receptor genes and, thus, the range of
antigens to which an animal can respond.