* 8801400
* Workshop on Undergraduate Uses of the MOSIS Fabrication     Service to be held in Washington, D.C., November 30 -       December 1, 1987
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1987,04/30/1989
* Harold Carter, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Maguire
* 04/30/1989
* USD 27,137.00

The purpose of this workshop is (1) to provide guidance to the National Science
Foundation on appropriate uses of the MOSIS integrated circuit fabrication
service by undergraduate students nationwide; (2) to identify design and test
software, curriculum plans and texts and other support functions needed to
implement an efficient undergraduate education program in VLSI design; and (3)
identify rules, guidelines, and fiscal policies for requesting, executing, and
maintaining a continuing undergraduate VLSI education program which is tightly
coupled to the needs of industry and government. The workshop will be attended
by key, motivated educators, industrial supporters, and government officials
with oversight and general guidance provided by a select steering committee.
VLSI design has become an important component of electrical and computer
engineering, both in practice and research. The MOSIS fabrication service,
supported by NSF and DARPA, has demonstrated high value in VLSI teaching and
research. It is the major national resource by which students can get their
designs implemented so that they can directly observe through test procedures
the success and shortcomings of their efforts. The MOSIS service has been used
primarily by graduate students. Because of the broad need for VLSI design
skills, it is important that more undergraduate exposure to VLSI design take
place. Toward this end, the proposed workshop will plan and delineate steps to
increase undergraduate course usage of MOSIS fabrication and to encourage the
introduction of VLSI design courses in primarily undergraduate institutions. The
workshop will also compile pertinent resources that are available for VLSI
design courses and plan the transfer of experience to faculty that has no
previous experience with VLSI foundry service.