* 8801814
* Genetic Control of Drosophila Embryonic Pattern Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Sean Carroll, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1991
* USD 238,400.00

The development of the metameric body plan of the insect Drosophila
melanogaster has emerged as the principal model system for studying the genetic
and molecular basis of embryonic pattern formation. The objectives of this
proposal are to make a comprehensive study of the interactions between early-
acting genes of the zygote that control subsequent gene expression and determine
the fates of groups of cells. By using molecular probes (cloned DNA and
antibodies) to study gene expression in wild-type and a great variety of mutant
embryos, the genetic system that controls the time, place and level of pattern-
regulating gene expression will be systematically dissected. Individual
regulatory phenomena revealed by these previous studies may eventually be
studied at the biochemical level in order to determine the mechanisms of gene
regulation and function. The conceptual framework of development being revealed
by studies in Drosophila relates to the fundamental aspects of any complex
organism. The control of cell proliferation, gastrulation, germ layer
differentiation, position-specific gene expression, and the number and
differentiation of body parts and appendages are central themes to all complex
animals. By exploiting the genetic approach available in Drosophila and
combining it with advanced molecular and embryological techniques, it is likely
that more will be known about the growth, development, and differentiation of
the fruit fly than any other animal species. %%% The development of a complex
animal from a simple fertilized egg is one of the most important problems in
biology that remains to be solved. In Dr. Carroll's laboratory, he is studying
the genes that control this process in the fruit fly, one of the best understood
genetic model system for developmental studies. By studying these genes, and the
protein molecules that they encode, he aims to understand how cells are
organized into distinct groups to form the different tissues, organs, and
regions of the animal's body.