* 8801873
* Site-Specific Mutagenesis of Rat Oncomodulin
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Michael Henzl, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 11/30/1991
* USD 248,400.00

Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis will be used to study the structure and
properties of the metal binding sites in two, small, calcium-binding proteins
that differ in their physiological functions. The protein, oncomodulin, exhibits
striking homology to the muscle protein, parvalbumin. Parvalbumin in muscle may
be involved in buffering intracellular calcium, but is devoid of the ability to
trigger calcium- dependent interactions of contractile proteins. Oncomodulin, on
the other hand, is capable of activating cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase in
a manner reminiscent of calmodulin. This functional difference between the two
proteins is mirrored in their metal-binding properties. Oncomodulin possesses
one Ca/Mg binding site and one Ca-specific site, while parvalbumin contains two
Ca/Mg sites. The objectives of this project are: 1. To determine what factors
differentiate a Ca-specific site (a "triggering" site) from a Ca/Mg site (a
"relaxing" site), and 2. to identify specific amino acid residues in oncomodulin
that are essential to the protein's regulatory capability. An oncomodulin
expression plasmid has been constructed, and now single mutations will be
introduced into the oncomodulin coding sequence. The effects of these mutations
on the protein's metal-binding properties and regulatory ability will then be
investigated. Luminescent lanthanide ion probes, together with conventional
metal-binding assays, will be used to study the metal-binding properties of the
altered proteins. The ability of oncomodulin to stimulate heart cyclic
nucleotide phosphodiesterase will be used as a probe of regulatory capability.
The family of intracellular calcium-binding proteins includes troponin C,
calmodulin, parvalbumin, and vitamin D- dependent calcium-binding protein, in
addition to oncomodulin. These proteins display a high degree of homology in
their metal- binding domains and are believed to have evolved from a common
precursor. There is, however, considerable variation in their metal binding
properties. Certain binding sites are quite specific for calcium and do not bind
magnesium ion under physiological conditions, while other sites have affinity
for both calcium and magnesium. The metal-binding specificity is correlated with
physiological function. Calcium specific sites are involved in initiating
("triggering") biological processes, while Ca/Mg sites are not. The molecular
basis for the difference in function is not understood. The proposed comparison
of the detailed structure of oncomodulin, which has "triggering" activity, and
parvalbumin, which does not, should provide important insight into this
interesting and physiologically important question.