* 8801371
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1991
* Shoshichi Kobayashi, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* James Glazebrook
* 10/31/1991
* USD 193,250.00

Shoshichi Kobayashi will continiue his work on the geometry of holomorphic
vector bundles. This is a topic of great interest in differential geometry,
algebraic geometry and mathematical physics. The recent work on the
classification of four dimensional manifolds has provided a marvellous example
of the surprising interplay between different mathematical disciplines.
Kobayashi's research is central to many of these exciting developments. A new
aspect to his work is his development of a theory of infinite dimensional
manifolds. This should prove to have applications to loop manifolds and
therefore have implications in string theory. The first of Koabayashi's areas of
research will be the moduli space of Einstein-Hermitian vector bundles. This
involves the study of self-dual connections on these bundles. These are known to
be minimizing for the Yang-Mills functional. He will attempt to study a combined
moduli space comprising moduli of bundles with moduli of complex structures on
the base manifold. The second area will continue his work on applications of
hyperbolic complex analysis to complex analytic varieties with singularities. It
is very likely that this will have applications in diophantine geometry. The
final area of study will be the set of mappings from one manifold to another,
this is itself an infinite dimensional manifold with a rich structure. This
topic is particularly important at this time in view of the growth of interest
in string theory.