* 8801949
* Use of An Insertional Mutant of Arabidopsis to Study        Trichome Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1988,05/31/1992
* Michael Marks, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 05/31/1992
* USD 238,400.00

The long term goal of this proposal is to obtain an understanding of the
molecular processes involved in the differentiation of an epidermal cell into a
plant hair (trichome). The specific objectives include: 1) Isolate and
characterize a gene required for elaboration of stem trichomes on Arabiopsis. 2)
Explore the utility of the trichome gene as a marker for transformation. 3)
Isolate and characterize other trichome specific genes. The starting point for
this work is a mutant of Arabidopsis that lacks stem trichomes. This mutant was
isolated from a population of plants that were transformed with Agrobacterium.
Because the mutation is most likely induced by a T-DNA insert, the isolation of
the trichome gene will be facilitated by a T-DNA probe. The significance is
three fold. First, the differentiation of an epidermal cell into a trichome
provides a relatively simple model for cell differentiation. Second, since
trichomes are associated with important traits such as insect resistance, salt
tolerance, and cotton quality, the understanding of trichome formation on
Arabidopsis may provide information on how trichomes of crop species might be
manipulated for crop improvement. Finally, the stem trichome gene may function
as a visible transformation marker. %%% Dr. Marks is studying the
differentiation of an epidermal cell into a plant hair (trichome). This provides
a relatively simple model for studying cell differentiation. Since trichomes are
associated with important traits such as insect resistance, salt tolerance, and
cotton quality, the understanding of trichome formation on Arabidopsis (a plant
more amenable to study than commercially important crops) may provide
information on how trichomes of crop species might be manipulated for crop
improvement.