* 8801955
* Developmental Regulation of the Synthesis and               Compartmentalization of Peroxisomal Enzymes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Wayne Becker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1990
* USD 160,000.00

Plant microbodies and their enzymes represent an attractive system for studies
of the synthesis and compartmentalization of organellar proteins. Dr. Becker
intends to continue our investigation of the appearance and import of both
glyoxysomal and peroxisomal enzymes in the cotyledons of cucumber (Cucumis
sativus) seedlings during early postgerminative development. At the molecular
level, Dr. Becker has already shown, by in vitro translation, that regulation of
enzyme accumulation is primarily at a pretranslational level. He has now
isolated cDNA clones for two glyoxysomal enzymes and two peroxisomal enzymes.
These clones will be used as probes to assay for transcript appearance during
post germinative development and greening of cotyledons. He also intends to
isolate and sequence genomic clones and to characterize their regulatory
sequences. If time permits, he plans to begin a functional analysis of gene
regulation using Arabidopsis thaliana, for which conditionally-lethal
photorespiratory mutants are available. At the subcellular level, he intends to
study the mechanism whereby microbody proteins are targeted to and imported into
the organelle, using both in vitro and in vivo approaches. %%% Many cellular
metabolic pathways require enzymes that are encoded by the nuclear genome and
synthesized on cytoplasmic ribosomes, yet are active only within specific
membrane-bound compartments. The appearance of such metabolic pathways during
development therefore involves both expression of the appropriate genetic
information and the compartmentalization of the gene products. Dr. Becker is
studying the development of the enzymes involved in photorespiration. The
enzymes responsible for these pathways all come to be localized in a membrane
bound organelles and Dr. Becker plans to use molecular genetic techniques to
determine how these enzymes are transported across the membrane into the
subcellular organelles where they function.