* 8801339
* Processing Lyotropic Crystalline Solutions of Cellulose in  the Liquid Ammonia/Ammonium Thiocyanate Solvent System to   Form High Performance Fibers and Films
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* John Cuculo, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 12/31/1991
* USD 268,393.00

Cellulose has the potential for forming fibers and films that are much stronger
than those which are currently known. It is proposed to accomplish this via wet
spinning of liquid crystalline solutions that form in an ammonia/ammonium
thiocyanate solvent system. The tendency for the chiral cellulose molecules to
form cholesteric solutions can be compensated and nematic solutions formed in
their stead by adjusting the solvent ratio and the polymer concentration.
Research thus far indicates that a nematic system is the preferred one from
which high strength, high modulus fibers will be formed. In developing a process
for producing such fibers, careful attention must be given to both important
spinning parameters and to post extrusion conditions. Cellulose is a naturally
occurring material which is available to industry as wood pulp from trees or as
fibers from cotton plants. Cellulose in either form does not melt nor does it
dissolve readily in any solvent. In order to make a useful product, such as a
fiber or a film from cellulose, one must be able to shape it by processing a
melt or a solution. Further, it has been discovered that if very concentrated
solutions are produced in a solvent, a very interesting form of matter called
liquid crystals may develop. If fibers or films are prepared from these
cellulose liquid crystals, new fibers, fabrics, and films may be formed which
are exceptionally strong and resistant. It is possible that the new lightweight,
strong, stiff materials or composites could replace steel and other conventional
engineering materials in many uses.