* 8801348
* In Situ Measurements of Electrode Suface Order and          Reconstruction Phenomena by Second Harmonic Generation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1988,10/31/1994
* Geraldine Richmond, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 10/31/1994
* USD 579,000.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfields of laser spectroscopy and electrochemistry. This research
continues the Principal Investigator's application of nonlinear optical methods
and particularly optical second harmonic generation (SHG) to study electrode
surface properties. The studies will comprise two categories. The first involves
a detailed analysis of factors contributing to the observed optical anisotropy
of a crystalline electrode surface. The second focuses on examining the
sensitivity of SHG to surface stability and reconstruction phenomena induced by
the properties of the electrochemical double layer. Both in situ and vacuum
studies will be carried out, with the primary emphasis on metallic electrodes.
Characterizing the chemical and physical interactions present at the junction
between a solid and a liquid at a microscopic level is of importance to many
technologically relevant areas such as the fabrication of new materials and
devices, corrosion, adhesion, catalysis and thin film growth. This task is
challenging owing to the difficulty of distinguishing the structure and
electronic properties of the atomically thin interfacial region from those of
the adjacent bulk media and the lack of suitable in situ spectroscopic
techniques for investigating condensed phase interfaces. A promising new
approach to this problem is the application of SHG spectroscopy since this
technique is inherently sensitive to the surface electronic properties of
crystalline media. In addition, the SHG signal is dependent on the orientation
of the crystal and the polarization of the incident laser beam. The anisotropic
response can provide information about the order and symmetry of the surface.