* 8801088
* Dissertation Research: Causes and Consequences of           Intrapopulation Variation in Lupinus Nanus (Leguminosae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Douglas Schemske, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 12/31/1990
* USD 6,999.00

Flowering plant species exhibit a great deal of variation in their mating
systems. One of the dominant paradigms currently used to describe plant mating
systems is the mixed-mating model. Perfect flowered plants are understood to
reproduce through some combination of self and outcross pollinations. The
proportion of seeds produced by outcrossing events, or outcrossing rate, can
vary between 0 and 1. While empirical investigations have identified natural
plant populations representing the full range of potential outcrossing rates,
theoretical predictions suggest that natural selection should act on
intermediate outcrossing rates to produce either extreme of complete outcrossing
or complete selfing. There is currently no empirical evidence of the forces of
natural selection acting upon intermediate outcrossing rates with which to test
these theoretical predictions. The proposed research will address the
evolutionary dynamics of intermediate outcrossing rates in a natural population
of the annual California lupine, Lupinus nanus. Estimates of outcrossing rates
have been made for populations throughout the species' range, and demonstrate a
great deal of variation between populations, with most of the populations
outcrossing at intermediate rates. Morphological variation between populations
has been suggested as an important determinant of the variable outcrossing
rates. Outcrossing rate variation had also been reported for the same population
between years, and for individuals within a population. The proposed research
will focus on mating system variation within a population. Individual plants
will be measured for morphological, phenological and ecological characters.
Naturally pollinated seed will be collected from these plants, and the
outcrossing rate for individuals will be determined using genetic information
gathered from the use of starch-gel electrophorsis. In addition, artificial self
and outcross pollinations will be performed and the seed will be used to assess
the relative success of selfed and outcrossed offspring. With this information,
the effect of selection on the outcrossing rate can be determined. In addition
to providing empirical evidence for testing the theoretical expectations
concerning mating system evolution, this study will also provide information of
general value of plant breeders.