* 8801084
* Dissertation Research: Planktonic Coupling in Lakes of      Differing Trophic Status: A Multi-Level Experimental        Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1989
* James Elser, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 11/30/1989
* USD 6,000.00

Considerable current effort in limnology focuses on the contributions of
nutrient supply and food web structure to the regulation of productivity in
planktonic ecosystems. This effort promotes a synthesis of community and
ecosystem perspectives. The main goal of this proposal is to investigate an
important question that has emerged from such recent syntheses: how does the
strength of phytoplankton-zooplankton coupling change between lakes of differing
trophic status? We propose to answer this question by performing experimental
manipulations of zooplankton and nutrients in mesocosms in four lakes which
encompass a broad range of trophic states. Factorial manipulations of
zooplankton and nutrients will directly assess grazing impacts and the extent of
enhancement of algal growth by zooplankton nutrient regeneration. Exposure of
phytoplankton to a broad range of zooplankton densities will reveal non-linear
algal responses and evaluate their responses to zooplankton densities that might
arise from seasonal or inter-annual variation. Finally, by evaluating algal
responses at the species, community, and aggregate ("ecosystem") levels, we will
try to integrate approaches characteristic of population, community, and
ecosystem ecology. The results of this study will assist both theoretical and
applied limnologists in understanding the complex interaction between
phytoplankton and zooplankton. This interaction represents the crucial link
which transfers photosynthetic production to consumers higher in the food web
and which translates changes in food web structure into changes in ecosystem
properties such as primary productivity.