* 8801702
* Informational Databases for Ichthyology
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1991
* William Eschmeyer, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 02/28/1991
* USD 199,963.00

Information about animals and plants (distribution, ecology, biology) is
organized around species (kinds) in a classification. In fishes there are about
25,000 different species (but with 55,000 names). There is no effective summary
about our accumulated knowledge of fishes, although yearly summaries of the
increase in knowledge are available. But classifications are always changing, as
when scientific species names are changed or species are moved to new genera or
new species are found, thus complicating the task or keeping track of
information. The information on scientific names and classifications is mostly
published in scattered small scientific papers, and follows certain
(nomenclatural) rules on a World basis. Computers allow the building of
databases to manage both the problems of names (taxonomy) and the accumulation
of prior knowledge. This project builds on a previous grant that allowed the
successful preparation of a database for the 13,500 genera of fishes and about
6,500 literature citations having to do with the description or status of these
genera. Preparing the "genera of fishes" for publication is one of the goals of
the present project. The project also allows expansion to cover families,
species (will be started but not completed), and more literature, and allows for
an examination of new software and other techniques (including data standards)
to better meet the objectives. The project will focus on designing a system that
meets the needs of the scientific community but also can provide on-line access
to the many users in need of current biological information. This project can
serve as a model for other biological disciplines, and it should have
significant value in the future, such that it will allow better availability of
information, including better summaries of the World's faunal diversity.