* 8801214
* Dynamics of Judicial Intervention to Promote Settlement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Doris Provine, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1991
* USD 99,000.00

Over the last twenty years, there has been a movement among American trial
judges to make the facilitation of pre-trial settlement part of their role.
Innovative judges are devising techniques and procedures designed to encourage
litigants who file suits in their courts to settle before trial, and in the
process they are subtly redefining what it means to be a judge. Although
academics and the legal community were instrumental in developing and
popularizing the theory of alternative dispute resolution, there has been mixed
reaction regarding the enthusiasm with which judges have embraced the idea that
they have a role in promoting settlement. To date, there have been few
scientific studies of civil settlement. We know that settlement negotiations
take place and usually succeed, but we know little about how or why they
succeed. This project will consider the implications of this movement and in
particular will study the judicial mediation of cases brought by individuals
seeking remedies against institutions for alleged violation of statutory,
common-law, or constitutional rights. The goals of the research are to describe
the steps involved in judicial mediation, to map the types of arguments raised
and pursued in this form of dispute resolution, and to analyze the
transformation of contentions and positions that occurs in the process of
reaching settlement in public-law cases. Twenty-five cases will be intensively
studied using observation, recording of settlement-conference sessions, pre and
post conference interviews with all participants in the settlement effort, and a
set of follow-up interviews with public-interest lawyers designed to elucidate
further the perspective of litigators on findings derived from the case
material. Facilitation of settlement in civil litigation is an activity of
American trial judges that is growing in significance. This research will lay a
foundation for the development of empirically-based theory about informal
processes for resolving disputes. Not only will it offer a theory of the course
of judicial mediation, but a very significant goal of the research is to
determine how disputes are resolved and rights fare in judge-hosted settlement
discussions.