* 8801008
* Dissertation Research: Factors Controlling Larval Survival  in the Odonate, Aeshna juncea
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Henry Wilbur, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 11/30/1990
* USD 7,000.00

The factors that control the distribution and abundance of animal populations
are of fundamental interest to biologists. The goal of this project is to
determine the factors controlling a population of dragonfly larvae inhabiting
rocky shorelines of Lake Superior. The approach employs a variety of techniques
to test hypotheses seeking to explain the distribution and abundance of the
dragonflies. The small size and clear water of the pools facilitate censusing
population sizes and observing behavioral interactions with minimal disturbance
to the community. In addition, the rocky shoreline contains a large number of
similar pools, so it is possible to perform well-replicated field experiments
without erecting cages or pens. Several experiments address the hypotheses that
populations are limited by competition for food or cannibalism between size
classes. The temperatures of many pools will be continuously measured to
determine if dragonflies are excluded from some pools by extreme conditions in
summer or winter. Adult dragonflies will be monitored to determine if patterns
of larval distribution are produced by oviposition preferences. The results of
this project will help generate a clearer picture of what controls natural
insect populations; such information is necessary for designing appropriate
programs for pest management and biological control.