* 8801884
* Heteroallyl and alpha-Heterosubstituted Allyllithium        Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Lloyd Jackman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas C. Farrar
* 11/30/1991
* USD 336,900.00

This grant in Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry provides support for Dr.
Lloyd Jackman, Pennsylvania Stata University. The work focuses on the chemistry
and mechanisms of various organic salts, particularly those involving lithium.
These species are among the most important reagents used in synthetic chemistry
and an understanding of their fundamental aspects has important practical
significance. The most important single group of synthetically useful organic
reactions is that based on ambident anions of the type C=C-X(-). The number of
representatives of this group is rapidly increasing. A proper mechanistic
understanding of the reactions of these anions with electrophiles does not
exist, in part because the structures of the ambident anion salts in solution
are usually unknown. With methodologies for solving such structural problems in
the case of lithium salts, this study will extend our knowledge by effecting a
comparison between the 13C, 6Li, and 7Li nmr spectral characteristics in
solution with those in the solid state for known crystal structures. All the
above techniques will be applied to lithium enolates, ester enolates and
enamides and to heterosubstituted allyllithium reagents. It is becoming clear
that mixed aggregates (dimers, tetramers) between lithium carbanion salts and
lithium salts which are strong electrolytes are important entities in weakly
polar solvents in that they control rates and regiochemistry. The thermodynamics
of mixed aggregate formation will be studied in order to determine the factors
controlling their stabilities. The structural information will be used in
conjunction with reaction kinetics to establish the reaction mechanisms of the
transesterification of lithium phenolates, the aldol reaction, and the
alkylation of phenolates, enolates, and enamides. Particular emphasis will be
placed on defining the primary reactant species and understanding the role of
mixed aggregates as intermediate species. The involvement of coordination
induced proximity effects arising when the electrophilic reagents possess basic
centers which can interact with lithium in aggregates will also be probed. The
reactions to be studied include some that are widely used in synthetic organic
chemistry. The results of these studies should allow synthetic chemists to
perform them more efficiently and to design new ones for achieving high regio-
and stereo-selectivities.