* 8801302
* Infrared Laser Specroscopy of Radicals: A Diagnostic for    Etching/Deposition Plasmas
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Marianne Begemann, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 12/31/1991
* USD 185,914.00

This RUI project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and
in the subfield of plasma diagnostics. Radio frequency and direct current
plasmas in silane and halogenated gases are used extensively for etching and
depositing thin films on semiconductors. The understanding, control, and
optimization of these processes requires non-intrusive in situ diagnostic
probes. In this research activity, infrared absorption spectroscopy will be used
to provide complementary information to more commonly used diagnostic techniques
such as laser induced fluorescence and optical emission spectroscopy for the
characterization of transient polyatomic radical species typically present in
these technologically important plasmas. The energies of the infrared
absorptions will be used to identify the species present and the corresponding
intensities of the absorptions will be used to determine their concentrations.
Data obtained from these experiments will be used to model chemical events
within the plasmas that are of importance to surface etching and deposition
processes as well as to combustion chemistry. To achieve the goals of this
research, a tunable infrared laser will be used to measure the high resolution
spectra of significant plasma-generated radicals such as SiF3, SiCl2, SiH2,
HSiF, and Si2H4. Initially the radicals will be generated in a radio frequency
or direct current plasma contained in a multipass cell. Frequency, Zeeman, and
concentration modulation will be employed to improve the minimum detectability
and to differentiate the radical spectra from those of stable molecules.
Following analysis of the spectra, a plasma reactor that simulates the
conditions encountered in the manufacture of semiconductor devices will be built
and the radical concentrations, spatial distributions, and rotational,
vibrational, and translational temperatures will be measured as functions of
external plasma parameters. These measurements should then enable the
development of a model for the chemical reactions that take place in these
plasmas and should also establish infrared absorption spectroscopy as a powerful
plasma diagnostic.