* 8801165
* Finite Element analysis of Transverse Shear Failures in     Reinforced Concrete Plates and Shells
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Thomas Harmon, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/1991
* USD 117,797.00

The study of the punching shear resistance of thick plates and shells made of
reinforced concrete will be conducted. In order to perform the study, a new
constitutive law for cracked concrete will be developed which allows cracks to
form in many non-orthogonal directions and which correctly models the interface
shear transfer characteristics of concrete, in particular the friction and
dilatancy behavior of cracks in combination with the fracture energy associated
with the crack. Existing test results will be analyzed and used to quantify and
refine the improved material models. The analytical study will be performed
using two dimensional finite elements, solid three dimensional finite elements
and a new innovative approach to layered plate and shell elements whereby shear
deformation is more accurately represented than in usual layered theory.
Further, both the possibility of shear failure and the inclusion of stirrups are
considered. A series of plates and shells will be analyzed to verify the
validity of the approach and the appropriateness of the new material models. The
final series of plates and shells to be analyzed will be the series of tests
that were recently performed at the National Bureau of Standards under a
separate contract. These tests simulate punching shear due to concentrated ice
forces acting on offshore structures. These tests have already been analyzed
reasonably successfully using improved material models. Finally, the program
developed will be used to perform a series of parameter studies in order to
develop simplified design equations. Parameters to be studied include shear
reinforcement ratios, shell curvature, and boundary conditions.