* 8801660
* Lightweight, Non-Absorbent, Loose-Fill and Batting-Type       Thermal Insulations for Cold Climate Clothing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Stephen Miller, Thermalon Industries Ltd
* Continuing Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/28/1991
* USD 205,205.00

PROJECT DESCRIPTION: This is the second phase of this project, and will continue
efforts in researching thermal insulation for use in cold climate clothing
derived from Thermalon's licensed polymeric honeycomb technology is proposed in
response to the emphatic need for one insulation which (1) has the same low
density, compressibility, and long service life as high-quality down, (2)
exhibits thermal transmittance equal or better than 550 fillpower down, (3)
retains less water, dries faster, and maintains more loft when saturated than
down or synthetic fiber insulations, and (4) readily transmits vaporous
perspiration to reduce thermal stress during periods of exertion in cold climate
environments. A loose-fill honeycomb-like material, with an initial density of
0.14 pounds per cubic foot (750 cubic inch per ounce fillpower), will be created
from thin, stiff, resilient polymeric films using in-house equipment. This
material, contained between layers of fabric to simulate clothing applications,
will be tested to determine thermal transmittance, evaporative heat transfer,
water retention, and drying rate. Additional fibers which may be suitable for
the honeycombing process will be identified and tested, studies of garment
construction techniques will be conducted, use testing will be completed, and a
commercialization plan will be developed. Compression cycling and wash cycling
will simulate typical garment/sleeping bag life. Control samples of 550
fillpower down and Dupont Quallofil (R) will undergo the same rigorous testing
to allow comparison. Previous research indicates that loose-fill polymeric
honeycomb will be superior to 550 fillpower down or fibrous synthetic
insulations. The proposed insulation would be used in civilian and military cold
climate clothing and sleeping bags. If the Research Objectives can be achieved,
the loose-fill honeycomb insulation would be a desireable alternative to down.
JUSTIFICATION: The project, which was submitted under the Small Business
Innovative Research Program, has been reviewed by four persons familiar with the
field of research. Overall, peer review is positive, The budget appears to be
reasonable, and funding is justified. RECOMMENDATION: I recommend that the
project be funded.