* 8801493
* Biophysics of Development of the Plant Shoot
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1993
* Paul Green, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 11/30/1993
* USD 667,400.00

Multicellular development in plants involves a long causal chain between genome
and macroscopic phenotype. Cell behavior is a key intermediate stage. One the
one hand the genome provides the basis for the cell behavior. On the other, the
cell behavior, when integrated through time and space, produces the successive
developmental stages. Dr. Green specialize in these later aspects of the causal
chain. Dr. Green studies the development of the shoot in terms of the
directional reinforcement, by cellulose, in the walls of growing cells. Cells
maintain, or reorient, the direction of cellulose synthesis at mitosis. A
biophysical theory to explain the origin and spacing of leaves, phyllotaxis, is
being developed. Its main tenet is that growth of recently formed leaves
influences the apical dome by stretching its cells which then establish new
reinforcement patterns on the dome. This can explain the placement of subsequent
leaves. Now he proposes to test experimentally the apparent key relationship-
between cell stretch and reinforcement behavior by altering organ stretch
patterns and studying cell responses. He also proposes to find out if the
present theory can be extended to additional phyllotactic patterns and if it can
be applied to the generation of form in leaves. Sufficiency of the biophysical
explanations will be tested by a finite element program which correlates
physical forces and cell responses in model meristems. A general biophysical
theory for shoot development should result. %%% Research in this project centers
on the way that plants inherit their geometrical features. The best known
examples of pattern in plant shoots are the spiral lines seen in the heads of
sunflowers and the helical lines made by the scales on a pine cone. These spiral
patterns are also found in the leaf patterns of most plants growing in temperate
zones. Obviously, plants have a "developmental engine" that produces leaves in a
pattern specific to the plant. The present research is concerned with the
cellular basis of the formation of these patterns. The patterns are generated by
a cycle of activity at the stem tip. At the stem tip, leaves or other
appendages, arise at points of discontinuity in the reinforcements patterns
around cell surfaces. These reinforcement patterns are a result of cellulose
microfibrils. Once a leaf is establishes, the growth of its base act of the
adjacent tissue, stretching it. This causes a response in neighboring cells
which create new discontinuities. Thus surface irregularities lead to organs and
the organs make irregularities. The cycle can go on to perpetuate a fixed
pattern. This research is to expand this interpretation of all patterns and to
examine the apparently key connection between physical stretch and the cell
response which alters reinforcement direction.