* 8801407
* Building Research: Room Air and Air Contaminant DistributionSymposium                                                   Monticello, Illinois, November 1988
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1988,05/31/1989
* Leslie Christianson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 05/31/1989
* USD 39,488.00

An international symposium on "Room Air Contaminant Distribution" will be held
at the University of Illinois Allerton Park Retreat during Winter 1988.
Symposium attendees will be limited to 50 to 70, including some international
experts invited by the Symposium Planning Committee to share their expertise,
and the remainder selected on the basis of abstracts submitted to the Planning
Committee. A minimum of 50% of the participants will be full-time faculty at
United States universities. The purposes of the symposium will be to: 1)
exchange knowledge among experts from the diverse types of fields with interest
in this topic (e.g., architectural engineers, mechanical engineers, chemical
engineers, agricultural engineers, physicists), and including university,
industry and government researchers, 2) define a research needs agenda for the
National Science Foundation (i.e., provide both direction and a statement of
importance for research on this topic) and 3) help develop and organize the
expertise of engineers and scientists from United States universities on this
subject. The symposium will be organized into: 1) brief technical presentations
by each participant, 2) whole group and small group discussions of research,
research needs and importance, 3) informal discussions in a retreat setting
(lodging and meals will be furnished at the site) and 4) a wrap-up session to
agree on major recommendations. All participants will receive advance summaries
of other participant's abstracts. Following the symposium, a proceedings
including participant's papers and the recommendations from the symposium will
be prepared.