* 8801184
* Dissertation Research: Papilio glaucus in Temperate and     Subarctic Forests: Host Plant Quality and Temperature       Adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* J. Mark Scriber, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 10/31/1990
* USD 6,780.00

A swallowtail butterfly (Papilio glaucus) is an exceptional insect herbivore
because of the breadth of its diet (polyphagy) and extent of geographic
distribution. Evidence suggests that this is allowed by genetic variability
within and among P. glaucus populations. Parallel investigations of host quality
have also indicated important intraspecific variability. The array of host
plants encountered by P. glaucus at 3 sites (southern Michigan, northern
Michigan, and interior Alaska) will be compared. Variablility between sites,
between host species within sites, and between trees within host species will be
compared using bioassays. Variability of full-sibling families across 7
sympatric host species. Reciprocal transplants of P. glaucus populations among
the 3 sites will allow simultaneous tests for geographic differentiation between
insect populations and host populations. Collectively, these experiments test
the constancy of insect-plant interactions. The hypothesis that average
characteristics of the insect and plant species are poor predictors of
interactions between individual plants and individual insects will be tested. As
a counterpoint, abiotic environments encountered by P. glaucus at each site will
be contrasted, and localized adaptation of the insect to different thermal
regimes will be tested. Patterns of genetic variability in insect traits
surveyed here will provide information about evolutionary lability of important
physiological attributes, and may separate environmental factors that lead to
local adaptation from those that constrain distributions.