* 8801427
* Radiometer Sonde Soundings at Amundsen-Scott Stations,      Antarctica
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1987,11/30/1991
* Charles Stearns, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 11/30/1991
* USD 20,000.00

Recent data on the stratospheric "ozone hole" over the Antarctic suggests that
a combination of dynamical and chemical processes are responsible for the
dramatic ozone decreases which takes place during the austral spring. While the
processes are complex and intertwined the recent field results obtained from the
National Ozone Expeditions in 1986 and 1987 and the 1987 Airborne Antarctic
Ozone campaign does suggest that both meteorological and chemical factors
contribute to the unique ozone distributions over Antarctica. To date the
campaigns designed to study this phenomenon have concentrated primarily on
investigating the chemical environment over the Antarctic continent and very
little information is available about stratospheric dynamics. This experimental
project is designed to make radiometer sonde soundings at Amundsen-Scott
Stations, Antarctica to pressure levels of 20 millibars at six day intervals
starting 1 July 1988. The radiometer sonde will measure the upward, downward,
and net long wave radiation in the atmosphere as a function of pressure. The
long wave radiation differences between the pressure levels will be the long
wave radiation divergence. The long wave radiation divergence can be converted
to layer cooling rates. The layer cooling rates will help in answering question
about the dynamics of the winter times stratosphere over Antarctic. The
radiometer sonde will detect the presence of possible cirrus clouds in the
stratosphere. This experiment is a preliminary study to see if the information
collected is of use in understanding the causes and evolution of the "ozone
hole" over the Antarctic continent during the austral spring.