* 8801650
* Observational and Theoretical Study of the Baroclinic       Boundary Layer Processes During GALE
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1992
* S. Pal Arya, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 11/30/1992
* USD 490,912.00

The rapid development and intensification of winter cyclones in coastal regions
presents a major weather forecasting problem. Along the eastern seaboard, the
development of cyclonic storms and frontal systems often occurs along the
coastal region of the Carolinas. These weather systems may lead to severe
weather in the heavily populated Northeast Corridor in the form of freezing
rain, heavy snowfall, blizzards and extensive coastal erosion. In order to study
these phenomena, the National Science Foundation sponsored an intensive field
investigation known as the Genesis of Atlantic Lows Experiment (GALE). The field
phase of the GALE was a two-month, multiagency endeavor executed during the
winter of 1986. As part of the GALE, the Principal Investigator was instrumental
in designing and implementing a network to study the redistribution of heat and
moisture in the lowest three kilometers of the atmosphere over the ocean which
is known as the marine boundary layer (MBL). The MBL and ocean-atmosphere
interaction processes appear to play an important role in the genesis of
cyclones or in the intensification of an existing cyclone. Preliminary analysis
of the data has shown exceptionally large heat fluxes in the vicinity of the
Gulf Stream. The Principal Investigator will continue his work on the MBL using
a combination of data collected during the GALE and numerical models. One goal
is to test and formulate new approximations for boundary layer processes which
can be used in numerical weather forecast models.