* 8801107
* Workshop on Morphometrics in Systematic Biology; Ann Arbor  MI; May 16-28, 1988
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Jennifer Kitchell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 01/31/1991
* USD 67,423.00

Principal Investigators Kitchell and Fink propose to organize and run a 2-week
workshop/short course on modern methods of morphometrics. Morphometrics goes
beyond multivariate approaches to morphology, in that it attempts to capture and
analyze the geometrical entirety of a specimen, rather than a sampling of that
morphology as embodied in an arbitrary set of measurements chosen by an
investigator. Morphometrics usually involves direct capture of images onto
computers using video cameras, followed by selection of point coordinates for
study. Up to roughly 25 supported participants will have lectures and hands-on
tutorials from the leading developers of analytical approaches. Hardware and
software will be made available throughout the course, and research problems
will be conducted as practical exercises. Morphometrics is a relatively new
approach to an old discipline. It holds promise for greater objectivity and
repeatability. These new procedures have not been widely applied, but the
proposed workshop will greatly increase the pool of practitioners who can then
train others and submit proposals for their own instruments for data acquisition
and analysis. The proposed workshop/short course addresses several of the
explicit initiatives of the Systematic Biology Program: new technologies,
graduate training, and centers for inter-disciplinary research.