* 8802900
* U.S.-Belgium Cooperative Research: Wave Packet Dynamics in  Molecular Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Yngve Ohrn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 04/30/1991
* USD 10,450.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor Yngve Ohrn,
University of Florida and Drs. P. Van Leuven and L. Lathouwers, University of
Antwerp, Belgium. The proposed research deals with explicit time-dependent
studies of electron and nuclear dynamics in molecular processes. It is important
to develop such capabilities to provide insight into charge transfer processes
in general. Detailed theoretical understanding of such processes is important
for large areas of chemistry. Electron transfer, for instance, as a general
phenomenon affects our thinking in virtually all areas of chemistry and in many
areas of biology. The difficulties in providing a precise description of such
processes stem from their dynamical nature. One has to be able to treat the
electronic and the nuclear dynamics on an equal footing and to handle their
coupling and the vastly different time scales of the submolecular particles
involved. In order to be able to predict electron transfer rates and to
distinguish between various possible transfer mechanisms, the investigators
propose to use the time-dependent variational principle and tested model
wavefunctions for the electrons and a wavepacket description of the active
nuclei. The very large number of resulting first-order coupled differential
equations in time are solved with the use of novel time-averaging technique, and
quantum mechanical transition amplitudes are calculated directly without further
simplifying assumptions. The research group of Professor P. Van Leuven and Dr.
L. Lathouwers in Belgium has outstanding expertise in the theory and
implementation of wavepacket dynamics in both molecular and nuclear physics. The
proposed research will benefit from the combined U.S. and Belgian expertise in
this topic.