* 8802795
* Dissertation Research: The Importance of Local Density and  Relative Frequency for Plant Population Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Peter Kareiva, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 11/30/1990
* USD 6,000.00

There have been several recent theoretical and empirical studies of competition
between annual plants. Despite these efforts, many empiricists and theoreticians
agree that there is little understanding of the impact of spatial heterogeneity
on competitive interactions between plants. This is disturbing given the patchy
nature of plant distributions and the ability of patchiness and dispersal to
markedly alter competitive relationships in simple discrete models. The
following are lacking: 1) experiments in which the spatial distrubutions of
inter- and intraspecific competitors are manipulated; 2) experiments in which
the consequences of dispersal (which alters these distributions) are
investigated; and, 3) a theoretical framework for investigating competitive
interactions between species with nonrandom spatial patterns. This project will
investigate how spatial distributions and seed dispersal influence the dynamics
of competing populations of Poa annua and Senecia vulgaris. A series of single
generation competition experiments in which spatial distribution is manipulated
under controlled conditions will be performed. Also the effects of dispersal
will be incorporated by performing field experiments in which spatial
distributions and dispersal are minipulated over many generations. Parallel with
these experiments a model to explore more general questions about how dispersal
and spatial patterns interact to determine plant population dynamics.