* 8802986
* Phase Transitions on Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Robert Park, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/1992
* USD 315,460.00

They will conduct an experimental and theoretical study of phase diagrams of
vicinal surfaces of Silicon and Germanium. Recent developments in their
laboratory imply that faceting associated with reconstructive phase transitions
is a general property of vicinal surfaces. This has profound implications for
the stability of vicinal surfaces and hence for many advanced device concepts.
Faceting associated with reconstruction can be related to the formation of a
sharp edge in the equilibrium crystal shape. Using thermodynamic arguments they
predict that this kind of behavior is widespread on surfaces that undergo
reconstructive phase transitions. They therefore plan to compare the phase
diagrams of a number of vicinal Silicon and Germanium surfaces with
phenomenological models of the free energy. Universal features of the phase
diagrams, such as critical exponents, impose strong restrictions on such models.
Nonuniversal aspects, such as phase boundaries, can be used to set limits on
microscopic interactions. Simulations of the phase diagrams will test existing
models and serve as a guideline for the development of more accurate
descriptions. The detailed phase diagrams needed for comparison with the theory
will be obtained using their recently developed high-resolution LEED instrument.