* 8802353
* Primitive Antibodies
* BIO,DCB
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1992
* John Marchalonis, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1992
* USD 327,800.00

The proposed research is the continuation of a study using a combination of
immunochemistry, protein chemistry, and molecular biology to ascertain the
properties of immunoglobulins of primitive species and to identify and
characterize the genes specifying them. Particular attention will be given to
rearranging elements (variable, joining and constant regions), the multiplicity
of these elements, and their arrangement. The focus of future studies will be:
1. characterization of Ig light chains of two carcharhine sharks, the tiger
shark (Galeocerdo cuvieri) and the sandbar shark (Carcharhinus plumbeus)
(elasmobranchs), and 2. completion of the characterization of genes of a teleost
fish (the goldfish, Carassius auratus) that are homologous to human V beta gene
sequences. One goldfish V beta homolog has already been characterized and will
serve as a probe for screening of genomic and cDNA libraries of lower species
and, potentially, of protochordates. Extremely little is known about the protein
structure of shark light chains and nothing is known of the details of lamprey
Ig or putative protoimmunoglobulins such as that found in the tunicate.
Similarly, little is known about the genes encoding these proteins--the types of
elements, their multiplicity, their sequence, and their arrangement. The
goldfish V beta gene fragment described here represents the first example of the
isolation of an Ig-like T cell receptor gene from a non-mammalian species.
Immunoglobulin molecules belong to a family of proteins that are involved in
self-recognition and self-defense in all vertebrates and possibly in some
invertebrates. The best known member of the immunoglobulin family of molecules
are the antibodies. The evolution of the immunoglobulins is not understood and,
until recently, had been studied very little. The information to be obtained
from this research will allow us to draw meaningful conclusions regarding the
variable and constant region structure of immunoglobulins of primitive
vertebrate species and should shed light upon the genetic events underlying the
origins of this important family of molecules.