* 8802646
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Mathematical Transport     Theory and Population Models
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Peter Takac, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1990
* USD 22,247.00

This work will focus on the investigation of nonlinear partial integro-
differential and integro-difference equations which arise from mathematical
transport theory and population models. In the former, studies of the general
transport process describing the effects of collision, absorbtion and reflection
of molecules or particles in gases whose kinetics is governed by the nonlinear
Boltzman equation are carried out. Problems of existence, uniqueness continuous
dependence on initial data, smoothness, approximation and asymptotic behavior
for large time will be undertaken. Techniques will employ the theory of abstract
differential equations in ordered Banach spaces and lattices, strongly
continuous operator semigroups and path integrals. Specific models associated
with the kinetic behavior of gases where collisions are governed by general
interaction potentials will be considered. Work on population dynamics will
utilize the discrete time nature of a growth-dispersal process whose evolution
is described by a dynamical system modeling competition among species living in
the same habitat. Interaction assumptions have two qualitative forms: peaceful
competition or predator-prey competition. Fundamental concerns in this work are
the establishment of conditions for coexistence of species and obtaining optimal
dispersion strategies for the individual species. The mathematical context for
this work is the spectral theory of positive operators applied to Frechet
derivatives, in studying solutions of Hammerstein equations which relate growth
and dispersion.