* 8802564
* Hydrate Formation and Protein Solubilization in Reversed    Micelles (Expedited Award)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* Vijay John, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/1989
* USD 30,000.00

This expedited award project is a study on protein solubilization
characteristics in reversed micelles under conditions where the water pools
within the micelles are partially converted to clathrate hydrates. Hydrate
formation in reversed micelles may be a novel and viable method to control the
solubilization of proteins within the micelles. The present technique to extract
proteins from fermentation broths into reversed micelles and subsequently
recover them from the micelles involves cycling the ionic strength, promoting
solubilization with low ionic strenth, high ionic strength causing
desolubilization. Such approaches can weaken enzymes. The extraction approach
under investigation is to solubilize protein in reversed micelles at low ionic
strength, and ten to induce the formation of clathrate hydrates under relatively
low temperatures (273-283 K) and moderate pressures (0.2-5 MPa) to effect
protein recovery out of the micelles. Formation of hydrates, which are ice-like
structures, would effectively reduce the microaqueous phase volume within the
micelles, and thus control desolubilization characteristics. The exploratory
research project is divided into three parts (a) the effect of moderately
enhanced pressures on protein solubilization in reversed micelles under ambient
temperature conditions where hydrate formation is prevented (b) the study of
hydrate formation in reversed micelles at low temperatures, and comparisons with
hydrate formation in bulk aqueous media, and most importantly, the synthesis of
parts (a) and (b), i.e. (c) a study of the effects of hydrate formation on
protein solubilization in reversed micelles.