* 8802944
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Mode-Locked          Q-Switched Picosecond Nd:  Yag Laser System for Nonlinear   Optical Processes with Organic Crystals and Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Iam-Choon Khoo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/1990
* USD 63,830.00

This Engineering Research Equipment Grant will provide funds for a picosecond
laser system (Nd:Yag, mode-locked, Q-switched 1.06um with second harmonic 0.53um
capability 35ps pulses). The main objective is to expand the current NSF funded
project on nonlinear processes in liquid crystals into the relatively unexplored
picosecond regime where several new fundamental wave mixing processes of
important applied potentials have been developed recently. Specially, theory and
experiment have shown substantial beam amplication can be realized in any highly
nonlinear Kerr media by two-wave interaction, owing to the generation of higher
order diffracted waves. The effect has been experimentally demonstrated from the
cw to the nanosecond regime in liquid crystals, organic polymers and
semiconductors. Cavity-less optical logic gates and opto-optical modulation
effects have also been recently demonstrated with nanosecond laser pulse. The
picosecond laser system will enable study for the first time of the dynamics of
these wave mixing processes, and the roles played by various semiconductor and
organic material physical parameters such as recombinations, diffusions,
excitonic formations, molecular orientations, corrections inter- and intra-band
transitions, molecular sizes, electronic hyperpolarizability, etc. Several
fundamental important effects and new nonlinear optical devices principals could
emerge from this study.