* 8802984
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant - Fabrication and      Measurement of New Effects in Linear and Nonlinear          Intersecting Optical Waveguide Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Leon McCaughan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sarah A. Clark
* 01/31/1990
* USD 51,750.00

Intersecting optical waveguides are an essential element for integrated optic
devices. Previous applications have been limited because of the absence of a
rigorous theory for this geometry. Such a theory has already been developed by
the P.I. and subsequently predicted several unexpected optical characteristics.
Also predictions were confirmed experimentally. Theoretical analysis will be
extended to examine new optical waveguide devices based on intersecting
waveguides and incorporating the electro-optic and higher order nonlinear
effects. Electro-optic devices will include high density switch arrays, tunable
wavelength filters, and discrete spectrum analyzers. The analysis will be
followed by design and fabrication of these devices in LiNbo3. Theory of
intersecting guides to treat the case of an optically nonlinear substrate will
also be extended. Incorporation of the intersecting waveguide structure into a
medium with (reasonable) third order nonlinearity intended. The guided mode and
radiation mode coupling results will be integrated into a single coupled-mode
theory. This will permit simultaneously accounting for radiation loss and
interwaveguide coupling in the analysis and design of intersecting waveguide
devices.