* 8802429
* Interval Techniques for the Numerical Solution of Ordinary  Differential Equations.
* CSE,CCF
* 11/15/1988,04/30/1991
* George Corliss, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 04/30/1991
* USD 109,195.00

Ordinary differential equations (ODE's) are fundamental modeling tools in many
scientific and engineering application areas. The models typically involve
systems of nonlinear ODE's which cannot be solved analytically. This, the
interpretation of these models usually requires the computation of approximate
numerical solutions. Current programs compute an estimate for the solution and
(perhaps) an estimate for the error. However, the current codes only supply
estimates; there are no guarantees that the estimates are correct. The co-
investigators will evaluate existing interval techniques for numerically solving
ODE's, extend the techniques, and write a suite of self-validating programs that
compute interval inclusions of the solution. An inclusion is validated by
appealing to appropriate mathematical theorems. In the case of numerical
solutions of ODE's, the logic of the program verifies the hypothesis of
appropriate existence and uniqueness theorems. Then the program can assert that
a solution exists and is contained in the computed interval. The actual
computations use interval arithmetic to capture round-off and truncation errors.
The suite of programs written for this project will fill a role for interval
techniques similar to the role filled for point methods by several programs
written in the early 1970's. It will serve both as a fundamental tool for
scientists and engineers and also as a test-bed for further study and refinement
of interval methods for ODE's.