* 8802800
* Structural Recognition in Complexation of Organic Compounds (Chemistry)
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Donald Cram, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Alfons Weber
* 08/31/1991
* USD 460,514.00

This research is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program.
The research involves building molecules that mimic nature's ability to
selectively complex and carry out highly selective reactions. The model
molecules are relatively small compared to enzymes but are built to simulate
their selective behavior, based upon an understanding of the responsible
factors. Dr. Cram has been a pioneer in this work, it having culminated in his
being awarded a Nobel Prize. The goal is to understand structural recognition in
complexation between organic compounds. Molecular traffic control in biological
systems depends centrally on structural recognition in complexation, and
inspires study of complexation with simple non-biological systems. Organic
compounds with convergent binding sites (hosts) are designed and prepared to
complex other organic compounds with complementary, divergent binding sites
(guests). The hypothesis is being tested "that stronger and more specific
complexation applies to host-guest partners whose intrinsic structures enforce
an organization for binding prior to complexation (preorganization)." Structures
of hosts and complexes derive from crystal structures, nuclear magnetic and mass
spectra, and elemental analyses. Free energies of complexation are correlated
with host and guest structures. Preorganization in hosts is obtained through
assembly of rigid molecular modules to form enforced concave surfaces of
molecular dimensions with saucer, bowl, cup, or vase-like shapes (cavitands).
Binding or solubilizing groups compose or protrude from their surfaces.
Molecular cells are constructed by multiply bonding at their rims two or more
cavitands to give carcerands, whose enforced interiors imprison organic or
inorganic guests, whose properties change with encapsulation.