* 8802781
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Fourier Analysis Related to Surfaces and Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1989
* James Vance, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1989
* USD 9,000.00

Several basic mathematical questions in Fourier analysis on Euclidean space
will be taken up in the project. The objectives are to analyze the decay of
Fourier transforms of measures concentrated on surfaces and power-norm estimates
for singular integral and maximal operators associated with curves. This work
derives from fundamental questions concerning partial differential operators
defined on various function spaces. Fourier transforms of functions restricted
to hypersurfaces have controlled asymptotic growth. Estimates for this growth
(or decay) have been the subject of intense research and are known to run from
absence of decay (for hyperplanes) to reciprocal power decay for surfaces of
finite type. This type of decay is not restricted to such surfaces although the
order of contact of a surface with its tangent plane plays some, as yet unknown,
major role in guaranteeing decay at infinity (of the transform). Work will be
done in finding the correct conditions between finite type and "flat" surfaces.
Recent unpublished examples have confirmed that convexity is not the right
criterion. A related line of investigation concerns the Hilbert transform and
maximal function along a convex plane curve. Of concern are the power-norms of
these functions and their relationship to the same norms of the antecedent
function. The theory is relatively well developed for convex curves given by
smooth even functions but breaks down when these conditions are weakened.
Efforts to find the exact conditions for boundedness of the two transforms will
continue.