* 8802562
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research on Interaction of       High Power Femtosecond Laser Pulses with Capillary DischargePlasmas
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Jorge Rocca, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1990
* USD 19,499.00

This award supports cooperative research on the interaction of fast, high
energy laser pulses with capillary discharge plasmas, to be conducted by Dr.
Jorge Rocca of Colorado State University and Dr. Oscar Martinez at the Comision
Nacional de Energia Atomica (CNEA) in Argentina. They will investigate the
interaction of high power ultrashort laser pulses with dense plasmas created by
fast, high power density capillary discharges (10-100 GW/cc). Multiphoton
excitation is expected to increase the optical gain in transitions in the
recombining capillary plasmas. The femtosecond laser pulses will provide the
multiphoton excitation and ionization as an instantaneous source of electron
heating. This research will provide insight into the interaction of intense
laser pulses with independently created plasmas. The ultimate goal is the
development of tabletop laser sources in the XUV region of the electromagnetic
spectrum. The high energy, fast laser will be constructed and combined with the
compact high power density capillary discharges currently under study at
Colorado. The CNEA group has expertise in generation of short laser pulses and
their recently demonstrated techniques will be used to produce the femtosecond
pulses. The equipment necessary for the implementation of these pulses will soon
be available at Colorado State. The collaboration will thus combine the
complementary skills of both groups to provide new insights into the interaction
of the laser pulses and the high density plasmas, and also to demonstrate new
amplification techniques in ultrashort, high power laser pulse generation.