* 8802033
* Kinematics and Dynamics of Plant Growth
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1992
* Wendy Silk, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* None
* 12/31/1992
* USD 228,600.00

The theory of growth analysis will be extended to show growth rate
distributions which produce stem curvature and torsion. The use of anatomical
records for determination of growth rate distributions will be tested. To obtain
insight into the biophysics of growth, spatial distribution of the growth rate
will be compared to patterns of rheological properties, measured with the
pressure probe, and to patterns of microtubule organization, visualized with
indirect immunofluorescent microscopy. The results will enhance our
understanding of the processes controlling growth and morphogenesis of cells and
organs, and the adaptation of plants to stressful environments. This
understanding is prerequisite to the development of rational and process based
genetic manipulation of plants to improve their performance. %%% The form of a
plant is the result of growth of its component cells, and this growth is known
to involve yielding of the cell walls in response to an internal pressure. The
rigid cell wall of plants requires different mechanisms for reacting to growth
than the more flexible animal cell. The magnitude and direction of the wall
yielding process produce the change in form as the plant develops. Dr. Silk
proposes to continue her research on the kinematics (spatial and temporal
patterns of growth rate) and dynamics (relationships among force, energy and
growth rate) involved in plant growth. She approaches these studies with both
theoretical, mathematical modeling and direct experimental measurements of the
mechanical forces involved.