* 8802714
* Linear and Nonlinear Guided Wave Optical Devices Based on a Rigorous Theory for Intersecting Waveguides
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1988,11/30/1992
* Leon McCaughan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 11/30/1992
* USD 316,900.00

Intersecting waveguides are a natural waveguide element for integrated optics.
As a passive element, they can be used as optical cross- connects between
devices in an integrated optical circuit. The geometry can serve as a power
splitter for broadcast circuits. Of greater interest is its potential as an
optical crosspoint switch. Unfortunately, current theoretical analysis has been
able to explain only the most trivial of experimental observations. In response
to this develop a rigorous analytic method based on multiple scattering between
waveguides. Theoretical analysis will be extended to examine optical
intersecting waveguide devices incorporating the electro-optic and higher order
nonlinear effects. Electro-optic devices will include switches, switch arrays,
modulators, and tunable wavelength filters. The analysis will be followed by
design and fabrication of these devices in LiNbo3. The intersecting waveguide
geometry should also be ideal for fabricating guided wave all-optical non linear
devices, including switches and optically bistable devices. The feasibility of
incorporating the intersecting waveguide structure into a medium with reasonable
third order nonlinearity will be examined. It is our intention to incorporate
these results into a guided wave device, using as a substrate either
semiconductor superlattice material or photorefractive compounds. Integration of
our guided mode and radiation mode coupling results into a single coupled-mode
theory will be pursued. This would permit simultaneously taking into account
radiation loss and guided wave phenomenon in the analysis and design of
intersecting waveguide devices.