* 8802529
* Committee on Radio Frequencies
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Robert Riemer, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Tomas E. Gergely
* 12/31/1991
* USD 261,530.00

The Committee on Radio Frequencies (CORF) was formed by the National Academy of
Sciences (NAS) in 1961, and it has been supported in some form by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) since 1963. Committee activities have predominantly
involved radio astronomy issues. In 1969, the Subcommittee on Space Science was
added to the existing Subcommittee on Radio Astronomy, and NASA began
contributing approximately 25 percent of the support for CORF. In 1987, the two
Subcommittees merged into one Committee on an experimental basis. The CORF is
the nongovernmental focal point for radio frequency requirements for scientific
research. Over the years, the CORF has played a leading role in representing the
needs of the scientific community in national and international spectrum
management forums, particularly during U.S. preparations for World
Administrative Radio Conferences. The NAS has administered the CORF expertly for
the past 26 years, and it is appropriate for that arrangement to continue. The
CORF provides timely and authoritative advice and recommendations to the NSF and
other Government agencies on the use of the radio spectrum for research
purposes. The NSF has a direct interest in the activities of CORF and cooperates
closely with the Committee through the Electromagnetic Spectrum Management Unit.
Input from the CORF to the NSF is of particular value since the NSF represents
the research use of the radio spectrum on the Interdepartment Radio Advisory
Committee (IRAC) of the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration (NTIA). CORF activities in the 1988-1991 time period will revolve
around domestic spectrum allocation activities, participation in the current
cycle of meetings of the International Radio Consultative Committee (CCIR),
preparations for a possible upcoming World Administrative Radio Conference of
the International Telecommunication Union and advice on the implementation of
the Final Acts of the 19897 Mobile World Administrative Radio Conference. The
role CORF plays in national and international spectrum management is becoming
more important with the increasingly intense competition for radio frequency
spectrum. Support for CORF for the period 1988- 1991 is highly recommended. This
recommendation for $67,000 covers the NSF contribution to CORF support for the
first year of a 3-year continuing grant.