* 8802677
* Kinetic and Mechanistic Studies of Carbenes, Silylenes,     and Germylenes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Peter Gaspar, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Koop Lammertsma
* 10/31/1991
* USD 375,000.00

This grant in Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry provides support for the
research of Dr. Peter Gaspar, Washington University. This work is focused on
studies of short-lived species in carbon, silicon, and germanium chemistry. An
understanding of such species, particularly those of silicon and germanium, has
important practical implications because they may be important in a number of
industrial processes, especially ones in the semiconductor industry. A
coordinated set of experiments will be carried out to elucidate chemical
reaction mechanisms for short-lived molecules containing divalent carbon,
silicon and germanium atoms. A complete understanding of the factors influencing
their reactivity will enhance the ability to control their highly useful
reactions. Another goal of this project is to determine how the mechanistic
ideas of organic chemistry need to be modified to deal with bond-making and bond
cleavage below the first-row of the periodic table. This knowledge will extend
the usefulness of these ideas in the domain of organometallic chemistry and also
enhance their effectiveness in dealing with pure organic chemistry. The rates of
reaction of silicon and germanium analogs of important intermediates in organic
chemistry will be studied as will the preparation of new types of molecules
containing multiple bonds to silicon. The experiments combine the synthesis of
new molecules with physical studies of species too short-lived to isolate. Among
the latter experiments are the generation of reactive molecules by use of
nanosecond pulses of photons from lasers and the monitoring of these short-lived
reactions on a time scale of picoseconds to milliseconds.