* 8802042
* Developmental Regulation of 5s RNA Gene Expression in       Xenopus Laevis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Lawrence Peck, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 11/30/1991
* USD 238,400.00

The objective of this research project is to investigate the molecular
mechanisms for the differential expression of the 5S RNA gene families of
Xenopus laevis during early development. Transcription of the abundant oocyte-
type 5S RNA gene is selectively switched off as the frog eggs develop into
tadpoles. In contrast, the less abundant somatic-type 5S RNA gene remain active.
Dr. Peck's development of an in vitro transcription system which mimics the
differential expression of the two types of genes will be exceedingly useful for
biochemical approaches to this phenomenon. Recently Dr. Peck has succeeded in
fractionating this transcription extract into components which further
accentuate the selective transcription of the two types of genes. Using a
biochemical approach, he plans to purify the component in the fractionated
extract which is responsible for the selective inhibition of the oocyte-type 5S
RNA genes. In addition, he will analyze the proteins associated with the
transcriptionally active versus inactive 5S RNA genes with the hope of
correlating structure with function. Several facets of this project revolve
around exploring the effects of the flanking sequences on the control of the two
gene families. The proposed projects include searching for proteins which
interact with the flanking sequences and the construction of clones containing
oocyte-specific 5S RNA genes and somatic-type spacers. Finally, he plans to
investigate the binding of TFIIIA to the 5S RNA genes in developing embryos
using the technique of in vivo footprinting. The knowledge of when during
development TFIIIA is complexed with the oocyte-type 5S RNA genes will place
severe restrictions on the possible mechanisms responsible for the selective
inhibition of transcription of this gene family. %%% The long-range objective of
the proposed research is to explore the molecular basis for the selective
expression of the 5S RNA gene families of Xenopus laevis during embryonic
development. Specifically, Dr. Peck wants to learn how a particular class of
genes, the oocyte family of 5S RNA genes, is selectively repressed as the
fertilized frog egg develops into a tadpole. An understanding of the control of
gene expression is of crucial importance for learning how genetic information is
transformed into the functioning organism. As an organism develops and groups of
cells differentiate to perform specialized functions, whole families of genes
within these cells must be coordinately controlled. Understanding how the
families of 5S RNA genes are regulated during development will contribute to an
understanding of the mechanisms which are used to regulate the families of genes
which control the developmental fate of differentiating cells. This is a central
problem in developmental biology and may provide insights into related problems
such as the generation of developmental abnormalities during human embryological
development.