* 8802088
* U.S.-Argentina Workshop on Mass Transfer in Biomedical      Engineering; October 1988, Buenos Aires, Argentina
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Clark Colton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/1990
* USD 12,184.00

This award will support a research-oriented workshop devoted to the discussion
of some basic and applied topics in biomedical engineering in which mass
transfer plays a predominant role. Mass transfer, either alone or in combination
with other phenomena such as fluid flow and chemical reactions, constitutes an
essential component of many processes occurring in the human body at the
cellular, tissue, or organ level. Processes such as ion transfer through an
excitable membrane, uptake of glucose across the blood-brain barrier, and the
distribution of a drug in the organism contribute to the regulation of cell
function, the maintenance of homeostasis, or the therapeutic action of a given
substance. Similarly, mass transport processes play a key role in therapeutic
extracorporeal membrane devices such as the artificial kidney. This workshop,
organized by Professor Clark Colton of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) and Professor Hugo Massaldi of the Instituto de Investigaciones
Cardiologicas (IIC) in Buenos Aires, Argentina, will bring together experienced
investigators to discuss problems that have had a demonstrated impact on the
biomedical community and also represent successful examples of cross-
disciplinary research between engineers, physical and biological scientists and
clinicians. Four specific themes will be covered in the workshop: 1)
transendothelial transport and its role in atherosclerosis, 2) membrane
transport in the natural and artifical kidney, 3) drug distribution in the body,
and 4) cellular and biological membrane transport. In so doing, the
investigators expect to: 1) exchange scientific information, 2) identify
promising areas amenable to collaboration, 3) find improved ways of promoting
cross-disciplinary research, and 4) establish feasible projects of mutual
interest.