* 8802310
* Genes Involved in L-alanine Biosynthesis in E. Coli
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Claire Berg, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1992
* USD 157,950.00

The long term objectives of the current studies are to determine how L-alanine
is synthesized and used by Escherichia coli. Currently, this entails a primarily
molecular genetic approach, with utilization of transposable elements as tools
for gene cloning, mapping and sequencing. Because solid L- alanine auxotrophs
cannot be isolated directly, potential alanine biosynthetic genes are identified
by cloning wildtype genes that suppress a leaky alanine mutation. These genes
will be mapped and the DNA will be sequenced. L-alanine is the most abundant
amino acid in E. coli and is a component of the bacterial cell wall. The
synthesis of several cell membrane components, including a cell surface antigen
associated with pathogenesis, is regulated by L- alanine, suggesting that this
amino acid may be one of the bacterial cell's general regulatory signals.
L-alanine, the most abundant amino acid in the bacterium E.coli, is an essential
constituent both of proteins and of the cell wall. Because of its involvement in
more than one physiological function, it regulates several diverse pathways of
gene expression, and is itself synthesized by more than one pathway. Because of
these complexities, the biosynthesis of L- alanine and the regulation thereof
have proven particularly refractory to genetic analysis for many years. Using
some novel methods, Dr. Berg has succeeded in isolating mutations in some of the
gene involved in the biosynthesis of L-alanine, and has begun to study the
regulation of their expression. It has emerged from her preliminary work that
the activity of one of these genes may be regulated in a novel way, viz., by the
tightness of physical coiling of the DNA very near the gene. This is a proposal
to extend these studies. The proposed work should yield new insights into how a
bacterial cell coordinates two rather disparate aspects of its physiology, and
may also reveal previously unknown mechanisms of regulation of gene expression.