* 8802823
* Mathematical Sciences: Value Distribution of Complex        Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1991
* David Drasin, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1991
* USD 57,238.00

Two of the main objectives of this work in the mathematical theory of entire
and meromorphic functions are to give sharp bounds for the sum of Nevanlinna
deficiencies of a meromorphic function and to analyze the minimum modulus of an
entire function. The deficiency of a meromorphic function is a measure of the
function's affinity for a given complex number. Generally the deficiency is
infinite, that is, meromorphic functions achieve most complex values infinitely
often. For functions of finite order the sum of the defects is known to be no
greater than two. The amount this falls short of two should be measured in terms
of the order of the function. The conjectured upper bounds (proposed many years
ago by Albert Edrei) have been proved to be valid for large subclasses of
functions. There is considerable evidence to suggest that a complete solution of
this fundamental estimate may be near at hand. The second thrust of this project
seeks to compare the maximum and minimum moduli of entire (or subharmonic)
functions of prescribed order. The moduli are compared for large values of the
underlying variable. When the order of the function is less than one, the
classic result of Wiman-Valiron gives a sharp lower bound. For order equal to
unity or above little exact information is known. New, related, results may
provide information related to this question. The focus of the research will be
on relating the number and distribution of zeros to the extremal cases. This
work is expected to have ancillary applications to complex differential
equations and quasiconformal mapping.