* 8802626
* Sorption Rate Measurements on Single Zeolite Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Henry Haynes, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1991
* USD 108,900.00

The objective of this project is to develop a new research technique for
studying zeolite mass transport. Sorption rate measurements are conducted on a
single zeolite crystal suspended in a flowing carrier gas by an electrodynamic
containment device. An electronic feedback control circuit senses particle
displacement due to weight increase and automatically adjusts the electrostatic
field to keep the particle at the null position. The sorption uptake curve is
then computed from a knowledge of the levitation voltage as a function of time.
Mass transport phenomena are directly responsible for the unique molecular sieve
and shape selective properties of zeolite. However, the characterization of
intracrystalline diffusion in zeolite is complicated by extracrystalline mass
transport resistance, crystalline size distribution, sorption heat effects, and
finite instrumentation response time. Consequently, large discrepancies are
often observed between diffusivities obtained by the various conventional
methods and between diffusivities reported by different investigators using the
same techniques of measurement. This new technique has the potential for
eliminating all of these problems. By studying single crystallites,
extracrystalline resistance are eliminated and so is the need to contend with a
distribution of particle sizes. Sorption heat effects can be probed in an
independent fashion by varying carrier gas flowrate. The new apparatus contains
no moving parts, hence, instrumentation response times should be dramatically
improved.