* 8802730
* U.S. - France Cooperative Science:  Conference on Computer  Algebra and Differential Equations Conference, Grenoble,    France, May 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,03/31/1989
* Michael Singer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 03/31/1989
* USD 6,750.00

A joint U.S. - France workshop entitled "Computer Algebra and Differential
Equations" will be held in Grenoble, France from May 24 to May 27, 1988. The
organizing committee consists of Jean Della Dora, Evelyne Tournier (both of the
TIM3 Laboratory at Grenoble) and Michael F. Singer (at North Carolina State
University in Raleigh, N.C.). In recent years, there have been several advances
in the theory of formal solutions of differential equations. These have included
deeper understanding of power series, asymptotic and closed form solutions of
differential equations and difference equations. At the same time, computer
algebra systems have become more and more sophisticated and offer the
opportunity to automate these ideas. The present workshop is planned to allow
workers in computer algebra to learn of the theoretical developments and at the
same time make the researchers in theoretical areas aware of questions arising
in the design of computer algebra systems. Professors B. Malgrange, J.P. Ramis
and M.F. Singer will deliver a series of expository lectures on various aspects
of formal solutions of differential equations and there will also be a few
additional short talks. Time will be allowed for the participants to study the
material presented as well as hold informal discussions. Attendance will be
limited to about 50 people; 25 from France and 25 from the United States. By
limiting the attendance the organizers hope to enhance the conditions leading to
a fruitful exchange of ideas. Academic Press has agreed to publish the
proceedings of this conference.