* 8802400
* Mathematical Sciences: Symmetry and Orthogonal Polynomials
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Charles Dunkl, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1992
* USD 75,107.00

Several areas within the theory of special functions will be investigated.
Particular emphasis will be placed on the development of a mathematical theory
of orthogonal polynomials of several variables in which there will be a
concentration on functions defined on the n-sphere. These polynomials are taken
to be orthogonal with respect to a weight function which is invariant under a
finite reflection group. The weight functions are powers of products of linear
functions whose zero sets are the mirrors for the reflections in the group. A
form of Selberg's integral, corresponding to the octahedral group, is an
important special case. By means of a commutative algebra of first-order
differential-difference operators, which have an action analogous to that of
partial derivatives in the theory of spherical harmonics, work will focus on
three problems. The first is to construct a nonabelian fractional integral
operator which intertwines ordinary differentiation and the differential-
difference operators. This gives a mapping from harmonic functions and other
eigenfunctions of the Laplacian to the functions under investigation. Secondly,
by use of these operators and their adjoints, work will be done constructing
explicit orthogonal bases and norms for functions on the sphere. Emphasis will
be placed first on three and four dimensional examples. Thirdly, work will be
done extending a recent positivity result on the Poisson kernel for the ball to
finding this kernel explicitly for the general reflection group. This work is
expected to have application to theoretical physics. It has already demonstrated
its utility by playing a major role in the grinding of mirrors for the new Keck
10-meter telescope.