* 8802713
* Regulation of the Drosophila Ddc Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1992
* Steven Scholnick, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1992
* USD 298,000.00

The cis-acting sequences controlling developmental stage and tissue specific
expression of the Drosophila dopa decarboxylase (Ddc) gene will be studied by in
vitro mutagenesis of cloned copies of the gene coupled with in vivo analysis of
the resulting phenotypes after reintegration of the genes into the Drosophila
genome. The enzyme encoded by this locus is required for the proper hardening of
the exoskeleton at various reproducible stages during development and for
neurotransmitter biosynthesis. Previous work has demonstrated that clone copies
of Ddc are correctly regulated when reintegrated into the Drosophila genome and
in vitro mutagenesis experiments have uncovered some of the cis-acting control
elements essential for proper regulation. The large amount of genetic and
molecular information already known about Ddc make it a model system for
studying the mechanisms by which higher eukaryotic genes are regulated. The
proposed experiments will further define the properties of the individual
elements and probe just how those elements interact in regulating the gene. We
will investigate how the two known central nervous systems specific elements
interact with the other controls; our data suggest that they do so in
conjunction with previously unknown control elements as well as sequences
previously thought to be involved only in hypodermal (exoskeleton) expression.
We will use similar techniques to probe the spatial and functional interactions
between the two major hypodermal elements and to determine whether or not the
Ddc controls act as transcriptional enhancer. These experiments will help us
elucidate the regulatory circuitry that controls this gene. The regulation of
gene expression in eukaryotic cells is complex. Some factors have been
discovered and investigated but it is clear that for genes which must be
expressed at different times in development and whose product is needed for
different functions, the regulatory circuitry can be complex. Drosophila is one
of the most powerful experimental organisms available for dissecting this
circuitry.