* 8802468
* Mathematical Sciences: Elliptic and Parabolic Systems of Nonlinear Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Robert Gardner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1990
* USD 39,180.00

This award provides support for mathematical research on two issues of current
interest, the question of stability of travelling waves in diffusive systems and
symmetry breaking bifurcations in unbounded cylindrical domains. In the first
instance, work will be done analyzing the stability of travelling wave solutions
of reaction-diffusion systems of partial differential equations related to
specific model equations in ecology, combustion theory and neurophysiology. The
technique will involve efforts to understand the distribution of eigenvalues of
the linearized parabolic systems about a travelling wave solution. General
topological methods may then be applied to gain insight into the qualitative
nature of the true solution. At the present time very little is known about
systems of such equations. Initial work will involve studies of important
specific examples and bringing new tools to bear. The second line of
investigation is related to the first in that solutions of the corresponding
steady-state equations, which are elliptic, will be studied. Questions here
focus on the bifurcation of branches of solutions. Specifically, work will be
done on semilinear equations defined in infinite cylinders (depending on a
parameter) which admit positive radial solutions. Non-radial solutions bifurcate
out as the parameter varies. Several questions arise in connection with the
symmetry breaking. One is to understand the inherited symmetries of the
associated vector field obtained by reduction of the problem to systems of
ordinary differential equations. A second is to consider the effects of changing
the geometry of the cylinder from circular to elliptic and finally, one wants to
find more complex bifurcations than the expected periodic ones. This research
has potential for use in many areas of applied science where reaction-diffusion
and Navier-Stokes equations are used in modeling. It may also lead to new
insights into chaotic dynamics in solutions of scalar diffusion equations.