* 8802924
* Qualitative Analysis of Complex Dynamical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Anthony Michel, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/1991
* USD 190,889.00

During the last nineteen years, the principal investigator, his co- workers and
students have conducted research in the qualitative analysis of complex
dynamical systems. A great deal of this work is concerned with Lyapunov
stability, Lagrange stability, input-output properties, well-posedness,
existence and stability of periodic motions, decomposition, topological
properties, and selected applications of interconnected dynamical systems. He
proposes to continue his investigations of complex dynamical systems along the
following lines: 1. Study qualitative properties of hybrid dynamical systems
with an emphasis on digital implementations of dynamic controllers in digital
feedback control systems. 2. Study the Lyapunov stability of infinite
dimensional dynamical systems, using decomposition techniques (e.g.,
transformation into systems in block lower triangular form having strongly
connected components as subsystems), and he proposes to emphasize toxic waste
models in this work. 3. Views in neural networks as interconnected dynamical
systems, study qualitative properties as well as synthesis procedures for
several models of neural networks. 4. Using recent results for Hamilton-like
variational methods of nonconservative dynamical systems, study power system
models which include transfer conductances; he aims to provide analytical
justification for several existing heuristic results which make use of path
dependent energy functions for such systems. 5. Continue research on existence,
nonexistence, stability and instability of periodic motions in complex dynamical
systems. He is particularly interested in establishing rigorously the validity
of various describing function methods. 6. Apply interval analysis techniques in
the study of dynamical systems. The emphasis will be on parameter tolerance
problems. 7. Study the stability of controlled viscoelastic structures using
fractional time derivatives in the model formulation of the plant. These topics
are clearly of great importance in theoretical studies as well as in
applications. His methodology will involve functional analysis techniques,
results from Floquet theory, invariance and comparison theory for differential
equations, Lyapunov stability theory (for finite and infinite dimensional
systems), I/O stability theory, interval analysis, etc.