* 8802764
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research: Evaluation of     Parallel Processing Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1993
* James Kurose, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1993
* USD 60,310.00

This award will support a joint effort research in the evaluation of parallel
processing systems, to be carried out by researchers based at the University of
Massachusetts and the French National Institute for Information Science and
Automation (INRIA). The U.S. group will be led by Dr. Donald Towsley; on the
French side the project will be led by Dr. Francois Bacelli, INRIA,
Rocquencourt. The research project will focus on the following two problems: 1)
The development of a mathematical methodology for evaluating the performance of
complex parallel systems. There currently exist powerful tools for evaluating
the performance of sequential programs that execute on single or
multiprocessors. The main difference between a sequential and a parallel program
is the need for synchronization of the different activities present in a
parallel program execution. Consequently, the first goal of the proposed
research is to develop a methodology for evaluating parallel software
applications that exhibit this phenomenon. 2) The design and analysis of
schedulers for multiprogrammed multiprocessors that execute parallel programs.
Many existing multiprocessors have implemented scheduling policies originally
developed for single processors. Initial studies indicate that this can result
in poor scheduling polices, i.e., policies that yield poor performance. The
second goal of the proposed research is to develop a methodology for designing
scheduling policies that yield good performance, such as low response times.
This research joins two groups of outstanding U.S. and French computer
scientists. INRIA is widely recognized for its concentration of expertise in
computer research, automation, mathematics and scientific computing. It provides
an excellent combination of fundamental research with industrial collaboration
in these areas.