* 8802401
* Coherence and Groundstate Properties of Highly Correlated   f-Electron System: Kondo Lattice and Heavy Fermion Studies  (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1989
* Jack Crow, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1989
* USD 72,600.00

This research effort is focused on establishing a better understanding of the
unusual phenomena, i.e., heavy fermion, Kondo and Kondo lattice, spin
fluctuation and mixed valent behavior, which appear in highly correlated
f-electron systems. Such phenomena are commonly associated with a delocalization
of the f-electrons due to a f-electron hybridization with other f- electrons or
spd-electrons. The high temperature behavior associated with these systems seems
to be well described by single ion models; however, at low temperatures these
systems display coherent fermi liquid-like behavior. This research is directed
at studying the salient features associated with this coherent groundstate.
Measurements of the temperature and hydrostatic pressure dependence of the
electrical resistivity, specific heat, magneto-transport coefficients and
magnetic susceptibility on a select number of mixed valent and heavy fermion
systems are planned. These measurements will be supplemented by measurements of
the temperature dependence of the thermal electric power and thermal expansion
along with room temperature crystal structure studies. The objective of this
research is to establish the role played by the indirect f-f and f-spd exchange
interactions, and other factors such as crystal field levels, the Kondo
temperature, etc., on both the coherent state and on the nature of long range
correlations, e.g., superconductivity and magnetic order, within this
groundstate.