* 8802237
* Capacitance Influences on the Water Relations of Desert     Perennials
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Park Nobel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 02/28/1991
* USD 121,352.00

Water is the key to the growth and survival of desert plants. It can be stored
in the shoots, which is especially apparent for succulent plants such as Agave
deserti (the common desert agave) and Ferocactus acanthodes (a barrel cactus).
Internal redistribution of such stored water can influence water flow in the
transpiration stream, the pathway from the soil to the root, stem, and leaves,
and lead to non-steady state (transient) effects. Such transient effects. which
can be considered by incorporating capacitors in electrical circuit analogs of
the transpiration stream, have received little attention for plants, although
the non-steady state is actually the rule, not the exception, for plants under
natural conditions. Succulent plants such as A. deserti and F. acanthodes employ
Crassulacean acid metabolism, where CO2 uptake occurs predominantly at night
when temperatures are lower and hence water loss from the plant to the air is
less. The CO2 taken up at night leads to the formation of malate, with a
consequent large increase in osmotic pressure. This increase in osmotic pressure
influences water movement by osmosis, a complication that has previously not
been included in electrical circuit analogs for plant water relations. A new
method will be employed that allows incorporation of this non-linear factor. New
imaging methods developed in medical research will also be used to observe root
location in the soil. Using an electric circuit analog, water movement and water
potential will be simulated at various locations with computer programs
developed to solve electrical circuits. Each component (such as a leaf) in the
transpiration stream will be assigned a capacitance, which will be connected
through a storage resistance to the main axial flow of the vascular tissue.
Field measurements of desert succulents will also be made to interpret further
the key adaptations of desert succulents to water stress and water use.
Synthesizing the data into a dynamic model should enhance our quantitative
understanding of the cellular properties of plants and the importance of
capacitance and osmotic pressure in maintaining water potentials favorable for
plant survival in the field, especially when they are exposed to natural or man-
made changes in environmental conditions.