* 8802684
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Methods and Nonlinear Hyperbolic Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Thomas Sideris, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1990
* USD 28,524.00

New geometrical methods will be used in the analysis of two problems concerning
nonlinear hyperbolic equations. One thrust will focus on the establishment of a
new decay estimate for the linear nonhomogeneous Klein-Gordon equation in three
space dimensions. Decay estimates arise when one studies linear problems
associated with nonlinear hyperbolic equations. This approach has been suggested
by successful applications by Klainerman and Hormander to quadratically
nonlinear wave equations. A similar program is planned for the Klein-Gordon
equation where uniform decay estimates will be sought. The solution is to be
bounded by an appropriate norm of the forcing function - which is not assumed to
have compact support. When this program is carried out, it should be possible to
give a direct proof of the existence of global small solutions of the equation.
A second line of investigation continues earlier work on obtaining lower bounds
for the life-span of smooth three- dimensional compressible flows. These ideal,
compressible flows are considered with small initial disturbances that are
smooth and localized. Near the front of the ensuing disturbance a singularity or
discontinuity is eventually detected. These are shocks in the acoustical waves
and are predictable. The thrust of this effort is to determine whether or not
singularities can form at an earlier time and, if so, to characterize their
nature. The functional relationship between the solution and its initial
configuration is expected to be an exponential involving the size of the initial
support. This work will have natural application to studies of wave motion and
fluid dynamics.