* 8802490
* Regulation of Gene Expression at the Level of               Transcriptional Elongation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Mark Groudine, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1991
* USD 298,000.00

A series of experiments are proposed to continue our investigation of the block
to elongation of transcription of the human c-myce gene, which was observed
originally by nuclear runoff transcription in the HL60 cell line. Preliminary
results are presented indicating that the block to elongation as assayed by
runoff transcription is also observed when the human c-myce gene is transcribed
in the context o> the xenopus oocyte. In addition, prematurely terminated and
sÃ•cble RNA's with 3' terminal mapping near the end of exon 1 are initiated from
tie two major human c-myc promoters after injection of human gene into the
oocyte. Deletion analyses reveal that sequences sufficient to control the
observed premature termination are located within a 95 base pair region upstream
of a Pvu II site 40 bases 5' of the saxon 1/intron 1 boundary. Termination
activity in these sequences is orientation dependent and functions downstream of
the HSV-Tk, but not the adenovirus 2 major late promoter. Interestingly, these
sequences are either eliminated or mutated in Burkitt lymphoma, and the block to
elongation is alleviated in these cells. A series of experiments are proposed
that will: 1.) provide independent verification of the in vivo distribution of
RNA polymerase II in the c-myc gene in human cells; 2.) define sequences in cis
necessary and sufficient for premature termination of thm human c-myc gene
injected into xmoopus oocytes and the block to elongation of transcription in
the luman c-myc gene in mammalian cells; 3.) determine the basis of read through
transcription of c-myc in Burkitt lymphoma cells; and 4.) identify factors which
interact with the sequences necessary for the block to elongation and, through
in vitro transcription assays, determine their contribution to elongation. The
regulation of transcription of eukaryotic genes is a central control mechanism
in differential gene expression. While many investigators are studying the
mechanisms involved with the initiation of transcription, few are focusing on
the equally important levels of transcript elongation and terminetion. The
results of this investigation should provide information leading to$a better
understanding of this pro>ess in eukaryotic cells.