* 8802011
* Calcium Regulation of Cytokinin-Stimulated Morphogenesis in Plant Cells
* BIO,DCB
* 08/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Mary Jane Saunders, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 04/30/1992
* USD 140,000.00

Understanding the control of cell division in plants by cytokinins
(N6-substituted adenines) is becoming increasingly important as a model for
cellular regulation in plants. Previous research on cytokinin-induced
asymmetrical division in target caulonema cells of the moss Funaria has
implicated a spatially controlled rise in intracellular calcium ion
concentration as a second messenger that activates calmodulin. A model for
cytokinin stimulation of cell division is proposed that suggests that the
binding of cytokinin to asymmetrically localized plasma membrane receptors on
target cells increases intracellular calcium from both intracellular and
extracellular stores leading to calcium-dependent protein kinase activation and
protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation. Both the spatial and temporal changes
in intracellular calcium and the protein phosphorylation appear to be involved
in the profound cytoplasmic rearrangements seen after hormone treatment. It is
becoming increasingly clear that covalent modification of preexisting proteins
by phosphorylation is a major mechanism in the regulation of cell growth and
differentiation. Calcium and protein phosphorylation may play a synergistic role
in cytokinin control of cellular function. The goals of the current project are
to: 1. characterize cytokinin binding sites by photoaffinity labeling using
8-azido benzyladenine, 2. analyze the localization of cytokinin binding using
antibodies directed against cytokinins, 3. analyze calcium uptake using
metallochromic indicators, and 4. monitor the cytoskeletal rearrangements, ion
changes and phosphorylation patterns after hormone treatment. This research will
increase our understanding of cytokinin signalling, the second messenger role of
calcium, and the amplification of cellular response by protein phosphorylation
leading to developmental changes in plants.