* 8802363
* Isolation and Utilization of Bacteria for Co-Culture Bio-   degradation of Polychlorinated Biphenyls
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Dennis Focht, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1990
* USD 17,150.00

This award will support Professor Dennis D. Focht of the University of
California in collaboration with Dr. Blanca Hernandez of the University of
Panama, for the purpose of isolating bacteria that metabolize biphenyl
compounds. Bacteria will be isolated from the untreated industrial and domestic
waste canals of Panama City, Panama, where a great diversity of such organisms
has been found. Isolation of a wide variety of biphenyl-metabolizing bacteria
may lead to efficient combinations capable of degrading even polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) in the environment. Polychlorinated biphenyls are widespread
contaminants in the global ecosystem and represent a potential hazard in dump
sites in industrialized countries. Biodegradation represents an alternative
strategy to incineration of PCB-contaminated soils. To date, bacteria using PCBs
as growth substrates have not been isolated and probably do not exist in nature.
Nevertheless, considerable progress has been made in selectively isolating
bacteria that use biphenyl as a growth substrate. These bacteria partially
metabolize PCBs by isolating part of the enzyme system while growing on
biphenyl, the non-chlorinated analog. By combining Professor Focht's expertise
with biodegradation, with access to a rich and varied sample of microorganisms,
this project enhances the capability of research scientists in a developing
country and is of mutual benefit, thus fulfilling an important criterion of the
Science in Developing Countries Program.