* 8802881
* Fort Monmouth Interaction:  Research on Optimization of a   Whiskerless Mixer/Varactor Schottky Barrier Diode Structure for Application at Millimeter and Submillimeter Wavelengths
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1989
* Robert Mattauch, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Queen
* 09/30/1989
* USD 29,822.00

Millimeter wave receivers incorporating the highest quality Schottky barrier
diodes presently utilize whisker contacted devices. The advent of millimeter
wave integrated circuitry and planar array receivers underscores the requirement
of a whiskerless, planar Schottky barrier device. At present, commercial
manufacturers have produced whiskerless devices which have far less than optimum
electrical characteristics. Research during the past year at the University of
Virginia has resulted in the design and fabrication of a novel whiskerless
Schottky diode with excellent DC and RF characteristics. The object of this
proposed research is to continue work on the whiskerless Schottky barrier mixer
diode for use at and above 100 GHz signal frequency which will have electrical
characteristics, including parastic element values, as near as possible to those
theoretically predicted. This research program will consist of a joint effort
between the University of Virginia's Semiconductor Device Laboratory and the
Fort Monmouth Electronic Technology and Devices Laboratory. It will involve
optimization of device design and fabrication technology utilizing the MBE,
electron beam mask generation ion implantation, and facilities at Fort Monmouth
and the existing processing technologies and processing equipment at the
University of Virginia. This project will involve 1 Masters student for a period
of 1 year.