* 8802506
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Geochemistry and Origin   of Archean Granulities in Northeastern China
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Kent Condie, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 01/31/1991
* USD 61,297.00

China contains a substantial fraction of the earth's exposures of ancient rocks,
mostly unknown to Western geologists. This proposal in early crustal studies
between Dr. Kent C. Condie of the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
and Dr. Qian Xianglin of Beijing University will characterize terranes of the
Gehuyao area of Northeast China by a collaborative field and geochemical study
of Archean high grade supracrustal rocks and associated intrusive rocks. This
granulite belt contains excellent exposures of all supracrustal lithologies
typical of Archean high grade terranes, with widespread felsic and mafic
granulites of probable igneous origin. Its parallel greenstone and high grade
belts offer an unusual opportunity to study the structural and compositional
relationship of these two Archean associations. Because its abundant mafic
granulites probably reflect a deeper section of Archean crust than is exposed in
southern India and elsewhere, a more accurate estimate of the composition of the
lower Archean crust should be possible, shedding light on how the continents
formed. The researchers will map critical exposures, complete major and trace
element analysis of both metaigneous and metasedimentary rocks, perform
geochemical studies of magma origin and source, conduct structural and
metamorphic studies. German and French collaborators will study geothermometry
geobarometry and Nd and Pb isotropes, and do U Pb zircon dating. This project is
jointly sponsored by NSF and the Chinese National Natural Science Foundation.