* 8802124
* Regulation of a Plasmid Gene in Bacillus Subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Paul Lovett, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1992
* USD 179,294.00

Chloramphenicol (Cm) inhibits bacterial growth by blocking peptide elongation
during translation on 70S ribosomes. Cm also acts as an inducer of the
expression of cat genes (encoding chloramphenicol acetyltransferase) in Gram-
positive bacteria. Induction of one gene, cat-86, has been shown to be due to
activation of mRNA translation. This appears to result from the ability of Cm to
stall ribosomes translating a cat-86 regulatory leader peptide; a stalled
ribosome is thought to disrupt a downstream RNA stem-loop that sequesters the
cat-86 ribosome binding site. The long term goal of this proposal is to explain
the mechanism which allows Cm to activate cat-86, and other inducible cat genes.
It is anticipated that these studies will clarify and extend our understanding
of the mechanism of action of a ribosomally targeted antibiotic. It is also
expected that these studies will show the breath of the principles of the
attenuation regulatory model in controlling gene expression. By use of site
directed mutagenesis and recombinant DNA technology it is now possible to
determine whether the proposed Cm stall site is an mRNA or protein sequence, and
the sequence of the site. The spatial relationship between the stall site and
the regulated RNA secondary structure will be identified. Uncommon examples of
apparently Cm-insensitive translation exit in bacteria. Do these result from the
fortuitous absence of a Cm stall site? Certain species of the soil bacterium
genus Bacillus are naturally resistant to the antibiotic chloramphenicol by
virtue of their ability to synthesize an enzyme which inactivates the drug. The
synthesis of the inactivating enzyme is specifically inducible by the drug,
i.e., the bacteria make the enzyme only when they encounter the drug. Dr.
Lovett's earlier studies have shown that a drug-induced change in the behavior
of ribosomes, the organelles which synthesize proteins, is a critical part of
the mechanism of the induction of the inactivating enzyme. This is a very
unusual mechanism for the regulation of gene expression, and Dr. Lovett proposes
in this study to work out many of the still obscure details of this mechanism.
Apart from insight into a novel regulatory mechanism, this work should also
yield new insight into how the function of ribosomes is controlled.