* 8802386
* Laboratory Studies of Tropospheric Sulfur Chemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Paul Wine, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 09/30/1991
* USD 361,020.00

The atmospheric sulfur cycle has been the subject of intensive investigation in
recent years because of the need to assess the contribution of anthropogenically
produced sulfur to such problems as acid rain, visibility reduction, and climate
modification. In heavily industrialized regions such as the eastern United
States and western Europe, anthropogenic sulfur magnitude. On a global scale,
however, natural sulfur emissions are thought approximately to equal those from
anthropogenic sources. An understanding of the natural sulfur cycle is thus
required in order to establish a "base line" with which anthropogenic
perturbations can be compared. A substantial measurement data base for the key
reduced sulfur species CS2, COS, and CH3SCH3 (DMS) has become available in
recent years. Laboratory research aimed at identifying major sulfur oxidation
pathways and quantifying the rates of these pathways has also progressed
rapidly. Nonetheless, major uncertainties in the atmospheric chemistry of
organosulfur compounds remain. This research is aimed at elucidating the
kinetics and reaction mechanisms which control the atmospheric oxidation of
reduced sulfur compounds, i.e. H2S, CS2, COS, mercaptans, sulfides and
disulfides. Direct observation of reactive intermediates and relatively stable
products in "real time" is emphasized because only through such observations can
results with a unique interpretation be obtained. Some specific experimental
investigations which are to be undertaken include kinetics studies of CH2S
reactions with O3, HO2, and NO2, kinetics studies of IO reactions with thiols,
sulfides, and disulfides, determination of the product yields of SH, CS, S2,
HO2, COS, CO, and CO2 from the CS2OH+O2 reaction, determination of CH3S yields
from reactions of OH and NO3 with organosulfur compounds, kinetic studies of the
reactions of OH and NO3 with dimethylsulfoxide, and investigations of the
mechanisms for producing the stable end products SO2, CH3SO3H, and (CH3)2SO via
the OH-, NO3-, and IO-initiated oxidations of organosulfur compounds. The
experimental methods to be employed involve coupling laser flash photolysis
production of unstable reactants with time resolved detection of intermediates
and end products by laser induced fluorescence, long path UV-visible absorption,
or long path infrared absorption. Most experiments will be carried out under
atmospheric conditions of temperature, pressure, and gas composition.