* 8802821
* Mathematical Sciences: Microlocal Analysis and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Nicolas Lerner, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1990
* USD 38,249.00

Two themes will be developed during the course of this project. Each centers on
fundamental questions related to partial differential equations. In the first
instance work will be done investigating the propagation of singularities for
solutions of nonlinear partial differential equations. The basic question is one
of predicting singularities in positive time knowing the singularities which
occurred in the past. An analogous problem is the description of the
singularities from knowledge of the Cauchy data at the initial time. The
propagation of singularities is a microlocal phenomenon, as pointed out by
Huygens centuries ago. The modern exposition of this principle is given by the
wave front set and, depending on which Sobolev space contains a solution, the
singularities travel along bicharacteristics, as in the linear case, or else
require intricate description - which represents one of the goals of this work.
A second line of research will deal with the local solvability for pseudo-
differential operators of principal type. One is interested in solutions of the
associated nonhomogeneous equation. Earlier work of Nirenberg and Treves proved
a sufficient condition for local solvability in the analytic case for
differential operators. Roughly the same condition gives a necessary condition
for local solvability for pseudo-differential operators. Recently, sufficiency
of the condition was shown for the two-dimensional case. Work will concentrate
on lifting this dimension restriction.