* 8802108
* Neuropeptide Control of Ecdysone Biosynthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1992
* Wendell Combest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 09/30/1992
* USD 205,620.00

The prothoracic glands of insects synthesize and secrete a class of steroidal
hormones known as ecdysteroids and it is these ecdysteroids that cause cellular
reprogramming and elicit molting (synthesis of a new exoskeleton so that the
insect can grow). The control of prothoracic gland activity, therefore, is
instrumental in the success of insects on this planet and the main regulatory
component for this control is a neuropeptide secreted by the brain of the
insect, prothoracicotropic hormone (PTTH) which stimulates the prothoracic
glands to synthesize and secrete ecdysteroids. The aim of this project is to
determine at the cellular and biochemical levels how this peptide hormone acts
on the prothoracic gland to cause the synthesis of ecdysteroids. The principal
investigators' work thus far indicates that the action of PTTH on the
prothoracic glands is quite similar to the action of the vertebrate ACTH on the
adrenal glands. That is, the peptide acts at the surface of the gland causing
the activation of a specific enzyme, adenylate cyclase, causing an increase
within the cells of the gland of a second messenger molecule, cyclic AMP (cAMP).
The cyclic AMP, in turn, activates specific enzymes known as protein kinases
which have the ability to add a phosphate to other proteins and thus "activate"
these proteins. It is their plan to identify the proteins that are activated and
determine their regulatory role in ecdysteroid biosynthesis. In addition, the
investigators intend to examine further the role of calcium in the activation of
the adenylate cyclase to determine whether PTTH acts on the prothoracic gland
cell by opening a channel through the membrane of the cell, the calcium channel,
and that it is the calcium-calmodulin system within the cell that directly
affects the adenylate cyclase. These studies have significance for all animals
including man because of the close analogy between the PTTH-prothoracic gland
axis and the ACTH-adrenal cortex axis. In addition, insects are the most
prevalent form of animal life on this planet and it is obvious that one should
learn more about these very successful organisms from an academic point of view
and because with such information they may be able to design better means for
controlling harmful insects. Insects are of great importance as vectors of
disease and as devastators of agricultural products. By interfering with the
insect's molting process, one could theoretically control specific insect
populations.