* 8802163
* Molecular Analysis of Genes Expressed in the Floral Meristem
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Douglas Meeks-Wagner, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 11/30/1991
* USD 306,450.00

This proposal is designed to identify, isolate, and characterized genes
specifically expressed in floral meristems. The novel tobacco (Nicotiana
tabacum) "Thin Cell Layer" (TCL) tissue culture system will be used to produce
explants containing floral meristems. TCL explants in floral culture conditions
produce up to 15 fully differentiated and functional flowers according to the
following scheme. Day 7:active cell division; Day 13: organized meristems
formed, Day 20: differentiated organs visable. Differential screening of a cDNA
library made from Day 13 floral TCL explants will be used to isolate clones for
genes transcriptionally expressed at Day 13, but not a Day 7, of culture.
Potential meristematic specific genes isolated by this approach will be
characterized using in situ hybridization to identify those expressed in floral
meristems. Genes of interest will be subjected to molecular and in vitro
mutational analysis, facilitated by stable plant transformation, to determine
the mechanisms of gene regulation and function during floral initiation. This
work should greatly improve our understanding of gene expression in plant
development by providing evidence of the factors which control developmentally
regulated gene expression, and giving insight to the types of genes required to
change the strategy of plant growth.