* 8802058
* Regulation of tRNA Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1988,03/31/1992
* Jerry Johnson, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 03/31/1992
* USD 272,300.00

The relative abundance of different tRNAs is statically regulated by the
sequence and spacing of internal control regions (ICR), both 5' and 3' -
flanking sequences, and the copy number of individual tRNA genes. A protein
factor, TFIIIC, nucleates formation of transcription complex. Variations from
canonical sequences and spacing in the ICR are known to affect this interaction
which may determine which genes are expressed. We have participated in
development of a photosensitive cross-linking reagent, 5-N3-
deoxyuridine-5'-triphosphate (AdUTP), which can be enzymatically incorporated
into DNA in place of thymidine. The photoactive DNA is capable of sequence-
specific interaction with TFIIIC and can be used to identify the subunit of this
protein which contacts the B-block of the ICR. We propose to study the
interactions of this protein with tRNA genes to identify which T residues are in
close association with TRIIIC, whether A & B blocks contact the same or
different subunits, whether other T residues in the coding or flanking sequences
can be cross-linked to the factor, and what regions of the protein contact the
ICR. The gene(s) for the DNA binding subunit (s) will be identified in a yeast
genomic library using synthetic DNA probes based on partial amino acid sequence
analysis of purified polypeptides. The nucleotide sequence of this gene (s) will
be determined to deduce the amino acid sequence analysis of purified
polypeptides. The nucleotide sequence of this gene (s) will be determined to
deduce the amino acid sequence. Peptide mapping of TFFIIIC photocrosslinked to
AdUTP substituted DNA will allow us to identify sites in the protein which are
in close contact with each tRNA control region. Studies of mutations in
5'-flanking and anticodon sequences which affect tRNA gene expression will also
be completed. These investigations deal with the factors that control the
formation of transfer RNA's, (tRNA's), which are ribonucleic acid molecules
involved in transferring amino acids to nascent peptide chains. One of these
factors is a protein called TFIIIC that reacts with the genes that code for
these tRNA's. The investigations will employ a base that will substitute for
thymine in DNA and react with TFIIIC in the presence of light. In this way, the
site on the DNA with which TFIIIC reacts can be identified.