* 8803493
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis Related            To Weight Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Sagun Chanillo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1991
* USD 25,806.00

Work to be carried out on this project focuses on estimates of differential
operators and resulting uniqueness of solutions which can be shown to follow
from such estimates. Particular emphasis is to be placed on p-power integral
conditions on the lower order coefficients of the operators. Among the specific
goals of the research is one of characterizing what has been termed the unique
continuation properties of potentials in differential equalities. These a priori
measures determine when a smooth function must vanish identically from very
local vanishing of its derivatives. Particular interest will be paid to the
Laplace operator in which the potential is taken in the largest logical class,
known as the Kato class. Related work will also be carried out on questions of
global unique continuation in which vanishing of potentials below hyperplanes is
to ensure that they vanish everywhere. Results due to C. Fefferman for
perturbations of the Laplacian confirm that unique continuation is possible for
potentials with high index. This research will seek to lower the condition to
integrability for all powers greater than unity. Efforts will also be made to
apply any new result to the Dirac operator where unique continuation is only
verifiable in specific cases rather than function classes. They key to
understanding inequalities needed in the work is a restriction phenomenon which
must be established. Basically, these phenomena say that the quadratic norm of a
Fourier transform confined to the surface of a sphere is dominated by the
weighted quadratic integral of its antecedent. The weight is the potential of
the differential inequality. This research will have fundamental implications in
the field of elliptic partial differential equations.