* 8803436
* Vibrational Linewidth of a Chemisorbed Polyatomic
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Victoria Buch, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 11/30/1990
* USD 87,385.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program, Buch will calculate the
vibrational line shapes of molecules which are chemically absorbed on the
surface of platinum. The calculated line shapes for the ethylidyde molecule will
then be compared with the detailed experimental results of Trenary et al. This
study will examine the influence of the high frequency adsorbate modes on the
vibrational broadening mechanisms. The results of the calculations will then be
used to construct simplified models of a "system/bath" partition concept. Line
broadening mechanisms due to the interaction of the vibrational modes of the
adsorbate with those of the solid will be studied. An atomic level approach will
be used in which IR line shapes are derived quantum-mechanically from the
microscopic force field. The focus will be on ordered overlayers of adsorbate
which will take advantage of system periodicity to reduce the dimensionality of
the problem. Zero order motion of the system will be described by the adiabatic
approximation, in which the low frequency substrate and adsorbate modes move in
the average field of the high frequency adsorbate modes. The resulting shifts in
the low frequencies will be calculated for both the ground and excited states of
the adsorbate, and used to evaluate the dephasing contribution to the linewidth.
The vibrational decay contribution will be calculated with the help of the
golden rule. The calculations will include no adjustable parameters; the data on
the microscopic force field will be adopted from the literature. The markedly
different widths and temperature dependencies of the three spectral lines
measured experimentally by Trenary et al., will offer a unique opportunity to
study mode specific effects in a chemisorbed polyatomic. This will be the first
quantum-mechanical atomic level study of IR line shapes of a polyatomic
adsorbate, including both decay and dephasing contributions for a realistic
microscopic potential.