* 8803726
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Reliability-Based Rehabi-litation of Civil Structures Against Natural Hazards
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1988,09/01/1988
* Alfredo H-S. Ang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 09/01/1988
* USD 0.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Alfredo H-S. Ang, Department of Civil
Engineering, University of Illinois, and Dr. Masanobu Shinozuka, Department of
Civil Engineering and Operations Research, Princeton University, to pursue with
Dr. Hyo-Nam Cho, Department of Civil Engineering, Hanyang University and Korea
Military Academy, and Dr. Chung-Bang Yun, Department of Civil Engineering, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, for a period of 24 months, a
program of cooperative research on reliability-based rehabilitation of civil
structures against natural hazards. These researchers will develop quantitative
damage models for steel and reinforced concrete structures and use them to
assess the degree of damage and/or deterioration of existing civil structures.
They also will develop nondestructive tests and knowledge-based expert systems
for field experimentation. The results of these activities will be used to
develop a strategy for rating the reliability of bridges and other structures.
The ratings then may be used to recommend replacement or rehabilitation. As
civil structures approach their original intended design life, the degree of
damage and/or deterioration must be assessed in order to determine if they need
to be rehabilitated or replaced. This assessment also can be used to (1)
determine their reliability when subjected to extreme loads such as heavy
traffic and natural hazards (high winds and earthquakes) and (2) reach decisions
on the degree of rehabilitation or whether replacement is required. The problems
addressed by this project are common ones whose solution would be beneficial to
the United States and Korea. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.