* 8803073
* Radiation Problems in General Relativity (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1992
* Jeffrey Winicour, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1992
* USD 603,600.00

This project involves the application of Einstein's General Theory of
Relativity to a theoretical investigation of systems with non-Newtonian
gravitational forces. Electric forces are due to charged particles and are
responsible for the orbiting electron structure of atoms and molecules; the
gravitational analog is the attractive force of gravity. Magnetic forces are due
to the motion of charges in current loops. They display a much richer variety of
effects. Their gravitational analogs, which arise from the motion of massive
objects, were unknown to Newton but are predicted by Einstein's theory. One
aspect of this research is the exploration of possible roles these forces play
in astronomical systems. Light and radio waves constitute a combination of
electric and magnetic forces into a wave. The same is true of their
gravitational analogs which again are predicted by Einstein's theory. A major
portion of this project involves the study of the properties of these
gravitational waves, such as their energy content, their quantum properties
analogous to the photon composition of light and the way they are produced by
stars and galaxies. This highly mathematical work should improve our
understanding of black holes, gravitational radiation, and the proper
construction of a consistent quantum theory of gravity.