* 8803926
* Rock Magnetic Studies of Soil Chronosequences in California:A New Approach to Soil Genesis and the Dating of Geomorphic Surfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Kenneth Verosub, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1991
* USD 80,001.00

Although soil scientist have been studying the chemistry of iron in soils for
many years, there have been relatively few studies of the magnetic properties of
soils. Most of the studies have focussed on the enhancement of the magnetic
susceptibility in the upper portion of the soil. For the past year and a half,
the Principal Investigator has been studying the rock magnetic properties of
three soil chronosequences in California, noting that the rock magnetic
properties vary within different horizons of the same soil profile or pedon and
between pedons of different age developed in the same parent material. Results
have also shown that the enhancement of the magnetic susceptibility is a more
complex phenomenon than previously thought. This project investigates other
chronosequences in California and extends work to include additional rock
magnetic parameters. The goal of this research will be to gain new insights into
the basic pedogenic processes involved in the translocation and transformation
of iron in soils and to use that information to develop a relative, if not an
absolute, method of dating soils. Such a dating technique would have wide
applicability, not only for the dating of soils on stable geomorphic surfaces
but also for the dating of various surficial processes such as hillslope
development and landsliding.