* 8803015
* PRF: The Role of Flight Muscle Ratios in Aerial Interactionsof Flying Insects
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1990
* James Marden, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 06/30/1990
* USD 52,800.00

.j.>Many insects capture prey, escape from predators, and compete for mates by
utilizing short bursts of rapid maneuverable flight. Recent experimental results
indicate that maximum short-burst flight performance depends strongly on flight
muscle ratio (FMR; the ratio of flight muscle mass to body mass). This result
suggests that animals with high FMRs should generally be able to outperform
animals with lower FMRs in aerial contests. Three analyses will be used to
explore this hypothesis. The first compares FMRs of prey captured by robber
flies with FMRs of prey that escape, and with FMRs of all potential prey. How
FMR variation among individual robber flies affects foraging success will be
determined. The second study compares FMRs of palatable butterflies with FMRs of
unpalatable butterflies, to determine if differences in predation frequency have
resulted in variation in the way butterflies distribute mass among their
tissues. The third study examines how interspecific variation in FMRs of male
dragonflies varies with the spatial pattern of female oviposition. Females that
oviposit selectively, in a few preferred sites, should impose strong selection
for male traits that allow aerial defense of these sites. Results of these
analyses may demonstrate that mass allocation is a basic and ecologically
profound problem for flying insects, and perhaps for flying animals in general.
Work will be performed at Brown University, The University of Texas at Austin,
and the Smithsonial Tropical Research Institute in Panama.