* 8803893
* The Rise of Complex Civilization in Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Warren DeBoer, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1990
* USD 48,057.00

Building on his prior reconnaissance in the area, Dr. Deboer will conduct two
seasons of archaeological research in the Santiago and Cayapas basins of the
Esmeraldas province in coastal Ecuador. Although very little work has been done
in this heavily vegetated tropical region, Dr. Deboer's survey indicates the
existence of six distinct archaeological complexes which appear to extend from
the first millennium B.C. to the recent past. Because the ground cover is so
heavy, Dr. Deboer and his team will follow extant trails and use these as the
basis for survey. His assumption is that such trails have great antiquity and
thus, prior settlements should be clustered along them. He will also conduct
excavation at selected sites. The goals of this research are to define these
complexes more clearly, determine their chronology through pottery seriation and
radiocarbon dating, and to determine the geographical extent of each. Dr. Deboer
will then work to explicate settlement patterns and social organization. Some
areas on the Pacific coast of South America have produced spectacular
assemblages with monumental architecture, and these have been studied in some
detail. Other regions which did not reach this state of development are less
known, and Esmeraldas is one of these. Dr. Deboer's survey and excavation will
help fill this gap. The research will serve to document the range of variation
along the Pacific coast and provide a broader interpretive context. From a
larger perspective the research is important because it will increase our
understanding of human adaptation at a simple level of technology in the
tropics. In this heavily forested region, groups survived by simple agricultural
techniques for over a thousand years. The techniques they employed were thus
successful over not only the short run, and it may be valuable both in Ecuador
and other tropical regions of the world to learn about them.