* 8803312
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Properties of Nonlinear       Hyperbolic Equations Arising in Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Sergiu Klainerman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1991
* USD 111,307.00

This project continues work of the principal investigator on problems related
to nonlinear partial differential equations arising in mathematical physics. The
equations are typically of hyperbolic type. Objectives of this work include the
development of methods for proving global existence, stability and asymptotic
behavior results for classical field equations. Among the problems to be
considered are the global nonlinear stability of Minkowski, Schwartzchild and
Kerr solutions of the Einstein vacuum equations. Also the asymptotic behavior of
the Yang-Mills equations for general initial conditions will be studied. Work
will also be done on establishing global existence and asymptotic results for
the Maxwell-Dirac equations subject to small initial conditions. A second line
investigation involves analysis of the formation of singularities for
quasilinear wave equations in three space dimensions. It has been known for some
time that solutions to certain classes of equations have developed singularities
in finite time . Very little is known about the nature of these singularities
near the onset of blow up and the three dimensional case is the least understood
of all. One of the difficulties to be overcome is conceiving a means for
visualizing solutions whose singularities only occur after exponentially long
periods of time have elapsed. Work will continue toward developing new methods
for the study of global smooth solutions for semilinear wave equations. In wave
equations where the nonlinear term is a power of the unknown function, it is
known that solutions remain smooth indefinitely if the power is less than five.
For higher powers almost nothing is known, although it is believed that some
version of singular local energy estimates will provide the information
necessary for the resolution of this problem. In addition to natural
applications to mathematical physics, this work will provide methods which will
be applicable to the analysis of large classes of differential equations.