* 8803300
* Trade Policy with Imperfect Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Avinash Dixit, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1992
* USD 115,186.00

The recognition of uncertainty and imperfect competition has led to a
substantial rethinking of the economic theory of international trade and
commercial policy. This project aims to expand the frontiers of this research in
four broad areas, the themes of which evolve naturally from the author's
previous work. A. Hysteresis in Trade: When firms must incur costs to enter and
leave a market, transient currency misalignments have persistent effects on
import volumes and prices. Previous models of this phenomenon were
oversimplified and unrealistic. The proposed research has simple but more
realistic descriptions of exchange rate movements (notably Brownian motion).
Some results for competitive firms have been obtained; future work will include
imperfect competition, and examine related policy issues like oil import taxes.
B. International R &amp; D Competition: Since R &amp; D is inherently risky,
good analysis of policy in this area must employ a stochastic dynamic game
model. Such a model is formulated; the research will consist of extensive
numerical computations necessary to solve it. Hypotheses about the intensity and
the riskiness of strategies appropriate for leaders and laggards in the R &amp;
D race will be tested. The design of trade and subsidy policy for high-tech
industries will be examined. C. International Policy Conflict and Coordination:
The main issue to be researched is the avoidance of Prisoner's Dilemmas: the
standard tariff retaliation war for competitive industries, and the strategic
import tariff or export subsidy for oligopolies. Prisoners' Dilemmas over many
dimensions of trade policies, and games of bargaining to divide the potential
gains from trade liberalization, will be studied. D. Trade Policy Under
Uncertainty: Markets for pooling and allocating risk are often incomplete,
especially in LDC's. However, casual arguments that advocate the use of trade
restrictions for insurance do not survive rigorous analysis. More precise
formulations of the market failures, and appropriate policy responses, will be
studied.