* 8803761
* Late Quaternary Valley Fills and Paleoenvironments of the   Southern High Plains
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Vance Holliday, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1991
* USD 176,988.00

The research examines late-Quaternary sediments on the Southern High Plains for
information on past environments. A number of dry valleys (draws) cross the
region and have slowly filled with sediments for the past +11,000 years.
Previous scattered geomorphic investigations strongly suggest synchroneity in
late Quaternary depositional and soil-forming events and similar regional
environmental changes. The first objective of the research is to document the
late Quaternary stratigraphic histories of the draws to test the hypothesis of
synchronous, regional geomorphic and soil-forming events. Another objective is
to understand environmental and hydrologic changes at the end of the
Pleistocene. There are marked out-of-phase hydrologic changes from flowing to
standing water along and among the draws between 11,000 and 10,000 yrs. B.P. It
is unclear whether these variations are due to local geomorphic conditions or
environmental differences. The third objective is aimed at understanding middle
Holocene environments. There appears to have been regional, massive eolian
deposition at this time, suggestive of severe widespread aridity. The proposed
research will help establish the late Quaternary paleoenvironmental record for a
vast region (over 120,000 km), hitherto known only from a few sites. The record
appears to be one of dramatic environmental changes, which is clearly the case
for historic times. Understanding these past changes could help in dealing with
future climatic extremes.