* 8803738
* Dissipation Rates of Osmotic Pressures in Geologic Membrane Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Steven Fritz, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1991
* USD 137,216.00

Osmotic flow through clays and shales can result in anomalous hydrostatic
pressures in the subsurface. Within the past 15 years, experiments conducted on
clay membranes have shown that the permselectivity of membrane-functioning
materials like clay is sufficiently high to generate appreciable osmotically-
induced hydrostatic pressure in the subsurface. Yet to be resolved is whether
osmotic-generated pressures are sustainable to explain long-term phenomena like
artesian conditions and thrust faulting. Dissipation of osmotic pressure can be
tested by measuring 3 phenomenological coefficients of the clay membrane. Of
these, the solute permeability coefficient (w) is the most important in
determining the rate at which an osmotic cell runs down. To date, there exists
no data for (w) inn clay membrane systems having low porosities akin to aquitard
materials in deep sedimentary basins. This study proposes to measure the rates
at which osmotically-generated hydrostatic pressures are dissipated across
bentonite membranes of various porosities. These data, mainly in the form of (w)
values, will help resolve the kinetic conundrum of geologic membrane systems. If
these data show that osmotic- pressure dissipation is extremely slow, then this
should result in a re-evaluation of mechanisms causing anomalous hydrostatic
pressures in the subsurface -- particularly for deep sedimentary basins.