* 8803940
* REU: Training Program in Biosocial Adaptation: Assessment ofPaleonutritional Techniques
* BIO,BIO
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1989
* Marc Kelley, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1989
* USD 39,400.00

This award will provide continuing support for a Research Experience for
Undergraduates Site at the University of Rhode Island. Students will be trained
in anthropometry, osteopathology, trace metal and stable isotope analyses,
skeletal densitometry, and biological differentiation of skeletal samples as
tools for studying adaptation to physical and cultural environments through
time. Such experiences will be invaluable to students majoring in anthropology,
biology or ecology and interested in pursuing an interdisciplinary approach
towards a common objective. The topic to be addressed is paleodietary
reconstruction which draws from a wide variety of disciplines and technologies--
thus offering undergraduate students from several fields the opportunity to
pursue a common goal while acquiring invaluable fieldwork experience and
subsequent laboratory analysis of data collected. This project involves
collaboration with the University of Tarapaca in northern Chile. The principal
investigator, Dr. Marc Kelley (URI) along with co-investigators have established
a well-defined research project for undergraduate training in paleonutrition
reconstruction based on well-preserved mummies and skeletal remains spanning the
last 8,000 years form northern Chile. The students will learn new techniques and
be in a position to assess their value for future studies.