* 8803225
* Analysis of National Education Longitudinal Studies Data
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Charles Bidwell, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 07/31/1993
* USD 1,024,999.00

A four-year program of research is being undertaken to realize the analytic
potential of two extraordinary education datasets: High School and Beyond and
the National Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988. Taken together, these two
datasets constitute the most extensive, richest body of information we have on
the educational status of America's youth in relation to America's secondary
schools. The scheduled program of research is intended to advance the social
science use of this information through an interrelated set of substantive and
methodological investigations which will, in a comparable and integral fashion,
examine the learning experiences of high school seniors graduating in the years
1972, 1980, 1982, 1988, and 1992. The conceptual framework for the research is
posited as an interactive system in which students' learning experiences and
outcomes are affected by a web of reciprocal relationships among the educational
activities of teachers, the student composition and social organization of
classrooms, the administrative policies and structures of high schools, and the
relationships of the parental community to both students and teachers. Attempts
to disentangle strands of the web and uncover underlying processes will be made
by use of sophisticated statistical modeling procedures which hold the promise
of producing substantive gains of a basic social scientific kind as well as
improving the metrics available for policy-related studies of formal schooling.
The research includes provisions for devising and implementing a database
management system that will organize and widen access to existing and
forthcoming educational longitudinal datasets, improve access to and management
of the growing body of statistical findings based upon longitudinal educational
surveys, gain bibliographic control over publications related to data derived
from such surveys, and make all of this available to future users of the data in
media appropriate to modern computing environments. Funding for the research is
being furnished by the Department of Education in addition to the National
Science Foundation.