* 8803804
* Transfer of Reducing Equivalents from Host Cytoplasm to     Bacteroids in Legume Nodules
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* John Streeter, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/1992
* USD 195,000.00

Recent theoretical arguments and experimental results suggest a role for
glutamate in the function of N2-fixing bacteroids. An examination of the
literature indicates that the best way to accommodate a role for glutamate is to
propose that a malate- aspartate shuttle operates in legume nodules. There is a
surprisingly large amount of published evidence to support this hypothesis, but
it has not been thoroughly tested. These experiments will directly test the
hypothesis by determining the patterns of labeling of metabolites in cytosol and
bacteroids, the effect of substrates on the acetylene reduction activity and
respiration rate of anaerobically isolated bacteroids, and the distribution and
properties of enzymes required for the operation of the malate-aspartate
shuttle. The hypothesis is attractive because it can be tested by many
approaches, all of which involve straight-forward methods. If the hypothesis is
correct, one of the major unresolved questions in symbiotic N2 fixation -
namely, how reducing equivalents are supplied to bacteroids - would be answered.
If the hypothesis is not correct, the proposed experiments will still provide
important new insights regarding carbon metabolism in legume nodules. Some
plants are "colonized" by bacteria which convert gaseous nitrogen to an organic
form usable by the plant. The plant must provide a substantial amount of energy
to its symbiont in exchange. In fact, the plant provides more energy to the
bacterium than it costs to fix the nitrogen. One of the major unanswered
questions is how energy is provided to the symbiont. This project directly tests
a new hypothesis that organic acids containing nitrogen are involved in this
exchange.