* 8803871
* REU: Undergraduate Research in Developmental Regulation
* BIO,BIO
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1989
* Susan Singer, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1989
* USD 36,000.00

This award provides funding for a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site
at Carleton College. The project provides support for a 10 week summer research
experience for nine undergraduates from Carleton College and other regional
colleges and universities. Pre-participation reading requirements will provide
students with an adequate foundation for meaningful scientific investigation.
During the summer students will work in a one-to-one relationship with a
research supervisor in the laboratory. Weekly seminars will provide students
with the opportunity to discuss research plans and results as well as to delve
into primary scientific articles. To further focus and unify the student
participants, a theme of developmental regulation has been selected. Six of the
eight projects relate directly to this theme and mid-summer seminars will be
used to discuss current literature in this area. Projects will include
investigations of: the mechanisms of action and the chemical characteristics of
a possibly-steroid pheromone produced by Oedogonium, functional structure of
Hensen's node in the chick embryo, regulation of floral development in tobacco,
effect of B chromosomes in maize on developmental processes, structure and
function of the glucocorticoid receptor in rat liver, development of neural
connections in Helisoma, variation of sex expression in composites and effect of
gregarine parasites on population biology of capitellid polychaetes.
Opportunities to complete research and writing during winter break will be
available.