* 8803774
* Polysilanes with Side Functional Groups
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 05/31/1992
* USD 200,000.00

High-molecular weight polysilanes with side functional groups will be prepared
and characterized. Polysilanes are new materials that show strong electron
delocalization in the main chain. They resemble polyenes, but are more stable
and can be prepared as soluble high polymers. In addition to alkyl-and aryl-
substituted polysilanes, only a trimethylsilyl derivative is known. Polymers
with new properties could be prepared by the introduction of various functional
groups to polysilanes. The principal investigator has developed a sonochemical
synthesis of high-molecular-weight polysilanes with monomodal molecular weight
distribution and low polydispersity, and a rapid and quantitative dearylation of
phenylsubstituted disilanes with trifluoromethanesulfonic acid. Triflated
silanes react rapidly with different nucleophiles. This technique opens new
synthetic avenues to high-molecular-weight polysilanes with side functional
groups, such as alkoxy and amino substituents which contain mesogenic groups,
electron-donating and withdrawing groups, or hydrophilic groups. Preliminary
experiments show efficient grafting of polytetrahydrofuran from triflated
polysilanes. As typical vinyl monomers, substituted styrenes, vinyl ethers, and
Nvinylcarbazole will be grafted on polysilanes. Cyclic ethers and iminoethers
will be used as heterocyclic monomers. The preliminary characterization will
involve studies of the influence of substitution on basic spectrosocipic
properties, molecular-weight distributions, and thermal behavior. These
polysilanes can find applications as more efficient photoresists,
photoconductors, and nonlinear optical materials.