* 8803029
* U.S.-U.K.-Cooperative Research: Optimization and Scale-up   of Animal Cell Bioreactors
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1989
* Donald Kirwan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1989
* USD 9,147.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Donald Kirwan of the
Bioprocess/Product Development Center at the University of Virginia and
Professor John M. Smith of the Process Biotechnology Program at the University
of Surrey in the United Kingdom. Both of these research groups are investigating
improved reactors for animal cell culture. The increased demand for monoclonal
antibodies, therapeutic proteins, vaccines, and other high value products of
animal cell culture requires that efficient larger scale processing methods be
developed. This proposal deals with the initiation of a cooperative research
effort between two groups devoted to this activity. The joint research will
focus on two topics: 1) The measurement and modeling of shear stress fields in
bioreactors and (2) the role of diffusion in influencing the productivity of
immobilized animal cells. The first project will involve the investigation of
the turbulent shear created by bubble coalesence events in aerated bioreactors.
The understanding of shear fields will be directly applicable to the culturing
of animal cells. The second project will involve diffusion and reaction of
nutrients, oxygen, and cell regulators in animal cell-filled gel particles. The
concentrations and time varying patterns of biochemicals can be important to
cell productivity. The researchers will model this phenomena based upon data on
diffusivities in gels, cell uptake rates, and the influence of regulators in
free cell cultures.