* 8803506
* Genome Evolution in Bacteria
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1988,05/01/1992
* Howard Ochman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 05/01/1992
* USD 139,624.00

The proposed research will investigate the factors promoting variation in the
size and organization of the bacterial chromosome. By analysing isolates of
Escherichia coli and other enteric bacteria of known genetic and genealogical
relationships, he will examine many types of evolutionary events occurring above
the level of individual gene loci. This research will address questions
concerning: (1) the incidence of horizontal gene exchange, recombination and
large-scale DNA rearrangements in natural populations, (2) variation in the
physical maps of the E. coli chromosome, (3) the extent of insertion and
deletion of chromosomal DNA causing variation in genome size among natural
isolates, (4) the chromosomal location and stability of transposable elements,
and (5) the rate and evolutionary history of genetic and chromosomal changes in
enteric bacteria. To analyse these events among natural isolates, Dr. Ochman
will: (1) Assess the nucleotide variation in a large number of genes positioned
around the E. coli chromosome to search for regions that have been affected by
recombination, as evident by inconsistencies in the phylogenetic relationships
among strains based on a particular gene. (2) Produce physical maps of the
chromosome for many strains of E. coli. Large DNA fragments generated by
restriction enzymes with very infrequent recognition sequences are resolved by
techniques such as pulsed-field gel electrophoresis and mapped by blot and
hybridization procedures. (3) Compare homologous traits- nucleotide sequences
and physical maps - among divergent taxa. In total, these methods provide a
broad approach to studying the dynamics of the bacterial genome.//