* 8803200
* Collaboration of Indian and American Research Scholars in   the Natural and Social Sciences, Award in US and Indian     Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Ted Tanen, Asian Cultural Council Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1992
* USD 443,796.00

Description: This project provides funds to the Asian Cultural Council (ACC) to
support research of scholars selected under the Indo-U.S. Subcommission on
Education and Culture. Eight awardees will come from a wide range of scientific
fields and will work with counterparts who are known scientists in India. Funds
from this grant are used for travel, and research costs of the scholars, and to
partially pay for the stipends of the awardees. U.S. $15,000 will be used to
cover administrative costs in the U.S. The ACC nominees for 1988-1989 are in
various social science fields as well as chemistry, chemical engineering,
mathematics and physiology. The specific topics they propose to work on are
generally of considerable interest to NSF. Scope: The ACC, the agent for the
Indo-U.S. Subcommission on Education and Culture, is a highly regarded
organization funding opportunities for collaboration with Indian scholars in
scientific areas of interest to NSF and to India. It secures necessary
clearances for the awardees in India and provides logistical and administrative
support. NSF makes the final ranking of potential awardees from the ACC
nominees. Past awardees have been productive with considerable publications in
refereed journals. The project is to be funded over two years. FY 88 U.S.
$15,000 plus $219,268 in Indian currency FY 89 U.S. $15,000 plus $219,268 in
Indian currency