* 8803247
* Cyclic Glucan Biosynthesis and Phospholipid Metabolism of   Bradyrhizobium
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Karen Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1991
* USD 210,007.00

The long-term objective of the proposed research is to gain a further
understanding of rhizobial bacteroid differentiation, a process essential for
the development of effective nitrogen-fixing nodules on the roots of leguminous
plants. Several lines of evidence have indicated that the cell- envelope
composition of the Rhizobiaceae provides an essential function in this important
microbial-plant symbiosis. The experimental plan will focus upon the
characterization of the phospholipid and cyclic glucan oligosaccharide content
of the cell-envelope of species of Bradyrhizobium. In addition, the phospholipid
metabolism of the bradyrhizobia will be examined as well as the enzymic
activities associated with the biosynthesis of the cyclic glucans of these
bacteria. Experiments are based upon preliminary studies by the applicant that
have indicated that the phospholipid metabolism of species of the Rhizobiaceae
is intimately linked to the biosynthesis of the cyclic glucans of these
bacteria. An important aspect of the proposed studies will be the examination of
bradyrhizobial phospholipid and cyclic glucan content before, during, and after
the induction of nitrogen-fixation in free-living microaerobic cultures.%%% The
availability of water and a source of combined or fixed nitrogen represent the
two most limiting factors in agricultural productivity. Because crop plants are
not able to fix nitrogen, it must be provided in fixed form. This may be
accomplished through the use of industrially synthesized nitrogen fertilizer,
however, this synthetic process represents a very costly one in terms of the
expenditure of fossil fuels. An alternative mechanism for acquiring fixed
nitrogen has evolved in which certain plants are able to participate in a
complex symbiotic relationship with nitrogen-fixing bacteria. The symbiotic
relationship between leguminous plants and members of the family Rhizobiaceae
represents not only an important source of globally fixed nitrogen, but also the
most well-studied example of such symbiosis. The overall goal of this project is
to gain further understanding of rhizobial bacteroid differentiation - a process
essential for the successful development of nitrogen- fixing nodules on the
roots of leguminous plants.***//