* 8803452
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Measure on Riemann Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Kenneth Stephenson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1990
* USD 60,801.00

Work on this project relates investigations into properties of analytic
functions with the geometry of Riemann surfaces. While this research continues
much of the same theme represented in earlier work, the introduction of the
tools of Brownian motion add a new dimension to it. The underlying approach to
problems addressed here is one of constructing Riemann surfaces which must be
image surfaces of analytic functions to ensure that the mappings have some
prescribed properties, especially of a geometric nature. An example of the type
of application possible is that of determining and locating harmonic measure by
using exit times of Brownian motion. If harmonic measure exists, it is supported
on accessible boundary points. On the other hand, one constructs analytic
functions by building Riemann surfaces which project onto the plane and then
combine with a Riemann mapping function. The difficult part of three
constructions is to verify that the resulting functions have certain properties.
Here Brownian techniques are expected to be of value. Particular problems to be
addressed deal with the scope of the support of harmonic measure. To what extent
can it diffuse rather than concentrate? It has been shown recently that such
measures (on Riemann surfaces) can be absolutely continuous with respect to
area. A second class of applications involve the identification of singular
factors in inner functions. Except for the presence of omitted values, very few
criteria exist which detect these factors. Using new geometric constructs,
efforts will be made to ensure that the resulting functions have prescribed
singular factors. It should be noted that Brownian techniques are not sensitive
enough to detect such terms.