* 8803663
* Reconstructing the Paleocommunity from the Fossil Assem-    blage:  Comparative Analysis of Taphonomy and Time Averagingin Modern Death Assemblages of the Marine Environment
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Eric Powell, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1991
* USD 118,812.00

A major impediment in the interpretation of the fossil record has been the
inadequate understanding of the biases in it caused (1) by the taphonomic
alteration of the original assemblage of living organisms and (2) by the mixing
or time averaging of temporally distinct faunas. The objective of this project
is to improve our understanding of these biases by a comparative study of
taphonomy and time averaging among the major environments of deposition found in
the Gulf of Mexico and adjacent waters. Over the past 6 years, selected
communities in Texas bays and the Texas continental shelf were sampled and
analyzed using the best techniques available to both zoologists (for the living
community) and paleontologists (for the death assemblage). Parameters
investigated included taxonomic composition, trophic structure, diversity,
population dynamics, biomass and the influence of physical disturbance phenomena
and biological interactions in determining community structure for both the
living community and the death assemblage. Processes studied included taphonomic
modification and loss of shell material, local transportation of shell material,
and time averaging. A good working model of how these processes affect the
formation of the death assemblage from the living community and the use of the
parameters listed above during paleoecological reconstruction has been developed
for the Texas coastal zone and extended out onto the shelf and upper slope. A
detailed taphofacies analysis has been conducted in a suite of major
environments of deposition in these same areas. We will extend this analysis in
depth by including, for the first time, a detailed comparative analysis of time
averaging. We propose to extend this analysis in scope by broadening the study
to include additional EOD's within the Gulf of Mexico and adjacent waters. In
this way, we can investigate how fossil assemblages form in the marine
environment and determine how broadly applicable the model developed for death
assemblages in Texas bays and the Texas shelf is to a much larger fraction of
the fossil record.