* 8803077
* Collaborative Research:  Development of Diagnostic Tools forHigh Temperature Fluidized Beds
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,09/30/1992
* James Welty, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 09/30/1992
* USD 143,998.00

This research addresses the design, development and calibration of diagnostic
tools for high temperature fluidized beds. An abrasion- resistant heat flux
transducer will be used to measure the local heat flux between a high
temperature fluidized bed and an immersed surface. An optical probe will be
developed to detect the local presence of bubbles in high temperature beds. The
optical probe will be used to measure the bubble size distribution, bubble rise
speed, and volumetric bubble fraction. After the devices have been developed and
calibrated, they will be used to understand the heat transfer in high
temperature fluidized beds under a variety of operating conditions. Considerable
attention has been devoted to the development of fluidized bed combustion
processes for high sulfur coal and other solid fuels since the sulfur emissions
from this technology can easily meet the air quality standards. Fluidized bed
combustors also have the advantage of flexibility in regard to fuel type because
they can be designed to burn several different types of fuels. Most of the
previous studies of instantaneous local bed-to-surface heat transfer
measurements are restricted to near room temperature conditions. The advancement
of our understanding of fluidized beds requires the experimental
characterization of the high temperature phenomena. This project will provide
the experimental devices and data to meet this overall objective.