* 8803036
* Immunoaffinity Isolation of Vitamin K-Dependent Proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* William Drohan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 11/30/1991
* USD 268,200.00

The use of highly pure plasma-derived vitamin K-dependent protein in
anticoagulant therapies necessitates that these protein products be devoid of
procoagulant cascade proteins. The homologous sequences found in both pro-and
anticoagulant vitamin K-dependent proteins render classical separation processes
inadequate for production of highly pure vitamin K-dependent proteins. This
study employs a combination of classical separation and immunoaffinity isolation
steps to produce highly pure human Protein C from cryopoor plasma and Cohn
fraction precipitates. A prepurification-volume reduction step is achieved via
anion exchange or wheat germ lectin affinity chromatography. Eluate from this
step is then subjected to a novel monoclonal antibody isolation step. The
monoclonal antibodies employed are selected for their ability to bind Protein C
either in the presence or absence of calcium. Thus, the immunosorbent materials
being evaluated form Ab-Protein C complexes that are calcium dependent such that
gentle elution conditions of either calcium or EDTA buffer solutions are
employed. This provides for extended longevity of the immunosorbent media.
Several crosslinked, beaded-agaroses and celluloses are being evaluated as
support matrices. Process feasibility is evaluated based upon the degree of
recyclability of the immunosorbent materials developed. It is hoped that a model
immunoaffinity isolation process technology for vitamin K-dependent plasma
proteins will evolve from these studies. The recently demonstrated clinical
indications for Protein C as well as other anticoagulant vitamin K-dependents
such as Protein S, signals the urgency for the development of isolation
technolgy for producing these proteins at large scale. Currently, plasma is the
only source which can meet the kg per annum or greater needs suggested by
biochemical and clinical studies. Even with the advent of cost-effective
genetically engineered versions of these proteins (which could become available
in the next 5 years), the need for an alternative and natural source of these
proteins is necessitated by the immunogenicity that will likely occur with
synthetic versions of these same proteins. The availability of plasma- derived
anticoagulant proteins would help provide an alternative therapy needed for
those cases where immunogenicity for the genetically engineered version is a
problem. There is no doubt that the same purification technology developed for
plasma derived proteins will be useful in genetically engineered protein
production.