* 8803494
* Mathematical Sciences: Critical Point Theory and            Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Joseph D'Atri, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1991
* USD 51,920.00

Work will be done in the application of variational methods to differential
equations. It will focus on three areas: critical point theory and Hamiltonian
systems, on elliptic differential equations arising in curvature problems of
differential geometry and on multiplicity questions for superlinear second order
elliptic boundary value problems. Although superlinear equations have been
studied for some time, certain results are only partially understood. One of the
important ones is the existence of infinitely many solutions of the Dirichlet
problem with null boundary values. Efforts will be made to determine some global
reason applicable to all superlinear equations. This will have to be achieved
through a more abstract approach, possible using new complexification ideas.
Work on Hamiltonian systems will follow two directions. The first is to
determine the degree of regularity of generalized solutions to Hamiltonian
systems with singular potentials; the second is to continue studies on the
Weinstein conjecture. This latter concerns periodic orbits on odd-dimensional
compact manifolds. It is believed that every contact vector-field has such an
orbit if the first homology group of the manifold is zero. Previous work on this
conjecture has led to ideas of critical points at infinity and pseudo-orbits of
contact forms. These, in turn, have produced partial solutions to the
conjecture. Work of a more geometric nature will center on the Kazdan - Warner
problem on spheres of dimension five or greater. The fundamental question is one
of deciding when a given function is the curvature of a metric conformal to the
standard one. Positive results for the three-sphere do not carry over to higher
dimensions. In addition to making fundamental contributions to the fields of
differential geometry and partial differential equations, this work can be
applied to dynamical systems and potential theory.