* 8803709
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research:  The Application of Non-   Destructive Techniques to Investigate Cavitation in         Superplasticity
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Terence Langdon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1991
* USD 6,562.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Terence G. Langdon, Materials Science
Department, University of Southern California (USC), to pursue with Dr. Ho Chul
Kim, Professor of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), for 24 months, a program of cooperative research on the application of
nondestructive techniques to investigate cavitation in superplasticity. The
collaborators will use the excellent facilities at KAIST to perform
nondestructive testing of samples provided by the testing laboratory in the
United States. Facilities of the type at KAIST are not available at USC.
Superplasticity refers to the ability of some metals to exhibit exceptionally
high neck-free elongations, often in excess of 1,000%, when pulled in tension at
elevated temperatures. This phenomenon is of considerable commerial interest
because of the any potential applications in sheet-metal forming. A major
problem in superplasticity is the nucleation and growth of internal cavities.
These cavities may lead to a significant degradation of the post-forming
properties of the material. The collaborators will attempt to obtain indirect
information on cavity size as a function of both specimen history and testing
procedures. They also will attempt to correlate results of nondestructive
testing at KAIST with parallel optical examination at USC. The collaborators are
highly respected scientists in the field of this research. The present project
will allow them to combine their talents and interests for mutual benefit. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperative between U.S. and Korea
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
Korean participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).