* 8803853
* A Model System for Analyzing the Generation of Linear       Satellite RNAs
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Anne Simon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1992
* USD 193,700.00

Small infectious RNAs, such as satellites and viroids, can interfere with
fundamental but as yet unidentified molecular processes in plant cells. Much
attention has been focused recently on the generation of mature forms of
circular small infectious RNAs. The discovery that some satellites and viroids
undergo self-cleavage reactions while others only process in the presence of
nuclear extracts is increasing our basic understanding of the multifunctional
properties of RNA molecules. To study the generation of linear satellite RNAs,
the turnip crinkle virus satellite system is ideal because of the multiple
related satellites, the infectivity of in vitro altered satellite and the recent
identification of a region essential for normal monomeric satellite
accumulation. By in vitro alteration of the satellite sequence, followed by in
vitro transcription of infectious cRNA and inoculation in plants, the
nucleotides involved in satellite processing in this region as well as others
will be precisely identified. To better understand this potentially novel
processing mechanism, sequences involved in processing will be duplicated,
deleted and moved to different locations in the satellite molecule. To aid in
data analysis, an in vitro processing system will be developed using extracts
from infected and uninfected plants. The study of small pathogenic RNAs is a
particularly challenging and intriguing area of plant biology. Even though these
RNAs can be described in molecular terms, their mode of action remains unsolved.
The fact that they can have significant effects on plant development suggests
that these simple pathogenic RNAs must somehow interact and interfere with
fundamental molecular mechanisms in the normal plant cell.