* 8803825
* Enzymology and Mechanism of Reaction of Selected Enzymes of Terpene Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1988,09/30/1993
* Hans Rilling, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 09/30/1993
* USD 630,000.00

This grant proposal enables four research groups of diverse research
disciplines to study a selected group of enzymes of polyprenol biosynthesis. The
different groups will contribute skills in enzymology, microbial/genetics,
synthetic organic chemistry, and physical organic chemistry. Most of the enzymes
for study utilize allylic and homoallylic diphosphate esters as substrates. They
are isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase, two prenyltransferases (farnesyl and
geransylgeranyl diphosphate synthetases), two enzymes that catalyze "head-to-
head" condensation of allylic pyrophosphates (squalene and phytoene
synthetases), and finally, 2,3-oxidosqualene cyclase. These enzymes will be
purified to homogeneity from Saccharomyes or Phycomyces. When necessary, genetic
amplification of their expression will be used to obtain enough protein for
study. Photolabile substrate analogs will be prepared so that their catalytic
sites can be identified and sequenced. Hopefully, entire proteins will be
sequenced so that a comparison of these enzymes that catalyze such chemically
similar reactions can be compared. In addition, comparative studies of the
mechanism of the reactions will be undertaken. %%% Many biologically important
polymers are made from a building block unit of five carbons. These include
natural rubber, the visual pigments, the colors and fragrances of flowers and
fruits, light harvesting plant pigments, and pheromones and defensive
substances. Although the pathways of synthesis of these compounds are of crucial
biological and economic significance, very few details of the enzymes carrying
them out are known. This project seeks to fill important information gaps and
provide needed data on these important pathways.***//