* 8803295
* Dissertation Research: Algal and Zooplankton Community      Responses to Piscivory: Mediation Through Alternate         Planktivore Types
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1989
* Nelson Hairston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 10/31/1989
* USD 14,557.00

One of the most visible symptoms of eutrophication is high phytoplankton
standing crop. Recently, investigators have hypothesized that by increasing
piscivorous fish densities in lakes, planktivorous fish abundance should be made
to decline, leading to higher zooplankton biomass or altered species composition
and thus indirectly to lower phytoplankton standing crop. Piscivorous fish are
limited in the maximum size of prey they can ingest by the dimensions of their
mouths. Because several studies have shown that this "gape limitation" can be
very important in influencing interactions between piscivores and their prey,
there should be differential effects of piscivores on populations of prey that
differ in body shape. This differential predation may in turn influence the
degree of piscivore-mediated cascading trophic effects on zooplankton and
phytoplankton. Laboratory experiments will examine prey election by piscivorous
largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides) for two species of planktivores
representing extremes in general body type: fathead minnows (Pimephales
promelas), soft-rayed and shallow-bodied and bluegills (Lepomis macrochirus),
hard-spined and deep bodied. A long-term pond experiment using 20 experimental
ponds will also examine largemouth bass-fathead minnow and largemouth bass-
bluegill interactions and their cascading effects on zooplankton and
phytoplankton. The outcome of these experiments will test ecological theory and
has immediate applied value in lake management.