* 8803338
* 2nd International Congress of Plant Molecular Biology,      November 13-18, 1988, Jerusalem, Israel
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1989
* Leon Dure, International Society for Plant Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/1989
* USD 15,000.00

The purpose of the Second International Congress for Plant Molecular Biology is
to provide an open forum for the presentation of recent research findings in the
area of plant molecular biology in its broadest sense, and to promote the
exchange of ideas, concepts and technological advances among scientists
throughout the world. Attendance is open to anyone interested in plant molecular
biology world wide as is the opportunity to present experimental results through
oral or poster presentations. It is anticipated that research workers in plant
molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry, physiology, pathology and tissue
culture on both the basic and applied level will participate in the Congress.
The need and usefulness of the Congress can be assessed by the success of the
first Congress in Savannah, USA in 1985 which had 2,000 attendees from 39
countries, and by the response to the first circular of this Congress to which
over 2,000 scientists have replied to date. This, in turn, attests to the
dynamic, exciting status that plant molecular biology is experiencing, which can
be attributed to the rapid advances in the field and to the potential impact of
this field on world agriculture. Support by the National Science Foundation will
permit partial travel awards of $500 each to approximately 30 young
investigators who will be presenting research at the Congress. This will help
assure adequate representation of young U.S. scientists at this important
international meeting.