* 8803324
* Molecular Analysis of a Gene Regulating Development
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Richard Garber, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 09/30/1991
* USD 163,000.00

The homeotic genes of the fruitfly, Drosophila, participate in determining the
developmental fate of cells. Antennapedia (Antp) plays such a role to cause
normal generation of the fly's thorax and abdomen. Our goal is to understand in
molecular terms how Antp carries out its role. Our attention is currently
focused on the Antp promoters and peptide products. Antp encodes four proteins,
and it makes these using RNAs orginating from two independent promoters. We will
determine the spatial pattern of RNAs associated with each promoter over the
course of embryogenesis. A complementary study will be made for total Antp
protein using mutants lacking activity of one or the other promoter. Together
these will define the cells which can be influenced by Antp action and whether
one or both promoters is responsible in each cell type. To understand the
functions of the different Antp proteins, mini-genes containing the cloned cDNAs
will be transformed into Drosophila to direct ectopic expression of each form.
The phenotypes caused by each will be compared to see if they are different, the
same, or show some overlap. Our primary goals in this project period are to
determine why Antp has two promoters and makes mutiple protein products. Many of
the gene complexes associated with development have proven to have intricate
regulation. This study should result in greater insight into some of the
mechanisms utilized at the molecular level.