* 8803937
* Improvement of Reliability of Electronic Subsystems
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1988,02/29/1992
* James Steelman, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/29/1992
* USD 216,055.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was designed to
increase the participation of minorities in scientific and engineering research.
The program provides support to strengthen the research environments and
capabilities of institutions that have substantial minority student enrollments.
Eligible institutions must also have graduate programs in science or programs in
engineering. The principal investigators at the New Mexico State University will
use RIMI support to evaluate electromagnetic interference and electric cross-
talk problems between adjacent leads on microchip surfaces. Researchers will
also develop computer-aided experimental (CAE) tools to do efficient electronic
packaging. The proposed research will use various analytical, numerical, and
experimental procedures that will enable design engineers to recognize and
correct potential packaging problems. This project on methods to improve the
reliability of electronic systems will strengthen the research infrastructure of
a productive institution that educates students at the cutting edge of science.
The principal investigator is a young and talented minority who has started a
very promising research career in the field of electrical and computer
engineering. He has completed training at the White Sands Missile Range
specializing in Analog to Digital Interface Systems that are used in radar. As a
result of this RIMI project, more minorities students will have the opportunity
to select careers in science and engineering.