* 8803769
* Tectonic Evolution of the Early Mesozoic Arc in California  and Arizona
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* James Mattinson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 02/28/1991
* USD 90,257.00

The PI's will test a speculative model for the tectonic setting of the late
Triassic to early middle Jurassic arc in Arizona and California. This
continental arc has occupied a deep, fault- bounded depression, similar to the
present-day arc of Central America. While the modern analogue provides a
"snapshot" of surficial processes in an arc graben-depression, the early
Mesozoic arc of Arizona and California provides a three- dimensional view of
what was an extensional arc, as it evolved over 50 million years. The work will
either document the speculative model or modify it, but the relationships to be
documented include: (1) determination of patterns and rates of subsidence along
the arc, using U-Pb zircon geochronology to date sections of continental strata;
(2) characterization of the abundance of high-level rhyolitic intrusions and
associated calderas, relative to mesozonal plutons; (3) documentation of
patterns of alkalic volcanism within the arc, using major and trace elements
that are relatively immobile during greenschist grade metamorphism, and (4)
recognition of syndepositional normal faults through facies analysis of
sedimentary and volcanic rocks, as well as by zircon dating of cross-cutting
relations between faults and intrusions. Implications of this speculative model,
which is based in part on our new U-Pb zircon age data, include the possibility
that craton-derived quartz sands were funneled along the length of the arc
graben-depression and distributed across its width, and beyond to forearc
regions, throughout lower and middle Jurassic time. These quartz sands would
thus be used as "tracers" to recognize exotic terranes that have been displaced
from their site of origin in the Jurassic arc or forearc region of the southwest
Cordilleran U.S., particularly if the sands can be fingerprinted through U-Pb
dating of detrital zircon. Continuous belts composed of thick continental arc
successions may largely originate in extensional settings. The PI's will
integrate facies analysis and petrologic study of metavolcanic and
metasedimentary rocks with U-Pb zircon dating to document patterns of faulting,
subsidence and volcanism in a long- lived arc. These results can then be applied
to interpretation of more disrupted continental arc successions of all ages and
localities.