* 8803418
* International Workshop on Defect and Fault Tolerance in     VLSI Systems; October 6-7, 1988; Springfield, Massachusetts
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1988
* Israel Koren, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1988
* USD 5,500.00

The workshop addresses problems on defect tolerance and fault tolerance in
complex VLSI (Very Large Scale Integration) and WSI (Wafer Scale Integration)
systems. Its objective is to bring together researchers and designers in the
above problem areas with developers of appropriate computer-aided design (CAD)
tools and innovative packaging techniques. Its scope includes (a) defect and
fault tolerant computer architectures; (b) defect and fault tolerant memories;
(c) techniques for yield enhancements; (d) fault models and defect models; (e)
statistical modeling of defects and yield; (f) repair and restructuring
techniques; (g) packaging technologies for WSI and 3-D VLSI circuits; (h) high
density hybrid circuits; (i) CAD tools; and (j) experimental systems. The
research will bring together researchers and practitioners in both industry and
academia in the U.S. and abroad to discuss problems on fabrication defects,
yield models, and chip designs for yield enhancement. It will foster better
interactions between industry and academia in understanding fabrication defects
and developing defect tolerant and fault tolerant techniques and systems. The
program committee consists of distinguished researchers in academia and
industry. The workshop organizers have done extensive research in this area and
are well respected in the problem areas addressed by the workshop. The grant
funded by the National Science Foundation will be used to support travel for a
keynote speaker and the printing cost of proceedings for conference attendees.
Without the support from NSF, the cost of registration will be exceedingly high
for the limited number of workshop attendees. Support is, therefore, highly
recommended.