* 8803047
* Interfacially Mediated Synthesis of High Tc Superconductors in Single Compartment Vesicles (Expedited Award)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1989
* Arijit Bose, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/1989
* USD 30,000.00

A novel technique for the production of uniform, ultrafine (~100A), dense,
monodispersed superconducting ceramics is proposed in this expedited award. This
method exploits the ability of single compartment vesicles to form a highly
selective barrier between its exterior and interior, thus creating a microvolume
reactor in the intravesicular space. By appropriate processing, coprecipitation
of the mixed metal hydroxides (precursors of the superconducting, ceramics) can
be induced in the internal region of these vesicles only. A mixed metal chloride
solution consisting of precalculated ratios of Cu++, Cu+, Ba++, and Y+++ ions
along with ~1% w/w dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine will be sonicated at slightly
above the lipid gel-liquid phase transition temperature to encapsulate some of
the metal and chloride ions inside the unilamellar vesicles. This proposal
represents the first attempt at using single compartment vesicles for
coprecipitation of metal hydroxides which are precursors for the recently
discovered high temperature superconducting ceramics. The critical transition
temperature as well as the critical magnetic field strength are intimately
related to the stoichiometry and composition of the ceramic phase. These can be
varied easily in the proposed technique by changing the ratio of the cations in
the original solution. In contrast, however, the critical current density
depends upon the processing steps used to obtain the final product. By producing
ultrafine, dense and uniform particles, it is expected that higher critical
current density than the presently available sintered superconducting ceramics
will be obtained.