* 8803163
* Dissertation Research: Mechanisms of Benthic Algal          Succession in Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1990
* Paul McCormick, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 10/31/1990
* USD 5,004.00

Although the process of ecological succession is considered important in many
communities, there has been a notable lack of experimental studies designed to
test predictions of mechanistic models. The purpose of this study is to test for
the importance of noninteractive, facilitative and inhibitory models in benthic
algal succession in low order streams. Algal species colonizing initially barren
clay tiles will be classified as early successional, late successional or
successionally indifferent on the basis of their relative abundance on the
substrate through time. The relative importance of facilitative, inhibitory and
neutral interactions between early and late successional species will be
determined by comparing growth rates of species of each successional type under
conditions where the density of early or late successional species has been
enhanced in the immigration pool. These manipulations will be performed
simultaneously in the presence and absence of indigenous invertebrate grazers to
assess their importance. Experiments will be performed in continuous- flow
streamside channels which will allow for greater control of confounding
influences and replication of treatments. The research will be the first to
elucidate successional mechanisms by directly measuring effects of changes in
the species composition of algal assemblages on species' growth rates and will
help clarify future hypotheses regarding the importance of specific habitat
parameters and grazing in influencing the rate and outcome of succession.