* 8803233
* ROW: Paleocurrent and Paleoslope Analysis in Deformed Rocks:New Procedures Applied to Problematic Siluro-Devonian Stratain the Acadian Orogen, Maine
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Lindley Hanson, Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 01/31/1991
* USD 49,200.00

Quantitative paleocurrent/paleoslope analysis, one of the most powerful tools
in the study of sedimentary basins, has not been widely applied in problematic
metasedimentary basins within mountain belts. This award will confront some of
the analytical difficulties which have discouraged such work, in the context of
a regional survey of paleocurrent and paleoslope directions in the Maine
Appalachians. We introduce innovative approaches in two problem areas:
retrodeformation of directional indicators, and kinematic analysis of soft-
sediment deformation structures. A rational approach to retrodeformation of
directional indicators is illustrated in terms of bedding pole paths during
deformation, and a broad selection of possible tilt-correction paths is thereby
revealed. A simple orthographic construction for strain correction of
directional indicators is proposed to supercede comparable but more complex
stereographic constructions proposed in the early 1960's by Ramsay. Proposed
innovations in kinematic analysis of soft-sediment deformation structures
include slump fold vergence as a more powerful alternative to the separation arc
and mean axis methods, and the use of displacement stereovectors to better
exploit available information from soft-sediment faults. The proposed research
will thereby introduce several recent advances of structural analysis to the
sedimentological community. An important by-product of our work will be the
development of a user-interactive Macintosh software package for paleocurrent
and paleoslope analysis, which will ensure that the more difficult and/or
laborious new procedures will be accessible to non-specialists.