* 8803034
* Proposal for Continuing Partial Support of The Federal      Construction Council's Technical Program
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1989
* John Eberhard, National Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 11/30/1989
* USD 22,000.00

The Federal Construction Council (FCC), established in 1953, is a continuing
activity of the Building Research Board (BRB) of the National Academy of
Sciences. Its fundamental purpose is to provide a common base for technical
studies by those federal agencies that are responsible for the design,
construction, and operation of federal government facilities or for
construction-related research. Because the FCC is the only organization in the
United States in which the various autonomous federal construction agencies meet
regularly to identify and resolve common problems, it fulfills a unique and
vital function. This grant provides partial support of the Council. During 1988,
work will continue on the development of a conceptual framework for an
integrated computer data base encompassing the entire construction process. The
program titles of five advisory studies included in the 1988 program include:
Integrated Data Base Development (Phase VI); Assessing the Impact on Federal
Agencies of the Use of Building Codes as Design Criteria; Improving the
Operation, Maintenance, and Repair of Federal Facilities; Criteria for Selecting
and Evaluating Heating, Ventilating, and Air- conditioning (HVAC) Systems for
Buildings; and the Use of Risk Appraisal in the Development of Design Criteria
for Facilities. NSF involvement in the FCC provides an important link for input
to the development of activities in the area of structures, construction, and
building research, particularly as it relates to the NSF Structures and Building
Systems Program. Reports resulting from FCC activities will be prepared in
sufficient quantity to ensure distribution to the sponsors, committee members,
and to other interested parties. In accordance with the NAS policy, such reports
also may be made available to the public without restrictions.