* 8803221
* Dissertation Research: Population Variation in VAM Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Peter Stahl, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 11/30/1989
* USD 8,000.00

The proposed study will examine ecological relationships among populations of
vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal (VAM) fungi. The objectives of this work are to
determine whether ecotypic differences exist among populations of these root
endophytes and to examine their ranges of tolerence to environmental conditions.
Common garden experiments will be employed to determine if population variation
among VAM fungi is the result of genetic differentiation or phenotypic
plasticity. Reciprocal transplant studies will be used to examine the ranges of
tolerance of populations to environmental factors. Geographic isolates of Glomus
mosseae, a well known VAM fungus, from a range of dissimilar environments are to
be included in the experiments and will be cultured on the roots of sudangrass
and yellow sweetclover. Both direct observations of the endomycorrhizal fungi
and analysis of their effects on host plant growth and physiology will be
employed to assay variation among and within G. mosseae populations. The results
obtained from this work will provide valuable data on genetic makeup, geographic
variation and physiological specialization in VAM endophytes. Further, this
investigation will yield insights on the mechanisms of ecological adaptation in
natural populations of fungi in general and eventually may be beneficial in the
selection of strains for specific uses.