* 8803116
* Interfacial Macromolecular Transport and Metabolism of LDL  in the Arterial Intima
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Peter Ganatos, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 07/31/1991
* USD 185,000.00

In this proposal, a new hypothesis is advanced for the local origin of
atherogenesis which attempts to relate local changes in macromolecular
permeability to the detailed sequence of events and mechanisms leading to the
formation of the foam cell lesion. The hypothesis offers a possible explanation
for the relationship between arterial wall cell turnover, macromolecular
permeability, the receptor mediated metabolism of the cellular component of the
arterial intima and media, the recruitment and subendothelial penetration and
transport of blood borne monocytes and their conversion to macrophage type foam
cells. The time dependent model developed by the principal investigators to show
the quantitative relationship between endothelial macromolecular permeability
and leaky junctions associated with statistically infrequent cells in turnover
will be further developed to include: (1) a discrete diffusion barrier for the
internal elastic lamina, (2) convection in the interendothelial clefts and
subendothelial tissue and (3) models for the receptor mediated low density
lipoprotein (LDL) metabolism of the endothelial and smooth muscle cells. The
quantitative models in (3) will be based on the experimental model of Brown and
Goldstein for the LDL receptor mediated metabolism and the intracellular
regulation of their number density in human fibroblasts. Simplified mathematical
models have been formulated for the six key processes governing this regulation
wherein the constants in the individual processes are determined from available
experiments. The objective of these models is to obtain a quantitative
predictive relationship between the extracellular native LDL concentration, the
hydrolyzed free cholesterol content of the cells and the regulation of receptor
number. The subendothelial LDL concentration predicted by the overall model is
then related to the release of chemotactic factors for the recruitment and
adhesion of blood borne monocytes based on the quantitative criteria proposed in
the new hypothesis. Experiments conducted in a complementary NIH grant have
recently confirmed the first part of the hypothesis showing that the leakage of
LDL across the endothelium does occur via poorly formed junctions surrounding
the small population of cells in turnover. Further experiments are required to
validate the quantitative link between subendothelial LDL levels and monocyte
recruitment proposed in the new hypothesis.