* 8803517
* Regulation of Protein Metabolism in Mammalian Cells: Role oftRNA
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1992
* Oscar Scornik, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1992
* USD 180,000.00

Most cells respond to amino acid deprivation with a number of compensatory or
adaptive biochemical changes including slower synthesis of protein and RNA,
stimulated protein breakdown and growth arrest. In bacteria this "stringent
response" is mediated by ppGpp, a regulatory nucleotide formed when deacylated
tRNA binds to idle ribosomes. Mammalian cells respond to amino acid deprivation
with analogous metabolic changes but ppGpp has not been found and the regulatory
role of tRNA has been questioned. Work from this laboratory has provided clear
evidence that in the stimulation of protein degradation by histidine starvation
in CHO cells, the regulatory mechanism does recognize the level of his- tRNA and
ribosomes idling in the histidine codon. Therefore, a mechanism does exist in
mammalian cells comparable to the bacterial stringent response, except for the
absence of ppGpp. This research will: (i) inquire into the nature of the signal
emerging from idle ribosomes and attempt to reproduce some of the regulatory
events in cell-free systems; and (ii) explore the physiological significance of
this tRNA-dependent response in growth control, protection from mistranslation,
and maintenance of amino acid pools. Unicellular organisms are exposed to
changes in the environment in which they live. They compensate for the scarcity
of some substances by increased transport or biosynthesis and adjust their
growth rate to the availability of nutrients. In higher organisms, tissue
specialization and hormonal regulation maintain relatively constant
concentrations of nutrients in the body fluids. Mammalian cells are capable,
however, of a direct response to amino acid deprivation which includes slower
synthesis of RNA and protein, faster protein breakdown, and arrest of growth.
The response is analogous to that in bacteria where the physiological changes
following deprivation of a required amino acid are collectively known as the
"stringent response". The bacterial stringent response is the result of a
regulatory mechanism sensitive to the level of amino acylation of tRNAs.
Evidence from this laboratory supports the existence of a comparable mechanism
in cultured cells.