* 8803212
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Properties Like the         Radon-Nikodym Property
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Isaac Namioka, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1991
* USD 13,795.00

This award will support collaborative research in modern analysis between Dr.
Isaac Namioka, Department of Mathematics, University of Washington and Drs. C.A.
Rogers and J.E. Jayne, University College London, U.K. The research topic
proposed is "Properties like the Radon-Nikodym Property." Dr. Namioka is a
leading investigator in this area of mathematical research, and Drs. Roger and
Jane are also internationally recognized experts in descriptive topology. A
compact Hausdorff space is called Radon-Nikodym compact if it is homeomorphic to
a weak compact subset of a dual Banach space with the Radon-Nikodym property.
Although there are some open questions, the class of Radon-Nikodym compact
spaces is reasonably well understood. This cooperative research proposal aims to
undertake a similar study for non-compact spaces. During the past year, the
three investigators of the proposed project have laid a foundation for the study
of topological spaces with Radon-Nikodym type properties. They now propose to
develop their theory further and to solve those problems that have arisen in
connection with the application of the general theory to specific spaces such as
Banach spaces with the weak topology. The results of this research are likely to
lead to interesting applications of descriptive set theory to the geometric-
measure theoretical structure of Banach spaces.