* 8803946
* Performance of Earth Dams During the Whittier Narrows       Earthquake of October 1, 1987
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1988,03/31/1991
* Ronald Scott, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 03/31/1991
* USD 106,230.00

A number of earth and rockfill dams, instrumented with strong ground motion
recorders, experienced the Whittier Narrows earthquake of October 1, 1987. The
closest was the Whittier Narrows Dam, at 4 kilometers distance from the
earthquake's epicenter. The maximum horizontal acceleration was 0.32g recorded
at the crest of the dam, while the upstream recorder indicated a peak vertical
acceleration of 0.46g. The response of other dams at greater distances was also
obtained. Few strong motion records are available for such structures. This
project addresses the analysis of these records from nine earth dams in order to
understand the behavior of earth dams, and the utility of different analytical
models for the analysis of dam response. The shaking during the main shock, as
well as the after shocks, triggered all accelerographs on the nine dams,
providing the most extensive array of earthquake response measurements of earth
dams yet obtained in the U.S. and abroad. It is a cooperative project between
the California Institute of Technology and the University of Southern
California. Three major tasks are being addressed: (1) data processing,
analysis, and comparison of accelerograms; (2) evaluation of internal permanent
deformation and cracking in the dams; and (3) summarizing the observations,
results, and conclusions in a general recommendation for the strengthening of
earth dams for earthquake resistance. The California Institute of Technology is
concentrating on performing centrifuge tests on physical models of one or two of
these dams, while the University of Southern California is concentrating on both
simplified and complex numerical models of nine dams. A comparison is being made
of the results of the centrifuge tests, the observed response of the dams during
the Whittier Narrows earthquakes, and the results of the computer analysis using
the numerical models.