* 8803526
* Integrated Biostratigraphic Standard of Reference for the   Lower Devonian (Lochkovian) Using Conodonts and Graptolite  Lineages
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Michael Murphy, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 12/31/1989
* USD 40,000.00

The research will continue studies that seek to establish an integrated
biostratigraphic standard of reference for Lower Devonian faunas of western
North America Cordillera based on quantitative studies of variation within
conodont and graptolite lineages and will add ostracode faunas to the synthesis.
An integrated and detailed standard of reference is necessary to an
understanding of paleobiological problems of biogeography, biofacies and
patterns of evolution. It is also required to solve stratigraphic and structural
problems requiring a high degree of resolution. Such studies are rare in the
literature because the concurrence of the factors necessary for success is
rarely encountered. Previous quantitative studies of the lower Lower Devonian in
central Nevada have demonstrated the utility of conducting statistical studies
of conodont lineages for this purpose. By-products of these studies indicate
that a number of additional important Lower Devonian conodont lineages are
present entirely or in part in several known sections or extensions of them.
These sections are located in the Toquima Range, the Simpson Park Range, the
Monitor Range and the Roberts Mountains and have formed the primary data base
for what is presently known of conodont and graptolite biostratigraphy of this
part of the column in the region. Study of several lineages has shown the
enhancement of correlation that can be attained and the utility of such studies
in attaining a stable classification. Both are ingredients necessary to a
detailed and stable biostratigraphic standard of reference.