* 8803308
* Replication Proteins of Bovine Papillomavirus
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Van Wilson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/29/1992
* USD 223,500.00

Bovine papillomavirus (BPV) DNA can be stably maintained in infected cells as an
extrachromosomal replicon. Stable copy number maintenance of the BPV genome
requires coordinate regulation of viral and cellular DNA replication. Genetic
analysis has identified two viral activities essential for regulated viral DNA
replication, but the gene products themselves have not been identified yet. Both
of the genetically defined activities map at least in part to the E1 open
reading frame (ORF). The proposed project will identify and characterize the E1
gene products. Identification will be immunological detection using a set of
regionally directed E1 antisera. Anti-E1 sera will be obtained by using either
OmpF/E1/B-galactosidase fusion proteins expressed in E. coli. or synthetic
peptides predicted from the E1 ORF sequence, as immunogen. In conjunction with
the production of anti-E1 sera, a series of E1 nonsense and in-frame deletion
mutations will be constructed by in vitro mutagenesis. The anti-E1 sera and the
E1 mutants will be used to determine physical (cellular localization, oligomeric
state, post-transnational modification, protein-protein interaction, kinetics)
and biochemical (ATPase, DNA binding) properties of the E1 proteins. This is a
proposal to study an unusual mechanism of maintenance of a viral infection. The
DNA of the virus under study is transmitted to successive generations of cells
as a small independent chromosome, of which a small number of copies is stably
maintained. The virus contains genes which are essential for this stable
transmission. If one of these genes is inactivated, the viral DNA can't be
reproduced at all. If another of these gene's is inactivated the viral DNA
replicates in an uncontrolled fashion, killing the lost cell. The products of
these genes clearly allow the virus to coordinate its replication with that of
the lost cell's DNA. The work proposed here is an investigation of the detailed
biochemical mechanism of action of the products of these genes. This work should
yield important information on how some types of viral infection persist for
long periods of time, and may also results in insights into how the lost cells
own chromosomes are transmitted in an orderly fashion from one generation to the
next.