* 8803620
* Physiological and Genetic Characterization of Salt Tolerant Mutants in Ceratopteris
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Leslie Hickok, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1992
* USD 181,868.00

This project uses the fern Ceratopteris as an experimental plant system that
provides several advantages for such studies, including: a variety of confirmed
mutants derived from the same salt sensitive wild type genotype, the ability to
rapidly characterize the genetic basis of the various mutants, the ability to
precisely determine quantitative responses to stress, and the ability to
efficiently carry out physiological and genetic studies on both a simple haploid
gametophyte and a developmentally complex vascular sporophyte phase of the life
cycle. Initial studies show that while the effects of single genes on tolerance
may be modest, specific combinations exhibit synergistic effects, resulting in
high levels of tolerance. The physiological and genetic complexity associated
with natural salt tolerance is most likely based upon similar gene interactions.
The availability of the described mutants and the advantages of this plant
system provide a unique opportunity to study fundamental aspects of salt
tolerance in plants. %%% The development of crops with enhanced tolerance to
salt and other osmotic stresses is an important objective in dealing with the
worldwide problem of excess salinity on agricultural land. However, the complex
basis of salt tolerance is incompletely understood. Fundamental genetic and
physiological studies are needed.