* 8803182
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Richard Hosier, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/1990
* USD 12,060.00

This doctoral dissertation award will support an investigation of rural energy
systems in Morocco. Energy is of major importance for the improvement of
household living standards, increased agricultural production and storage, the
development of local industries, and the access of rural communities to area and
national markets. The research will focus on the interdependencies between
energy use and village social organization in a cluster of 12 representative
villages. The purpose of the project is to develop a comprehensive understanding
of the role of energy in the economy of the study villages. Based on an in-depth
survey of the food-fuel-fodder- fertilizer cycle, a detailed picture will be
developed of energy use in the study region. Information related to energy usage
patterns, distribution networks, and availability constraints will be acquired
through a variety of survey research techniques. Environmental input-output
analyses will be used to determine energy balances, flow diagrams, and the
potential for interfuel substitution. The project will enhance our understanding
of energy as a pivotal production frontier for economic and social development
and will offer a model framework for assessing future energy requirements and
technological interventions in the region. It will provide knowledge essential
to our understanding of the global economy.