* 8803975
* REU: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Biological   Sciences
* BIO,BIO
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Elizabeth Jones, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 11/30/1989
* USD 40,000.00

This award will provide continuing support to the already established
undergraduate research program at the Biological Sciences Department of Carnegie
Mellon University (CMU). This department stresses a comprehensive undergraduate
curriculum in modern biology, including strong preparation in the physical
sciences. The department has a long tradition of undergraduate involvement in
research. Over 60% of undergraduate biology majors at CMU do original research
and more than 33% go on to graduate studies. The department is therefore highly
suited to provide a site for an undergraduate research experience. Funds will be
used to augment and formalize the already existing program. In particular, the
proportion of students recruited from other institutions will be increased.
Special efforts will be made to attract minority students and students form
liberal arts institutions. Students with little or no prior laboratory
experience will be provided with an intensive laboratory course before beginning
an original research project. A seminar series will be given by faculty on
topics in modern biology. And finally, students will prepare a written summary
of their summer research and make an oral presentation at a closing symposium
for participating students and faculty.