* 8803910
* Patterns of Carbonate Accumulation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Bruce Wilkinson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 02/28/1991
* USD 122,976.00

Mass-age data on global sedimentary carbonates require that global limestone
and dolostone comprise about 3,500 x 10^20 g of carbonate Ca with a cycling rate
of 0.25% per million years. Epoch-interval deviations are small, suggesting
relatively constant long-term rates of deposition and destruction. Best-fit
curves through data on deep oceanic and shallow cratonic reservoirs indicate
that shallow water limestone formation has been decreasing at a rate of about
0.7% per million years. Holocene shallow water limestone accumulation is not 60%
lower than during the Mesozoic. Possible reasons for global carbonate transfer
from shallow to deep setting are largely unconstrained. Biologically-medicated
processes related to the Mesozoic diversification of planktic protozoans may
have resulted in the progressive replacement of shallow shelly faunas by deep
oceanic calcifiers as the principle sink for a finite marine carbonate flux.
Conversely, decline of cratonic carbonate reservoir mass may reflect
physicochemically- mediated processes related to global sea level and the extent
of carbonate-saturated seas. Preliminary data indicate that ongoing carbonate
transfer is also recorded by correlation between Cenozoic positions of the
continents, global sea level, and the latitudinal extent of cratonic limestones.
The project will: 1) compile global data on the areal extent, latitudinal
setting, and vertical accumulation rates of shoal-water carbonate platforms; and
2) document relations between present patterns of shallow water carbonate
accumulation and ambient fluid carbonate chemistry. Collectively, this effort
will allow for the evaluation of relations between eustasy, ambient fluid
saturation state, biological versus chemical precipitation processes, and global
patterns of carbonate accumulation, and will directly constrain the history of
surface carbonate saturation in shallow marine settings. This global data base
will be of major importance to interpreting paleoclimate and understanding
evolution of the ocean.