* 8803050
* Hardware Self-Diagnoses Using On-Component Links to Experts   Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Eugene Jones, Tractell Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 01/31/1992
* USD 191,258.00

The objective of this research is to determine the feasibility of a method to
embed diagnostic expertise within hardware systems to achieve a self-diagnostic
capability. For this purpose, a self-contained electronic device is proposed
which serves to link hardware, diagnostic information, expert diagnostic
systems, human diagnosticians. This link is called the Adaptive Memory
Module/Template (AMMT), which is an intelligent software-controlled information
logging device to be eventually packaged as a microchip. This AMMT device is to
be embedded into a host component as a module, or onto the component as a
template. The AMMT is externally powered and interrogated through a radio-
frequency probe. It has a battery-backed, non-volatile, crash-proof memory which
is capable of data retention for ten or more years. As an option, electronic
links between the AMMT and the host component may serve to continuously record
host component reliability parameters, such as electrical pulsing, temperature,
vibration, humidity, etc., through embedded microsensors. Based on the Phase I
research, the AMMT concept is highly feasible with existing technology. This
feasibility is significantly enhanced with newer, more comprehensive electronic
units. Also, the AMMT has potential commercial applications extending beyond
hardware maintenance to such areas as biotechnology, manufacturing, and
robotics.