* 8803496
* Mathematical Sciences: Existence and Multiplicity Questions for Periodic Solutions of Hamiltonian Systems and Related   Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Helmut Hofer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1990
* USD 41,705.00

The theme of this work centers on the structure of solutions of systems of
ordinary differential equations. The equations have roots in classical mechanics
described by Hamiltonian systems. To understand the orbit structures of these
systems, one tries to find invariant subsystems, the simplest of those being
periodic solutions. This leads naturally to boundary value problems. Three
different questions will be treated in this project. The first is concerned with
conditions one can expect to find periodic solutions on a prescribed energy
surface. Complete results are available for convex and star-shaped surfaces.
Work will be done in expanding known theory to compact hypersurfaces of contact
type. The expected criterion for periodic solutions is the vanishing of the
first (real) homology group. A newly observed phenomenon of almost existence of
periodic solutions will also be pursued. A second direction this work will
follow is one of finding symplectic invariants for periodic solutions on compact
hypersurfaces in symplectic manifolds and deciding on multiplicity questions. In
attempting to find the number of periodic solutions on an energy surface, one is
faced with the difficulty that the usual variational approach does not give the
unparametrized periodic solutions. For compact convex surfaces, efforts will be
made to establish this number - which is thought to be at least half the
dimension of the ambient space. The third area of concentration will deal with
symplectic geometry. Considerable activity has been stimulated by the solution
of one of Arnold's conjectures and the introduction of holomorphic maps of
Gromov. Current work will focus on the role of the 2nd homotopy group in the
Lagrangian intersection problem.