* 8803199
* Indo-U.S. Workshop and International Symposium on BiologicalNitrogen Fixation Associated with Rice Production, June 1988Bhubaneswar, India, Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1988,03/14/1990
* Sisir Dutta, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/14/1990
* USD 56,670.00

Description: An international Symposium on Nitrogen Fixation Associated with
Rice and Green Manuring Crops is planned to be held in June 1988 in India, to be
followed by a joint Indo-U.S. Workshop to develop specific areas for future
cooperative research. The symposium will cover the topics of nitrogen sources
for rice, physiology and ecology of nitrogen fixation, biology of root and stem-
nodule forming rhizobia, recombinant DNA application in rice culture, and
agronomic aspects of nitrogen fixation. The binational workshop will consider
plant-rhizobium interactions, molecular understanding and manipulation of the
rice genome, the interaction between rice and associated microflora and the
molecular manipulation of associated cyanobacteria. The workshop is to result in
a report summarizing the state-of-knowledge in these areas, and specifying areas
of problems for viable research to be proposed jointly by scientists from the
U.S. and India. Scope: The two topics of nitrogen fixation and molecular
biotechnology are of great interest in the U.S. and in India. They relate to
various applications, one of which is agricultural productivity. Rice is a major
crop in the U.S. and is crucial to nutrition in India and other South Asian
countries. Collaboration on researching the parameters affecting nitrogen
fixation and the application to rice production would be worthwhile
scientifically and economically to the U.S. and India.