* 8803649
* Molecular Topology and Development in a Photosynthetic Membrane System
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* R. Clinton Fuller, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1990
* USD 150,000.00

The objective of this research is to further the understanding of the structure
and function of the photosynthetic membrane system in the evolutionarily
"primitive" prokaryote, Chloroflexus aurantiacus. The relative simplicity of its
reaction center and light- harvesting antenna systems make Chloroflexus an
excellent model system for the study of photosynthetic energy capture and the
genetic regulation and assembly of its photosynthetic apparatus. These
experiments are a continuation of previous work defining the architecture of the
photosynthetic apparatus. In addition, a series of experiments applying
recombinant DNA techniques will isolate genes encoding the photosynthetic
apparatus in Chloroflexus. These isolated genes will be used for analyzing both
the structure of the photosynthetic apparatus and its regulation of assembly.
Application of recently developed genetic techniques has resulted in new
approaches for studying regulation of assembly of bacterial photosynthetic
membranes. Such experiments have largely confirmed the observations of earlier
workers, in that assembly responds to light and oxygen levels. The exact
mechanisms for this control have not yet been clarified, but it is clear that
several photosynthetic components are under separate regulatory control. Current
information indicates three levels of regulation. One regulatory mechanism
appears unique to the Chloroflexus photosynthetic apparatus: post-translational
protein processing. This mechanism may be involved in regulation of chlorosome
assembly. Such a processing mechanism predicts that the several chlorosome
polypeptides are encoded on a single message, translated into a single
polypeptide, then cleaved. The genetic analysis proposed in this project will
provide a direct test of the protein- processing hypothesis by determining the
structure of the genes encoding the chlorosome polypeptides.