* 8803640
* RUI: The Use of Antibodies to Study the Topology of         Thylakoid Protein Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Steven Berg, Winona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 11/30/1991
* USD 154,000.00

Polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies specific for surface determinants of three
protein complexes isolated from spinach thylakoid membranes will be isolated by
affinity adsorption to rightsideout or insideout thylakoid membranes. These
side- specific antibodies will be used to identify those proteins which display
antigenic determinants to the aqueous milieu in which the thylakoids are
suspended. Comparison of those proteins with stromal exposures with those
proteins displaying lumen exposures will indicate which proteins are
transmembranous. In other experiments, monoclonal antibodies will be used to
demonstrate which proteins lie beneath the four lumen side extrinsic proteins
which are involved with water oxidation. Together, these experiments will
greatly enhance our understanding of the topology of the selected protein
complexes, thus allowing the development of increasingly sophisticated
structure/function models of the process of photosynthetic energy conservation.
%%% The overall objective of these experiments is to increase our understanding
of the transverse orientations and topologies of three protein complexes
required for photosynthetic energy coupling. The proposed research will enhance
the development of more sophisticated and topologically correct models of these
protein complexes and lead to a better understanding of photosynthesis.