* 8803899
* The Regulation of Gene Expression in Streptomyces: ROW Award
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1988,02/01/1991
* Janet Westpheling, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/01/1991
* USD 114,260.00

The properties of certain S. coelicolor mutants blocked in the initiation of
sporulation strongly suggest a direct connection between carbon-source
catabolite repression, activation of antibiotic synthesis genes and
morphological development. As a starting point for our investigation of how
these complex metabolic and developmental processes interact, we have chosen to
characterize in detail the regulatory mechanisms that control the
transcriptional activity of the gal operon of S. coelicolor, a relatively simple
transcription unit that is subject to both glucose-mediated catabolite
repression and induction by galactose. It is proposed to: 1) purify and
characterize the polymerase forms that transcribe gal, 2) define the cis-acting
elements of the operon that determine its regulation, and 3) identify and
isolate the trans-acting factors that mediate repression and induction. Members
of the bacterial genus Streptomyces are of enormous industrial importance, since
they are the source of about 80% of known antibiotics. These species are also of
great interest from a genetic and developmental point of view because of the
complexity of their life cycle. When deprived of nutrients, these bacteria
undergo a complex morphological differentiation culminating in the production of
dormant spores which can germinate when and where environmental conditions favor
vegetative growth. The synthesis of antibiotics is intimately related to this
developmental process, since it occurs during the development, and since many
mutants blocked in development can't make antibiotics. It is clear that one of
the signals for initiation of development is depletion of an easily assimilable
carbon source, such as glucose. The mechanism whereby this signal is translated
into a decision to begin the developmental process is not at all understood, but
a working hypothesis is that this mechanism is related to one by which, during
growth on glucose, genes whose activity is not essential under these conditions
are shut off. The mechanism of this type of shutoff has yet to be investigated
in detail in Streptomyces, but it is already clear that it is very different
from analogous but much better understood mechanisms in other unrelated species
of bacteria. This proposal to elucidate the mechanism of shutoff of a gene
unnecessary for growth on glucose is of particular interest because of the
central importance of this process in the complex life cycle of this bacterium
(which also happens to be a species of great industrial importance), and is of
general interest because it may establish new principles of control of gene
activity.