* 8803049
* Transport in a Continuously Moving Material Undergoing      Thermal Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Yogesh Jaluria, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tammi Owens
* 08/31/1991
* USD 189,938.00

This experimental and numerical research is in the area of thermal processing.
The investigation will study the effects of the coupling between the conduction
in the material and the convective fluid flow, the contributions of the boundary
conditions at an upstream of the point of emergence of the of the material, the
augmentation by buoyancy forces in the fluid and by radiative loss, and the
influence of turbulence. Interest also lies in the heat transfer rate at the
surface, the downstream temperature decay and the effect of the important
physical variables such as material velocity, temperature levels and material
and fluid properties. These aspects are important in the simulation of the
process and in the optimization, control and design of the relevant physical
system. The results obtained will contribute to a basic understanding of the
underlying physical processes and will provide important inputs for improving
and designing practical materials processing systems. In a wide variety of
applications related to the thermal processing of materials, such as extrusion,
rolling and continuous casting, continuously moving materials subjected to heat
transfer environments are encountered. In many cases, the motion of the material
itself generates the fluid flow for the thermal transport and this is the
circumstance proposed for detailed experimental and numerical investigation in
this research effort. Though the problem is of considerable practical and
fundamental importance, little detailed study has been undertaken to answer many
of the basic issues that arise and to provide the relevant inputs for process
design.