* 8803949
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Geol.): Geochemical Studiesof the Massive Sulfide Gold Deposits of the Tongling        District,  Anhui, China
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* James Craig, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 07/31/1991
* USD 23,880.00

This proposal on "Geochemical Studies of the Massive Sulfide Gold Deposits of
the Tongling District, Anhui Province, China," between Drs. James R. Craig and
Robert J. Bodnar of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University and
Messrs. LIN Gen Fan and WAN Xin of the East China Geological Exploration Company
of the Chinese Ministry of Metallurgical Industry (MMI), is jointly sponsored by
NSF and by the Chinese MMI. This joint research aims at a detailed geological
investigation into the ore deposits of a major, but little known, metallogenic
province in east central China, the Tongling area of Anhui province. This area
contains a large number of skarn and stratabound massive sulfide deposits that
contain mineable or potentially mineable quantities of base metals and gold,
specifically copper gold skarn deposits, stratabound copper gold deposits, and
gossan gold deposits. The investigators seek to define the conditions under
which these deposits formed and to determine if the two different deposit types
are genetically related. To achieve this, detailed petrographic and electron
microprobe analyses of ore and gangue minerals will define the mineralogy and
mineral chemistry within the deposits and seek to establish a comprehensive
paragenetic sequence. At the same time, detailed fluid infusion studies,
including standard microthermometry and laser Raman analyses, will define the
composition and physical state of the mineralizing fluids. This study of gold
deposits in distinctly different geological settings and apparent genesis
provides an opportunity to discover new aspects of the geochemical transport and
deposition of gold. Specifically, study of these ore deposits may provide
valuable information about the evolution of gold bearing hydrothermal systems,
by exploring the relationship between deposits that are clearly related to
igneous activity, such as the skarns, and those that are hosted entirely in
sediments (the stratabound deposits) and spatially unrelated to an intrusive
body. The new insight into gold ore genesis promised by this research could lead
to new exploration strategies and techniques useful both in the United States
and in China.