* 8803694
* Collaborative Research:  Investigation of Volatile Gradientsin Silicic Magma Chambers
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Philip Kyle, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 02/28/1991
* USD 37,500.00

Two examples of material from chemically zoned magma chambers are the Bishop
Tuff in California and the Lower Bandelier Tuff in New Mexico. In the Bishop
Tuff, the eruption appears to have overturned the contents of the magma chamber,
preserving a stratigraphic record of the chemistry of the chamber. The eruption
of the Lower Bandelier Tuff did not preserve the chemical layering which has
been deduced to have been present in the chamber. The difference between the two
eruptions suggests that the Bishop Tuff chamber had a density (volatile)
gradient while the Lower Bandelier magma chamber was more homogenous with
respect to volatiles. This project will quantify the volatile content in the two
chambers by analyzing trapped melt inclusions in phenocrysts which represent
different stratigraphic horizons. Ion and electron microprobe techniques will be
used to determine the content of H, F, Cl and S in the melt inclusions as a
fuction of depth in the original magma chamber, thereby determining the
magnitude of the volatile gradient. Electron probe analyses for major elements
will help determine the unaltered nature of melt inclusions and ion probe
microanalyses of selected lithophile trace elements will help determine the
original stratigraphic position of each phenocryst. The PI will do everything
except the ion probe analyses, which will be done by Dr. Richard Hervig of the
University of Arizona in a collaborative project.