* 8803822
* Relative Stabilities of Organic Aqueous Species in          Geochemical Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/1988,10/31/1991
* Everett Shock, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 10/31/1991
* USD 63,789.00

This research project in theoretical organic geochemistry will address problems
of critical importance to the understanding of the chemical transformations
which organic compounds undergo in geochemical processes. Research objectives
include calculation of relative stabilities and activities of organic aqueous
species as functions of temperature, pressure, fugacities of various gases (O2,
CO2, CH4, NH3, etc.) and activities of inorganic aqueous species, estimation of
thermodynamic data and equation of state parameters for organic aqueous species,
prediction of pKa values for organic acids and bases at high temperatures and
pressures, and estimation of activity coefficients for aqueous species in
electrolyte solutions. The focus of this research will be on the conditions of
diagenesis with the goals of enhancing understanding of the observed
distribution of organic aqueous species in sedimentary basin solutions,
identifying plausible chemical reactions between these species, organic matter
(kerogen and petroleum) and minerals, and predicting which organic aqueous
species should be found in future extended searches of natural solutions. This
research requires an interdisciplinary approach combining theoretical equations,
thermodynamic data, computer techniques, and field and laboratory observations
to achieve these goals.