* 8803659
* Expedited Novel Research Award; Local Averaging - A         Deterministic Analogue of Simulated Annealing
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1988,06/30/1989
* Lov Grover, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan S. Baheti
* 06/30/1989
* USD 30,000.00

Simulated annealing has had success in solving complex computational problems by
using a form of average to smooth out the local optima of a cost functions,
thereby enabling it to make progress towards the global optimum. Based on this
idea, PI proposes a new approach called local averaging to derive information
about the variation of the cost function. He defines a normalized cost of a
state to be its absolute cost minus the average cost of all states. He has
discovered that for several NP-complete problems, including the traveling
salesman problem and the min-cut graph partitioning problem, the average
normalized cost of the neighboring states of any state is a constant multiple a
of the normalized cost of that state, where 0 < a < 1. Using this result, he has
shown that local optima of any of these problems have to be better than the
average cost of all states. Also, applying the same result, it is found that NP-
complete problems satisfy an equation which strongly resembles certain wave
equations of mathematical physics. An analysis of simulated annealing is carried
out, based on the neighborhood structure of NP-complete problems. Simulated
annealing is shown to satisfy a simple continuity equation, based on which it is
suggested that the algorithm can be implemented with a combination of random
moves and greedy moves. The relative fraction of random moves is decreased with
temperature. This implementation is faster than the standard one, since no cost
calculations have to be done for the random moves.