* 8803724
* RUI: Molecular Analysis of the Poly-Beta-Hydroxybutyrate    Biosynthetic Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Douglas Dennis, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/29/1992
* USD 193,300.00

The goal of this project is to analyze the molecular structure of the
poly.beta.hydroxybutyrate biosynthetic pathway (PHB). The PHB biosynthetic
pathway has been cloned from Alcaligenes eutrophus into Escherichia coli where
it is expressed. This expression can be induced via oxygen limitation or
nitrogen limitation. Proteins encoded by the pathway will be specifically
translated in vivo and then analyzed by denaturing and non.denaturing
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Northern blot hybridization and nuclease
protection assays will be employed to determine the mode of transcription and
start of transcription, respectively. The three enzymes that constitute the
pathway will be initially purified utilizing large.scale purification techniques
followed by fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC). Final purification will
be by preparative isoelectric focusing. The proteins will be characterized as to
their size, subunit structure, partial amino acid sequence. Putative PHB
transcriptional control regions will be located using PHB:lac fusions in concert
with an induction assay, and agents that induce PHB biosynthesis will be
identified. This is a proposal to lay the groundwork for the molecular and
genetic study of a metabolic pathway leading to the production of a
biodegradable polymer in a little studied species of soil bacterium. The
bacterium seems to produce this polymer as a means of storing energy during
times of stress, but the mechanism by which it regulates polymer production is
completely obscure, as are regulatory mechanisms in most species of soil
bacteria (except for a small number which have been well studied). The work in
this proposal could lead to the discovery of previously unknown mechanisms
regulation of gene expression, and is therefore of general interest. It is also
of particular interest because of what it may tell us about the natural
synthesis of the biodegradable polymer, information which may have important
practical consequences. This work is funded under the RUI program, since a great
deal of the work is actually performed by undergraduates who would not otherwise
easily be able to participate in a serious research program.