* 8803406
* RUI: Testing Models of Climate-Induced Geomagnetic Field    Behavior with a Record of Pleistocene Paleomagnetic         Directions
* GEO,EAR
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Robert Negrini, California State University-Bakersfield
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1991
* USD 76,619.00

The main focus of this study is to test models of climate- induced geomagnetic
field behavior which predict a correlation between time-dependent variations in
the volume of global ice and time-dependent variations in the paleomagnetic
vector. A previously-published record of Pleistocene variations in 18O from
deep-sea sediment cores is used to represent changes in global ice volume for
last 500,000 years. The variations in the magnetic field during this time
interval are represented by a record of paleomagnetic directional data from a
sedimentary sequence exposed in south-central Oregon. Prior to comparing the two
records 1) a detailed sampling program was conducted to improve the accuracy of
the existing paleomagnetic record and 2) a moving-window cross-spectral analysis
was conducted to improve the age control. The latter method is one of three
independent age control methods underway at three academic institutions to
improve the age control. Angular dispersion analysis and band- pass filtering
are among the methods used in the comparison between the improved paleomagnetic
record and the 18O record. Whether or not the improvements in age control are
sufficient to allow the testing of the above models, the paleomagnetic record
will contribute significantly to research in geomagnetism, stratigraphy, and
tectonics.