* 8803333
* An Archaeological Analysis of the Le Flageolet I Mammalian  Fauna
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Donald Grayson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1991
* USD 30,799.00

Dr. Grayson and his assistant will analyze archaeological faunal remains
excavated from the site of Le Flageolet I, which is located in the Perigord
region of France. Years of careful excavation at the site have revealed a series
of superimposed cultural layers which are rich in animal remains as well as
stone tools. Nine of these layers contain Aurignacian and Perigordian cultural
materials, the earliest of which are approximately 35,000 years old, and thus,
date to the last part of the most recent Ice Age. These cultural layers document
the first appearance of anatomically modern humans in Europe. The team will
analyze the faunal remains with innovative techniques to determine the extent to
which these Paleolithic peoples obtained animal food through hunting as opposed
to scavenging. Recent arguments maintain that the preceding Middle Paleolithic
peoples were dependent on scavenging to obtain the flesh of at least larger
mammals. This position holds that fully efficient hunting did not emerge until
about 35,000 years ago and that this ability emerged as part of the complex of
characteristics that marks behaviorally modern peoples. While several Middle
Paleolithic faunal series have been studied, they do not answer the question
because no comparable assemblages younger than 35,000 years have been analyzed.
This research will provide the first such sample. This research is important
because it will increase our understanding of the forces which shaped human
development. Many anthropologists have argued that humans evolved as hunters and
that the skills necessary to hunt form an essential part of human behavior and
shaped its development. Others believe that such is not the case and that such
hunting is relatively recent. This research addresses the issue and thus, should
shed light on the process which made us human.