* 8803432
* Software Tools for the Design and Tuning of Parallel        Supercomputer Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Dennis Gannon, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 05/31/1991
* USD 289,112.00

Current trends in high performance computer design indicate that parallel
processing is the only way to deliver the speed needed to tackle the
computational problems confronted by modern science and engineering. It is not
reasonable to expect that programmers can successfully program the variety of
parallel architectures being proposed without the assistance of automated and
interactive parallelization tools. This project will design software tools that
help the programmer develop new programs, perhaps by restructuring existing
programs, that run efficiently on one or more parallel architectures. The work
concerns the design and prototyping of three related tools or sets of tools: (1)
a tool for parallel program performance estimation, (2) a set of tools for
automatically or interactively parallelizing Lisp programs, and (3) a portable
run-time environment for parallelized programs. The direct impact of this
research will be that the time required to develop new programs for parallel
architectures will decrease and the efficiency of programs running on parallel
architectures will increase. Furthermore, because less time will be required to
develop new programs it will be possible to test out new architectural ideas and
new parallel processors more quickly and with less programmer effort. This may
in turn lead to more rapid improvements in parallel architectures.