* 8803644
* Regulation of Amino Acid Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Henry Paulus, Boston Biomedical Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1992
* USD 325,000.00

The enzyme aspartokinase plays a central role in bacterial amino acid
biosynthesis, and its activity is attuned to the physiological needs of the
bacterium by complex control mechanisms. Bacillus subtilis has two
aspartokinases, one of which (aspartokinase I) is regulated by the cell wall
constituent diaminopimelate, while the other (aspartokinase II), the major focus
of this research, is controlled by lysine and is unusual in being composed of
two different types of subunits which are independently translated from in-phase
overlapping genes. These and their control regions have been cloned and their
nucleotide sequence has been determined. This proposal aims to apply the
sequence information to the study of the mechanisms that control aspartokinase
synthesis and of the relationship between structure and function of the enzyme
itself. The proposed research will use oligonucleotide directed mutagenesis to
alter specific sites in the control regions as well as in the genes encoding the
protein structure, in the expectation that the study of these structural
perturbations will reveal the mechanisms that underlie control and function.
Another aim is the sequencing of the genes that surround the genetic locus of
aspartokinase II and the elucidation of their regulatory and metabolic
relationship. Bacillus subtilis, the species of bacterium under study in this
proposal, has two modes of growth, vegetative under normal environmental
conditions, and sporulation under conditions of starvation or other types of
stress. The latter process results in the formation of highly durable spores
which can be dispersed, and can subsequently germinate when and where conditions
permit vegetative growth. Vegetatively growing bacteria, upon receiving specific
stimuli to begin sporulation, must alter their entire internal physiology to
meet the requirements of the new mode of growth. Certain key enzymes, which play
different physiological roles under the two different modes of growth, are thus
under a very complex series of controls, which permit the transition of the
bacterium from vegetative growth to sporulation. This is a proposal to elucidate
the mechanisms of these controls; it could possibly reveal previously unknown
mechanisms of control of gene expression. The transition of Bacillus cells from
vegetative growth to sporulation is a developmental switch which can serve as a
conceptual model for the differentiation of embryonic tissues in higher
organisms. The work in this proposal may thus shed indirect light on the latter
process.