* 8804951
* 5' Processing of Yeast Cytochrome b pre-mRNA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Carol Dieckmann, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1991
* USD 100,000.00

Mitochondrial biogenesis requires the coordinate expression of their nuclear and
mitochondrial genomes. The long term goal of this research is to understand the
nature of the controlling signals in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae that
synchronize the production of mitochondrial proteins encoded in the separate
compartments. The characterization of nuclear respiratory deficient pet mutants
has identified several genes necessary for processing of mitochondrial precursor
transcripts and translation of the resultant mRNAs on mitochondrial ribosomes.
One group of pet mutants describes the nuclear gene CBP1, which encodes a 76,500
dalton protein that is imported into the organelle and interacts with the 5' end
of the cytochrome b precursor RNA. It is planned to purify the CBP1 protein and
study the interaction with substrate RNA in vitro. The CBP1 gene produces two
polyA+ mRNAs, differing at the 3' end by 900 nucleotides. How and why the
abundance of the RNAs is regulated by glucose repression will be investigated. A
coding sequence terminates in the TATAA box for CBP1. This upstream gene is
expressed as a 1.1 kb mRNA that is also under catabolite control. Deletions of
this gene lead to a phenotype similar to deletion of a mitochondrial outer
membrane protein gene. The sequence of the gene, will be determined. Does
transcription of this gene affect expression of CBP1 and define how does the
encoded protein function in the cell. At the present time we have only a sketchy
understanding of how the functional integrity of subcellular organelles is
maintained and modulated in response to a changing environment. In yeast the
production of mitochondrial respiratory-chain components are significantly
altered by changing their growth conditions. As three of the large enzyme
complexes of the inner mitochondrine membrane are composed of subunits encoded
both on nuclear chromosomes and on the organella genome, the change of
expression due to media availability must be coordinated. Is it transcriptional
or translational factors that enhance and decrease production of nuclearly
encoded respiratory chain components? The answer to this question is of great
importance for an understanding of mitochondrial respiration.