* 8804380
* RUI:  Collaborative Research:  Evaluation of Hybridization  Mechanisms in Calc-alkaline Granites
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Daniel Murray, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 08/31/1991
* USD 12,932.00

Understanding the origin of granitic rocks is an essential part of
reconstructing earth history. It is likely that several processes (fractional
crystallization, restite unmixing, and magma mixing) are important. Isotopic and
chemical data have suggested that mixing of mafic and felsic magmas is
widespread, producing commingled rocks to more thoroughly hybridized rocks,
depending on compositions, temperatures and relative proportions of the
interacting magmas. Rheological modeling predicts that commingling should
predominate, and small-scale composites dikes support this prediction. In larger
plutons, however, hybridi- zation has apparently occurred under conditions that
models suggest are prohibitive of mixing. This dichotomy suggests that
mechanisms other than two fluid mixing may be operative in the large plutons.
Murray and Reid will perform a coordinated field, petro- graphic, geochemical
and isotopic study of localities in Yosemite National Park to test the viability
of two additional hybridization mechanisms, disintegration of chilled globules
and contamination of basalts with wallrock to more easily mixed intermediate
compositions. Sites include a suite of partially disaggregated pillows in the El
Capitan and Tuolumne granites and a series of contaminated basalts in the North
America Wall, El Capitan. This project will enhance geologic education at both
insti- tutions by involving students in all aspects of the study: field and
analytical work, participation in research seminars and professional meetings.