* 8804725
* Phytogeography and Floral Diversity of the Namurian and     Westphalian A (Carboniferous)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1992
* Anne Raymond, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 07/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

During the middle Carboniferous, continental glaciation began in the Southern
Hemisphere, marine faunas suffered an extinction event, and land plants
radiated. Glaciations certainly cause high-latitude cooling; they may also
ameliorate (warm and moisten) equatorial climates. The differing responses of
marine faunas and land floras to glaciation may relate to their differing
responses to equatorial amelioration. Evidence for this amelioration during
glacial onset comes from climatically-sensitive sediments and faunal migrations.
If mid-Carboniferous glaciation ameliorated equatorial climates on land: 1, pre-
glacial, seasonally adapted, equatorial plants should have migrated away from
the equator into the low and middle latitudes; 2, the equatorial zone should
have experienced increased origination rates following glaciation; the mid-
Carboniferous radiation of land plants should have been centered on the
equatorial zone. Data on floral mirgrations will establish the terrestrial
paleoclimatic history of the mid- Carboniferous. Data on changes in the
latitudinal diversity gradient of plants during this interval will carroborate
that history. Data on the diversity and evolutionary rates (origination and
extinction) of mid-Carboniferous plants, globally, within floral realms, and
latitudinally, will indicate whether the mid-Carboniferous floral radiation was
centered on the equatorial zone. A study of mid-Carboniferous phytogeography
will allow evaluation of the link between biotic diversity, biogeographic
differentiation and the pole-to-equator climatic gradient.