* 8804567
* Mathematical Sciences: Free Boundary Problems, Fully        Nonlinear Equations, Nonlinear Parabolic Equations, and the Navier-Stokes Equation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Luis Caffarelli, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1991
* USD 102,405.00

The range of questions to be dealt with in this research covers broad
fundamental investigations into the nature of solutions of partial differential
equations. The equations arise from physical as well as geometrical sources and,
for the most part, are nonlinear. One class of equations to be treated are known
as fully nonlinear equations. They describe basic phenomena of geometry,
elasticity and physics. Typical of these is the Monge-Ampere equation which
effectively describes the curvature of a domain. The more interesting, and
difficult question is that of deciding whether a given function can be the
curvature of a domain. Work is planned on characterizing interior smoothing
properties and related stability properties of solutions. Another line of
investigation will continue work on free boundary problems which represent
physical quantities whose properties change discontinuously at some level of the
unknown, such as in multi-phase systems. Here the boundary between phases is a
dynamic part of the problem and must be found along with solutions of the
attendant differential equations. Work here will concentrate on geometric
properties of the interphase and efforts will continue in seeking a unified
theory coupled with minimal surface regularity theory. A singular perturbation
approach will be employed. Bridging the two main themes of this project will be
a study of generalized surfaces for which an elementary symmetric function of
the curvature is prescribed. Results of this nature provide insight into various
envelopes associated with arbitrary sets such as the convex or minimal area
hulls. By-products of this work are expected to have extensive applications to
the physical and mathematical sciences.