* 8804638
* Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry of a Streptomyces       Extracellular Esterase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1992
* Janet Schottel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 193,700.00

Streptomyces scabies, a gram positive soil bacterium, is the causative organism
for scab disease on a variety of underground vegetables. The pathogen produces
an extracellular esterase which may be involved in the breakdown of suberin, a
waxy polyester compound that covers the surface of the tuber and thus protect
the plant against moisture and possibly pathogen invasion. This esterase has
been purified and characterized. Its production is induced by zinc which was
found to be a component of suberin. The goal of the research is to elucidate the
mechanism by which zinc effects this induction. The esterase gene will be cloned
and its sequence determined. Transcription of the gene, the stability and
translation of the esterase mRNA, and processing/secretion of the esterase will
be tested for zinc dependence. Secretion of this esterase by the pathogen will
also be studied. This research will provide important basic information of the
mechanisms of gene expression and protein secretion in Streptomyces scabies, an
agriculturally important pathogen. The results will enhance our understanding of
the mechanisms of gene regulation and the molecular biology of host-pathogen
interactions. They may also be applied to the protection of economic crops
against infection by pathogenic organisms.