* 8804970
* Recollecting and Drilling Emerged Coral Reefs on the Huon   Peninsula, Papua New Guinea
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Arthur Bloom, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1990
* USD 100,000.00

Reef terraces on the Huon Peninsula of Papua New Guinea were the basis of a
series of studies beginning in the early 1970's that gave impetus to the use of
coral reefs to date ice ages. The tectonic uplift rate on the Huon Peninsula is
so rapid (1 to 4 mm/yr) that many of the lesser fluctuations of sea level within
the last ice age are recorded by small, partly overlapping reefs. This project
represents major recollecting effort in collaboration with Australian scientists
and a group of international experts, because few samples are now available from
the Huon terraces. Also, drill cores through the youngest, Holocene, reef and a
selected set of older reefs will define the rate and amplitude of sea-level
changes and climatic fluctuations during the last ice age. Newly developed
analytical techniques of mass-spectrometric Uranium-series dating and electron
spin resonance (ESR) dating offer unprecedented precision and a longer time
range for dating emerged coral reefs on uplifting tropical coasts. Unweathered,
fresh coral samples are essential to both techniques. Coral-reef growth is
closely controlled by sea-level fluctuations, which in turn are governed by the
expansion and shrinkage of continental ice sheets. Thus, precise dates on corals
from the Huon Peninsula, comparable to recently published mass-spectrometer
Uranium-series ages in the range of 125,700 + 1200 years for corals from
Barbados, will open a new era of precision for dating ice ages and their
concomitant changes in sea levels. The new methods will permit a rigorous test
of the Milankovitch theory of ice ages and more accurate comparison with the
deep-sea isotope record.