* 8804517
* REU: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Aquatic Ecology  at the University of Kentucky
* BIO,BIO
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1989
* Philip Crowley, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1989
* USD 39,943.00

This award will establish a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site in the
Department of Biological Sciences at the University of Kentucy. A new Aquatic
Field Facility funded by the NSF EPSCoR Program at the University will allow
talented undergraduates from seven Kentucky colleges and universities to be
introduced to research in aquatic ecology. From nominees provide by the seven
institutions, ten students will be selected and matched with the six faculty
advisors. To learn the relevant techniques, students will begin an intensive
eight-week summer session by participating in the advisor's ongoing projects.
Within 2-3 weeks, the students will shift most of their effort onto independent
research projects. Informal weekly seminars during the summer, and evening
seminars in the fall, will stimulate discussion and provide information on
research careers and on major research issues and methods. After gathering and
analyzing their own data and developing skills in critical analysis of the
literature and effective scientific communication, the students will complete
the program by presenting their project results orally at an in-house "research
conference". This wide spectrum of research-related experiences will
significantly broaden the horizons of the participating students, many of whom
would otherwise be unlikely to consider seriously the possibility of a career in
research.