* 8804365
* On the Role of Load and Pore Pressure Diffusion in the Triggering of Seismicity at Monticello Reservoir
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Pradeep Talwani, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Patty Brooking
* 05/31/1991
* USD 37,521.00

The proposed studies are aimed at studying the relative roles of loading with
accompanying elastic pore pressure increase and pore pressure diffusion in
triggering seismicity at Monticello Reservoir, S.C. following its impoundment.
Monticello is unique in that extensive geological, geophysical, and
seismological studies were conducted prior to, during, and after filling, making
this one of the best studied cases of reservoir induced seismicity in the world.
Determination of the relative roles of loading and pore pressure diffusion
requires analyses of accurate spatial and temporal patterns of well located
earthquakes together with the induced stresses and pore pressure changes which
occurred during filling. As the geology at the site is extremely heterogeneous,
development of a three dimensional velocity model is necessary to obtain
accurate hypocentral locations. We propose to develop such a model by inversion
of high quality local earthquake phase data within constraints imposed by
detailed geological and geophysical data. Relocation of initial seismicity using
the improved velocity model will provide an accurate spatial and temporal
history of the activity. From a comparison of these patterns with that of the
load induced stresses it will be possible to differentiate the relative roles of
loading and pore pressure diffusion in triggering the seismicity at Monticello
Reservoir. The results of these studies will be directly applicable to the
control of RIS associated with reservoirs worldwide.