* 8804260
* Polynuclear Sulfide, Polysulfides and Thiol Complexes in    Anoxic Water
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1992
* George Helz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1992
* USD 288,703.00

Much current research is directed toward understanding the behavior of trace
metals in anoxic aquatic environments. These studies have created a need for
accurate data on the stoichiometry and stability of metal complexes containing
reduced sulfur ligands. Existing data in many cases are uncertain at the order
of magnitude level. In other cases, no data whatever are available (e.g.,
polysulfide and aliphatic thiol complexes of most sulfophile trace metals). A
major question about such data as do exist concerns whether the complexes are
mononuclear or poly- nuclear. Previous experimentalists have raised this
question but not answered it. Misinterpretation of polynuclear complexes as
mononuclear can create immense errors in predictions of chemical behavior in
nature. A program to make the fundamental measure- ments is needed to answer
such questions. Copper and zinc will be the focus of most of the work, although
some studies on Fe will be undertaken if time permits. All measurements will be
made at 250C. These studies will build upon previous work in this laboratory.
They will add significant information in deciphering metal solubility in anoxic
environments with applications to pollution, waste water treatment and a variety
of geochemical problems.