* 8804047
* Physiology of Hydrogen Oxidation and Terminal Oxidases in   Azotobacter vinelandii
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Robert Maier, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/1992
* USD 123,000.00

The energy-consuming biological nitrogen fixation process is essential for a
positive input of usable nitrogen on earth. The ATP-dependent evolution of
hydrogen by nitrogenase results in a considerable loss of energy from the
nitrogen fixation process. However, the evolved hydrogen can be recycled via an
hydrogen oxidizing electron transport system. The cytochrome components involved
in hydrogen oxidation and the role they play in protecting nitrogenase from
oxygen damage, and supplying ATP to nitrogenase are poorly understood. This
research uses mutant analyses approaches toward understanding and assessing the
roles of terminal oxidases in nitrogen fixation and various substrate oxidations
using Azotobacter vinelandii. The approaches include the isolation and
characterization of mutants with deletions in cytochrome o and d genes.%%%
Increasing world population combined with dwindling fuel reserves makes
increased dependence on nitrogen fixation likely. Since most experts believe
that the nitrogen fixation process is energy (ATP) limited, factors that result
in efficient use of otherwise wasted energy (such as hydrogen) deserve research
attention. Hydrogen oxidation by the bacterium Azotobacter has been shown to
allow the nitrogen fixing enzyme to function optimally. The study of hydrogen-
oxidizing electron transport and its regulation shows promise for increasing
nitrogen fixation.***//