* 8804352
* Conodont Biostratigraphy of the Upper Cambrian -- Lowest Ordovician and International Correlation of the Cambrian-Ordovician Boundary
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1992
* James Miller, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 07/31/1992
* USD 79,956.00

Cambro-Ordovician conodonts are abundant and the same species are more widely
distributed than other contemporaneous fossil groups. Because of their utility
they will be the primary group utilized for choice of a boundary point by the
International Working Group on the Cambrian-Ordovician Boundary. The project
will fund the PI's continuing work as Secretary of this committee. Other aspects
of the project are study of Cambro-Ordovician eustatic sea-level fluctuations.
Strata in Nevada deposited during these sea-level changes will be studied in
cooperation with U.S. Geological Survey personnel who have studied the Nevada
strata and equivalent beds in Kazakhstan. The goal of this part of the research
is to correlate unusual sedimentation patterns in platform and continental-slope
deposits in these areas. A final aspect of the study is continuation of a
project on biostratigraphy and paleoecology of Cambro-Ordovician conodonts in
western Utah. Facies changes in the area make it a natural laboratory for study
of the Cambro-Ordovician conodont paleoecology and the influence of facies
changes on conodont biostratigraphy. Some of these facies changes are related to
the eustatic fluctuations discussed above and can be correlated with data on
sedimentation patterns in Nevada, Kazakhstan, and other areas to form an
integrated picture of the effects of these eustatic events. These events are
related to faunal extinctions and evolutionary changes which must be understood
before a Cambrian-Ordovician boundary point can be chosen wisely.