* 8804121
* 4th Annual Penn State Symposium in Plant Physiology;        University Park, PA; May 18-20, 1989.
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Charles Boyer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 10/31/1990
* USD 8,000.00

The Intercollege Graduate Program in Plant Physiology of Pennsylvania State
University sponsors an Annual Penn State Symposium in Plant Physiology on timely
topics in plant physiology. Penn State is centrally located along the Eastern US
seaboard and is a relatively short trip for students and scientists in the
eastern US. With the institution of the Penn State symposium in 1986, annual
symposia in plant physiology are now held in the West (Riverside, CA), Midwest
(U. MO) and East (Penn State). %%% The aims are to foster in-depth discussion
and dialogue among researchers, to assess and integrate current knowledge and
models of light energy transduction from the various photosynthetic organisms,
and to identify areas in critical need for further research. Light energy
transduction is of keen interest to a diverse set of scientists who study
photosynthesis using molecular, genetic, physical, chemical, cellular,
ecological and agricultural approaches and who would likely benefit from a
cross-fertilization of information, techniques, and approaches. In addition to
its scientific importance understanding the mechanism of light energy
transduction is central to practical efforts to manipulate photosynthetic
productivity and plant yield - a goal of great interest in agriculture and
horticulture.