* 8804727
* Regulation of Isoprenoid Biosynthesis in Higher Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1992
* Charles West, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1992
* USD 253,300.00

The general objective of this research is to develop an understanding of the
mechanisms of regulation of the biosynthesis of diterpenoid substances of
physiological importance in the life of the plant. The first experimental target
is kaurene synthetase, a key regulatory enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway
leading to the gibberellin family of plant hormones. A new approach to assessing
the levels of this activity is being attempted. Components of the kaurene
synthetase complex will be purified to homogenity, antibodies prepared and cDNA
clones isolated. These tools will then be utilized to measure the levels of
translatable and total hybridizable kaurene synthetase mRNAs in plant organs,
and their changes under different physiological circumstances. The biosynthetic
pathways involved in diterpenoid phytoalexin biosynthesis in rice (Oryza sativa)
is a second area of interest. The biochemical characteristics of these
biosynthetic pathways will be further defined. The nature of elicitor molecules
that initiate diterpenoid phytoalexin biosynthesis will be investigated. And the
role of transcriptional regulation in the expression of the enzymes involved in
cyclization of diterpene hydrocarbon intermediates will be investigated. These
results will contribute to our knowledge of the manner in which plants respond
to environmental and biological stresses.%%% Cyclic diterpenoid metabolites are
often characterized as secondary metabolites. Such substances appear to serve
the organism that produces them in specialized regulatory roles that enable the
organism to adapt to environmental changes and biological stresses associated
with encroachments by pathogens, predators and competitors. Consistent with this
view, many cyclic diterpenoid compounds isolated from higher plants have been
shown to be physiologically active. The diterpenoid substances whose metabolism
is being considered in this research are examples. ent-Kaurene is the cyclic
diterpene precursor of the gibberellin family of natural plant growth
regulators, while casbene, the momilactones and the oryzalexins are phytoalexins
that are thought to be important in the host plant's resistance to microbial
pathogens.***//