* 8804021
* REU: Stable Isotopic Applications to Great Plains Ecology,  Paleoecology, and Archeology
* BIO,BIO
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1989
* Larry Tieszen, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1989
* USD 39,876.00

This award will provide continuing support for a Research Experiences for
Undergraduate Site at Augustana College. This project will support undergraduate
participation in a focused research program which integrates the research
activities of six investigators, four from Augustana College, one from St. Olaf
College, and one from The Nature Conservancy. The projects are integrated at the
scientific level because of the common interests in prairie ecology and
paleoecology and because aspects of each project benefit form the applications
of the stable isotopes of C and N to the research methodology. This program will
provide a coherent group and a unique methodology to approach paleoecological
reconstructions in a geographic area of rich ecological resources. Nine students
will study field and laboratory problems with a common focus. They will be
expected to gain some mastery of the theoretical basis for their study as well
as the experimental design and ultimate interpretation. Weekly seminars and
workshops will review each project's theoretical basis and research design;
enhance the students' library, laboratory and data handling research skills; and
broaden their understanding of the related projects. The ten-week summer program
will be followed by a January Symposium in which each student will present the
interpreted results and conclusions and help develop the hypotheses and research
designs for the on-going projects.