* 8804861
* Molecular Basis of Antigen-Antibody Recognition: G-Protein  as a Model System
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Michael Kahn, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 02/29/1992
* USD 332,040.00

This research project involves a multifaceted approach to investigate two
fundamental questions: 1) the molecular determinants of antigenic recognition of
peptides and proteins; and 2) the molecular basis for signal transduction by the
G protein family. Drs. Hamm and Kahn will study the conformation of an antigenic
determinant of bovine guanine nucleotide binding protein (G-protein). They have
shown with monoclonal antibody 4A studies that this region is the major site of
interaction with rhodopsin, the light receptor in vertebrate rods. Thus, studies
of the structure of this site will simultaneously provide information on the
stucture of a receptor-effector recognition site, as well as the structure of an
antigen-antibody interaction site. Despite the central position which peptides
and proteins occupy in the regulation of virtually all biological processes, a
molecular understanding of their structure- function relationship remains
relatively unknown. To date, extensive and in several cases successful efforts
have been mounted to modify peptides and proteins to examine this interplay.
These studies will yield molecular models of the site of interaction of
G-protein with rhodopsin, and may give insight into the recognition and
triggering mechanisms involved in enzyme activation by protein-protein
interactions. The work will also shed light on the importance of secondary
structure and rigidity/flexibility in antigen-antibody interactions.***