* 8804286
* Behavior of Architectural (Non-Structural) Building         Components at CSU, LA Campus During the Whittier Narrows,   California, Earthquake of October 1, 1987 - etc.
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1988,08/31/1990
* Satwant Rihal, California Polytechnic State University
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1990
* USD 72,995.00

Structural engineering and design has in the past, focused on life safety and
the prevention of major structural damage during and earthquake. The Whittier-
Narrows earthquake of October 1, 1987, has shown that performance of non-
structural items that effect building mission performance to be very important
and can have significant effects on economic damage. This research project
focuses on seismic design implications/lessons from the extensive non-structural
building component damage caused by the Whittier, California Earthquake with
emphasis on effects at the CSU-LA campus. The research focuses on the
performances and behavior of the interior (e.g., partitions, stair enclosure
walls) as well as exterior (e.g., cladding curtain-walls, screen-walls) building
components; as well as their influence on the overall seismic behavior of
building systems. Available data on damage of interior building components and
exterior building components as well as building contents is categorized and
analyzed. This includes details of the configuration of buildings, their
structural systems, with respect to building components, as well as building
component repair cost data. This is followed by selected case-studies of two
buildings on the CSU- LA campus that suffered significant non-structural damage
in addition to structural damage. The results and conclusions of this research
will be more effective methods of deriving lessons from observed damage during
severe earthquakes; building component damage during earthquakes; valuable
practical data on the performance and behavior of interior non-structural walls
and exterior facade/cladding systems; and their influence on the overall
response and behavior of building systems during earthquakes.