* 8804921
* Expression of Mammalian cAMP-Dependent Protein Kinase in Yeast
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Jeffrey Kuret, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1990
* USD 92,000.00

The long term goal of this project is to characterize the structure and function
of cAMP dependent protein kinase. This is an enzyme that is ubiquitous in
eukaryotes and one that plays an important role in the regulation of cellular
proliferation. The inactive holoenzyme is a tetramer comprised of two catalytic
(C) subunits and two regulatory (R) subunits. cAMP binds to the R subunit and
activates the enzyme by dissociation of the complex into two C subunits and an R
subunit dimer. The C subunit functions to phosphorylate a number of protein
substrates, thereby altering their biochemical properties. Although the function
of the enzyme is known, the relationship of structure to function is poorly
understood. The PI's laboratory has been approaching this problem through the
isolation and characterization of mutants in cAMP-dependent protein kinase from
the yeast, S. cerevisiae. This proposal expands the scope of his experiments to
study the mammalian cAMP-dependent protein kinase. The mammalian C subunit will
be expressed in yeast in order to exploit the advantages of yeast as a system to
conduct structure/function studies. In order to define the experimental system,
the catalytic subunits from S.cerevisiae will be purified and compared with the
mammalian C subunit. Three genes, TPK1, TPK2, and TPK3, encode catalytic
subunits C1, C2, and C3, respectively. The purified proteins will be compared
biochemically. Genetically defined strains containing only one of the three TPK
genes will be characterized biologically. Specific substrates recognized by the
individual catalytic subunits will be identified. The cDNA encoding the
mammalian Cx subunit will be expressed in yeast using yeast promoters. The yeast
catalytic subunit will be replaced with the mammalian catalytic subunit in vivo.
The biochemical and biological properties of yeast cells containing the
mammalian catalytic subunit will be compared with cells containing the natural
catalytic subunits. If these studies are successful, future experiments will
exploit yeast genetics to obtain mutants of the mammalian enzyme. These mutants
will be used study the structure and function of the mammalian C subunit.
Protein kinases are enzymes that regulate other enzymes by adding phosphate
groups to the latter, thus turning them on or off. A large group of the protein
kinases in turn are regulated by cyclic AMP, and the levels of the latter are
regulated by external factors such as hormones or virus infections. Thus the
protein kinases are a very important set of enzymes to study to further our
understanding of how cell metabolism is regulated. The PI will purify and
characterize three such enzymes from yeast and one from mammals which he will
express in yeast.