* 8804024
* The Haystack Observatory as a Research Experiences          for Undergraduates (REU) Site for Astronomy                 and Atmospheric Science Using Radio Techniques
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Joseph Salah, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pol C. Delosreyes
* 11/30/1989
* USD 39,050.00

The Haystack Observatory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, carries out
vigorous research programs in radio astronomy and atmospheric sciences. There
are unique facilities at its site in Westford, MA, which are used to conduct
this research. The Observatory is used by a large number of researchers and
students, nationally, primarily in graduate education. A summer research
opportunities program for undergraduates will be carried out as a continuation
and expansion of their 1987 Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
program. Five students in astronomy and four students in atmospheric sciences
are planning projects in these disciplines and will combine experiences in
scientific and technical topics. These experiences will be supplemented by a
series of weekly seminars, facility tours, meetings on research discussions, and
final report preparations and presentations. The program is aimed at promoting
in the students an appreciation for the full scope of research functions in
order to develop excitement in scientific disciplines and contribute to
maintaining student interest in careers in science, engineering and mathematics.
The recruitment and selection processes will encourage applications by women,
minorities and handicapped students.