* 8804837
* Sedimentary Response to Oblique Convergence:  Cretaceous,   Tyaughton-Methow Basin, British Columbia
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Karen Kleinspehn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 11/30/1990
* USD 100,924.00

This study will test three hypotheses concerning early Late Cretaceous
sedimentation and subsidence in the Tyaughton-Methow Basin, southwestern British
Columbia. These hypotheses explain the basin as: 1) a pull-apart reflecting
strike-slip tectonism; 2) a flexural basin due to basin-ward thrust faulting; or
3) a piggyback basin on sub-basinal thrusts. The PI will also address the
question of whether sedimentation occurred in a back-arc versus a forearc
setting and at a paleolatitude possibly as far south as Cretaceous northern
Mexico. Results will constrain kinematic models for the mid-Cretaceous North
American Cordillera and for the timing and style of interal deformation within a
moving composite allochthonous terrane. Basin-analysis methods to be employed
include determining the style and orientation of sediment dispersal systems,
defining three-dimensional facies architecture, defining the changing
composition and location of the sediment-source areas, defining temporal and
spatial changes in basin geometry, and identifying any syndepositional
intrabasinal structural deformation. In addition, 40Ar/39Ar dating of primary
volcaniclastic and volcanic strata will provide precise, reliable ages critical
to constraining paleogeographic, lithostratigraphic and paleomagnetic data. An
ongoing paleomagnetic study to determine the paleolatitude of the early Late
Cretaceous Tyaughton-Methow Basin and its underlying allochthonous basement. The
research will help unravel the history of the growth of the western margin of
North America.