* 8804896
* Continued Support for an Undergraduate Research             Participation at the Space Physics Research Laboratory,     University of Michigan
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Timothy Killeen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth H. Schatten
* 11/30/1991
* USD 123,339.00

This grant will continue an Undergraduate Research Participation Site at the
Space Physics Research Laboratory of the University of Michigan. The Space
Physics Research Laboratory is a broad interdisciplinary research organization
which is part of the Atmospheric and Ocean Sciences academic department of the
University of Michigan. Research undertaken in the laboratory spans several
fields of engineering and geophysical sciences, with an emphasis on the
observation and understanding of the physical processes which control the
gaseous, plasma and liquid envelopes of the Earth and planetary bodies. The
annual research budget of the laboratory is approximately $8M and major funding
comes from the National Science Foundation and NASA as well as other agencies.
Because of the strong ties to the academic environment at the University, and
its presence within a geosciences department in the College of Engineering, the
Space Physics Research Laboratory has always maintained active interest in
providing significant undergraduate and graduate research opportunities,
particularly in the areas of Solar-Terrestrial research and Aeronomy. This grant
will expand and consolidate the undergraduate involvement by continuing support
a very successful REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) site within the
Laboratory. The continued REU site will involve the direct participation of 12
faculty members who have all had previous experience with the training of
undergraduate students in research. Funding will provide support for 16
students, of whom half will be from institutions other than the University of
Michigan. Because of its commitment to high-quality undergraduate education, the
University has agreed to waive indirect costs on this program for the first
year. The rich variety and significance of the research carried out within the
Laboratory and the commitment of time on the part of the faculty participants
will provide the undergraduates of the program a significant opportunity to have
hands-on experience in active and exciting research areas.