* 8804926
* The Effects of Stream Flow and Predation on Trophic         Interactions Among Juvenile Cyprinid and Centrarchid Fishes Below Beaver Ponds
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Isaac Schlosser, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1992
* USD 172,936.00

Annual variation in stream flow is associated with dramatic fluctuations in
invertebrate abundance and the density of juvenile cyprinid and centrarchid
fishes. In the absence of centrarchid predation, small fishes depress
invertebrate abundance in pool habitats but not riffles, and centrarchid
predators restrict juvenile fishes to shallow riffle refugia while engaging in
species- and size-selective predation. This research is a logical extension of
these findings. Experiments will quantify the simultaneous influence of stream
flow, centrarchid predation, and juvenile fish density on invertebrate resources
and juvenile cyprinid and centrarchid fishes below a beaver pond. Hypotheses
will be tested related to the following four questions: 1. How sensitive is the
growth and survivorship of juvenile cyprinid and centrarchid fishes to changes
in fish density and what, if any, effect does interspecific use of invertebrate
resources have on the growth and survivorship of these fishes? 2. Do changes in
flow regime below beaver ponds shift the intensity and outcome of resource use
by juvenile cyprinid and centrarchid fishes? 3. What effect do centrarchid
predators have on the intensity and outcome of resource use by juvenile
cyprinids and centrarchids? 4. How do changes in flow regime below beaver ponds
effect predator-prey interactions and the outcome of invertebrate resource use
by juvenile cyprinid and centrarchid fishes? This research will greatly enhance
our understanding of the regulation of growth and survival in stream fishes. It
will also increase our ability to incorporate the effect of hydrologic regime on
trophic interactions into emerging conceptual models of north-temperate aquatic
landscapes.