* 8804295
* Evacuation of Special Facilities in the Aftermath of        Whittier Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/1988,04/30/1989
* Antoine Hobeika, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* William A. Anderson
* 04/30/1989
* USD 30,000.00

Most transportation actions regarding disaster conditions cannot be tested or
evaluated in a laboratory or inferred from normal situations. They have to be
acquired through real-life experiences which in the case of an earthquake is a
rare occurrence. The most significant events in the transportation and
transportation-related field that followed the October 1, 1987 Whittier
earthquake is the organized evacuations of special facilities such as
convalescent homes, hospitals and public and high rise buildings. The main focus
of this study will be on analyzing and evaluating the immediate and short-term
actions of these evacuations and comparing the results in terms of evacuation
times, training needs, transportation requirements and operational problems.
Special emphasis will be placed on the evacuation of the health care facilities
such as the Long Beach naval Hospital. In that regard, an interactive computer
program will be developed to simulate the evacuation of a health care facility
under natural disasters. The data from the evacuation of the Naval Hospital will
be used to test and calibrate the model. The model outputs will provide an
evaluation of the system performance under different evacuation conditions. The
model is intended to be a decision support tool that can assist the facility
manager to determine the best allocation of resources to efficiently execute a
quick and smooth evacuation.