* 8804227
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Diffusion of Gases Through Porous Media
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1993
* Franklin King, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1993
* USD 297,371.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was designed to
increase the participation of minorities in scientific and engineering research
by providing support to strengthen the research environment and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions. Institutions eligible to participate in
this program must have in addition to a substantial enrollment of minority
students, graduate programs in science or programs in engineering. North
Carolina A&amp;T State University will use RIMI support to establish a research
group to investigate the diffusion of gases through porous media. Experimental
and theoretical studies of gas fluxes through model porous structures will be
conducted from the Knudsen limit to the bulk diffusion limit. Four model porous
media structures will be characterized and diffusion rates of He, N and CO
determined over a wide range of temperatures and pressures. Flow equations will
be developed based on two mathematical models. Mathematical models, optimized by
use of experimental data will provide basic information about the parameters
that describe true porous media. This project to study diffusion in constructed
porous media is sound, particularly well adapted to undergraduate and graduate
research and should yield useful data. The assembled research group is balanced
and each of the proposers is competent in their own area of expertise. The
project has excellent potential for enhancing long-range plans for engineering
research and will strengthen student and staff research capabilities at North
Carolina A&amp;T State University.