* 8804130
* Age and Paleogeographic Implications of a Pre-Tertiary Flora in the Blue Mountains, Northeastern Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Sidney Ash, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 06/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

The principal investigator will collect and study the Jurassic flora which was
recently discovered in one of the allochthonous pre-Tertiary terranes in the
Blue Mountains of northeastern Oregon. A preliminary examination of several
small collections of these fossils has shown that the flora consists of both
well preserved leaf impressions and permineralized wood representing a variety
of ferns, seed ferns, cycadophytes, ginkgos, and conifers. A detailed study of
this flora will provide new data to test the hypothesis that the pre-Tertiary
terranes in the Blue Mountains originated in a near-equatorial location and were
subsequently displaced hundreds or even thousands of kilometers before colliding
with the North American craton sometime during the Mesozoic. Also, the work will
establish the age of the flora, information which should shed light on the
timing of the movements of these terranes. The project will emphasize a
comparison of the Blue Mountain flora to other Mesozoic floras to which it might
possibly be related, especially the Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous floras that
have been described from many localities around the rim of the Pacific Ocean
basin. In addition, the general paleoclimatic requirements of the flora will be
evaluated in order to learn something about the climatic regime in which it
probably lived.