* 8804582
* Mathematical Sciences: Fourier Analysis and Partial         Differential Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* David Jerison, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1991
* USD 102,501.00

Three major areas will be addressed during the course of this mathematical
research; geometry, analysis and economic modeling. The Yamabe problem of
Riemannian geometry asks if a manifold with a given Riemannian metric is
conformally equivalent to another with constant scalar curvature if the new
metric is obtained from the old by multiplication by a positive function. Work
will be done on the analogous problem for Cauchy-Riemann structures. Here one
seeks to choose a Levi form with constant pseudohermitian scalar curvature. This
amounts to solving an explicit partial differential equation on the manifold.
Results on compact strictly pseudoconvex orientable manifolds have been
extensive for odd dimensions. Work will proceed on the remaining cases. Efforts
will also be made to extend fundamental (P, q1) - estimates between power
integrals of a function and the image of the function under the heat operator.
Results over the past two decades, while sharp, have rested on the assumption
that the two exponents are in duality. Such results all fall within the general
definition of Sobolev inequalities. The renewed interest in such comparisons is
related to work on uniqueness properties of solutions of partial differential
equations. In addition to seeking new Sobolev inequalities work will also be
done in expanding their applicability to more general differential operators.
Recent interest in economics derives from a result of Frobenius about
differential equations which, in modern terminology, states when a one-form has
an integrating factor. In microeconomics one considers one-forms of differences
between differentials of income and demand functions of income and prices
(multiplied by differentials of prices). These forms distinguish whether or not
a tangent vector is pointing in the direction of improvement. The Frobenius
result is the statement that a utility function exists - it is generally
regarded as a basic axiom. There is evidence to suggest that the axiom fails for
collections of consumers. The present project will focus on characterizing
conditions when approximate integrability can be expected.