* 8804369
* Function of Subunit Isologs in Cytochrome c Oxidase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Robert Poyton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1990
* USD 55,000.00

The recent discovery of isologs to the nuclear-coded subunits of cytochrome c
oxidase has led to the hypothesis that these polypeptides play a role in the
modulation of cytochrome c oxidase activity and that this modulation is affected
by a differential expression of their genes in response to environmental (or
developmental) signals. This hypothesis will be tested by studying the two
isologs Va and Vb for subunit V of yeast cytochrome c oxidase. Preliminary
studies have suggested that mutant cells carrying only Vb produce cytochrome c
oxidase molecules whose in situ turnover numbers are higher than those produced
in mutant cells carrying only Va. The effects of Va and Vb on the binuclear
reaction center in holocytochrome c oxidase and the interactions of the enzyme
with its substrates oxygen and cytochrome c will be examined. Do the holoenzymes
that carry Va or Vb interact preferentially with one of the two cytochrome c
isologs? An answer will be sought. Chimeric proteins will be contructed and the
domains in Va and Vb that modulate the catalytic functions of the enzyme will be
identified and located with respect to the inner mitochondrial membrane. How
does intracellular levels of Va and Vb change in response to cell physiology?
Cellular energy production is necessary for the growth and division of cells and
cytochrome c oxidase is a key component in the respiratory chain, a multienzyme
complex. Mitochondrial oxidative phosphoylation is capable of supplying more
than 95% of the total ATP requirement in respiring encaryotic cells. The
respiratory chain that drives it acts in series to affect the transfer of
electrons from reduced substrates to water. Cytochrome c is the terminal member
of this chain and seems to be the key enzyme in cellular energy production. It
is very important to discover how eukaryotic cells alter their cytochrome c
oxidase activity levels in response to energy demand. Dr. Poyton has done very
significant work in this field and is certainly well suited to carry out this
investigation.