* 8804348
* RUI: Transcription Termination of E. Coli Galactose Operon
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1991
* Joe Jeffers, Ouachita Baptist University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1991
* USD 60,000.00

The objectives of this grant are to locate functionally the transcription
termination signal(s) of the galactose operon of E.coli; to determine the
nucleotide sequence of the signal(s); to assay the efficiency of termination of
signal(s); if more than one signal is found, to study the relationship of the
signals; and to compare the signal(s) to ones previously characterized. Since
preliminary studies suggest the possibility of an as yet uncharacterized gene on
the galactose operon, a further objective is to determine if such a gene exists.
Sections of DNA generated from restriction enzyme digests will be inserted into
a plasmid (pKG) developed for assaying transcription termination efficiency.
Once the transcription termination signal(s) is/are functionally located, the
nucleotide sequence of the termination region will be determined. In the event
multiple transcription termination signals are discovered, their relationships
in termination efficiency will be studied using the pKG plasmid. The possibility
of an uncharacterized gene on this operon will be explored by inserting sections
of DNA containing open reading frames into plasmids developed to generate
proteins. The proteins will be injected into rabbits, which will produce
antibodies against the proteins. The antibodies will then be used to probe
E.coli proteins to determine if such a protein exists. The project is
significant in contributing to an understanding of the role of transcription
termination in the regulation of gene expression.