* 8804699
* Postdoctoral Fellowship in History and Philosophy of        Science
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1990
* Thomas Broman, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 05/31/1990
* USD 21,000.00

The relationship between form and substance has long intrigued historians and
philosophers of science and technology. To what extent does a scientific theory
affect and, more provocatively, is it affected by the form in which it is
presented? Dr. Broman is studying the connections between form and substance in
his study of biological theories and the genres in which they are presented. He
will seek to learn what kinds of problems were handled in different genres, how
those genres were structured, and how information moved between them. He will
make a close reading of the logical and rhetorical structure of these writings
with the aim of discovering the explicit and implicit "rules of scholarship"
contained in different genres. Finally, he will attempt to demonstrate the
extent to which these literary structures determined what sort of physiological
theories could be articulated by them. The specific context in which Dr. Broman
will examine these questions is a study which seeks to connect the changing
physiological theories between 1750 and 1820 with the introduction of new genres
of medical writing during the same period. At the level of theory, the change
was from functional explanations of anatomical structures to two new areas of
interest: morphological studies of the laws of animal form and theories
emphasizing regulation of vital processes. At the level of writing, doctoral
dissertations rapidly fell after 1800 while journals publishing reports of
empirical research established themselves as a new genre in biological
scholarship. His argument is that the old genre made presentations of empirical
research more difficult while the new one facilitated it. This study will
greatly help historians and philosophers of science to understand the
constraints of form on the substance of scientific thought and how science moves
to adopt new forms when necessary. Dr. Broman will undertake this research under
the guidance of Dr. Frederic L. Holmes at Yale University. Dr. Holmes'
experience in studying the detailed methodologies of practicing scientists will
provide Dr. Broman with a much needed grounding in the "substance" whose form of
communication he wishes to examine.