* 8804052
* REU: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Biological  Science
* BIO,BIO
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1989
* Marshall Sundberg, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1989
* USD 39,437.00

This award will provide continuing support for a Research Experiences for
Undergraduate Site at Louisiana State University. The primary activity will
involve an eight week summer session of independent research in biological
science. A select group of ten students, of junior or senior standing, will be
invited to participate in the program. Each student will be under the direct
supervision of an LSU faculty member who will serve as the research advisor and
be directly responsible for the student's progress. Faculty participants have
been chosen on the basis of their experience working with undergraduates in the
laboratory, suitability of research projects and general research productivity.
Additional components of the program will be a formal library orientation and a
series of weekly communication skills workshops for all REU investigators. The
program will also involve a weekly seminar series for all participants,
including the faculty advisors and members of their research laboratories. The
latter activities will be coordinated by the P.I.. Upon completion of the summer
research program, each REU investigator will present his/her research results as
an oral seminar and written paper, the latter in a form suitable for
publication. A number of follow-up activities are planned to encourage REU
investigators to present the results of their completed work to a scientific
audience.