* 8804263
* Ten Week Summer Research for Five College Teachers with Emphasis in Bioanalytical Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Theodore Kuwana, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 11/30/1991
* USD 162,642.00

This project is in the general area of analytical chemistry, broadly defined.
During a ten-week period between 1 June 1988 and 31 August 1988, five faculty
members from colleges that do not offer the PhD degree in chemistry will carry
out collaborative research on various aspects of bioanalytical chemistry with
ten faculty members from the Center for Bioanalytical Research (CBAR) at the
University of Kansas (KU). Research participants will be selected from among
those who respond to KU's announcement of the summer research program; this
announcement has been targeted at ten midwestern states in the vicinity of
Kansas. This activity is analogous to the support of faculty from undergraduate
institutions through NSF Research Opportunity Awards (ROAs). In this project,
however, participating faculty from the undergraduate institutions will not have
necessarily prearranged their summer research activities with particular CBAR
faculty members. Rather, they will establish their collaborative arrangements
after they have had an opportunity to consider fully all of the research
programs of the host institution participating faculty. In addition to the
research thrust of this program, CBAR faculty will present a series of tutorials
covering current research tools and topics that constitute modern chemical
analysis, with particular emphasis on research opportunities in bioanalytical
chemistry that could be implemented subsequently at the home institutions of the
participating undergraduate faculty members. Also, representatives from Federal
and private sector funding agencies that have strong commitments to the support
of quality research programs in undergraduate institutions will address the
participants and describe opportunities whereby such support can be
competitively sought. This three-year project can be expected to lead to the
attraction of increased numbers of students into careers in analytical chemistry
by beginning to establish a network of vital, academic analytical chemists at
undergraduate institutions in the midwest.