* 8804283
* Collaborative Research:  Oxygen Isotope Tracers of Bacterial Manganese Oxidation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1991
* Bradley Tebo, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1991
* USD 119,206.00

The reactions leading to the formation of geological metal ore deposits are
complex, and the potential role of microorganisms in the formation of some low-
temperature ore deposits, while recognized, has not been fully assessed. In the
past 9 months the investigators developed techniques for measuring the 18O of
manganese oxides and are using these measurements to compare microbial and
nonbiological manganese oxidation mechanisms. They hypothesize that measurements
of the oxygen isotopic composition of Mn oxides can be used as geologic tracers
for the microbial origin of Mn deposits or as a paleoindicator of the dissolved
oxygen content, and there fore Eh conditions, of the water from which the
deposit was formed. Progress has been made in establishing the technical
feasibility of this approach. They will continue using oxygen isotopes to
examine mechanisms of chemical and biological Mn(II) oxidation and determine if
the isotopic signature of Mn oxides persist under environmental conditions.
First, they will assess the stability of the oxygen tracer in the manganese
oxide by a series of exchange experiments with different Mn oxide minerals
precipitated biologically and chemically. Second, they will determine if
bacteria fractionate oxygen isotopes during Mn(II) oxidation by measuring the
18O of the initial and residual reactant (O2) as well as the Mn oxide product.
Third, the diversity of microbial mechanisms will be investigated by culturing a
variety of Mn(ii) oxidizing bacteria and measuring the 18O of their oxides.
Last, the relationship between dissolved oxygen concentration and the 18O of the
manganese oxides will be tested in the field in anoxic water columns beginning
with initial studies in the Black Sea and culminating in two cruises to an
anoxic marine fjord. This research has significant implications for
paleoenvironmental studies.