* 8805709
* Genetics of Rhizobium-Legume Symbiotic N2 Fixation
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Robert Ludwig, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1991
* USD 260,080.00

The objectives of this research program are to conduct molecular genetic
analyses of the Rhizobium-Legume symbiosis, which, in world food production, is
of great agronomic importance. The study of symbioses at the molecular level
challenges us to understand how two different organisms intertwine their
fundamental biochemical life processes and interregulate the genes responsible
for these processes. To accomplish this, as genetic probes, translational, in-
frame gene fusions will be constructed between Rhizobium N 2 fixation genes and
either E. coli lacZ (encoding B-galactosidase), uidA (encoding B-
glucuronidase), or V. fischerii lux (encoding bacterial luciferase) genes by
perfect gene replacement. To understand how N 2 fixation is orchestrated during
both symbiosis and free- living bacterial growth, using these gene-engineered
Rhizobium strains, the regulation of N 2 fixation processes will be compared in
culture and in planta. To understand how these processes are genetically
controlled, the genes responsible for this regulation, will be isolated defined
Rhizobium mutants in which these genes have been altered, will be constructed
and the phenotypes resulting from such alterations will be tested. Because it
offers a powerful method to manipulate genes in defined ways, the capacity to
deliver to any bacterium defined DNA sequences via phage will be exploited.
Rhizobium is a genus of gram-negative bacteria which can invade the roots of
legumes and stimulate the development of root nodules. ln this symbiotic
relationship, the bacteria and plant are able to convert atmospheric nitrogen
(dinitrogen) to biologically useful forms by the process known as nitrogen
fixation. The goal of this project is to understand the genetic regulatory
events that bring about this symbiosis. Emphasis will be placed on isolating the
Rhizobium genes that participate in nitrogen fixation and on identifying the
mechanisms that regulate the expression of these genes. This is an economically
important area of research as symbiotic nitrogen fixation represents an
efficient alternative to nitrogen fertilizers.