* 8805275
* Comparative Studies of Great Ape Vocal Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* John Mitani, Rockefeller University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 02/28/1990
* USD 22,951.00

To gain insight into how great apes communicate, Dr. Mitani will collect field
data on all four great ape species - the orangutan, gorilla, chimpanzee, and
bonobo (pygmy chimpanzee) - and supplement these materials with recordings
already in his possession. Research will be conducted at the Gunung Palung
Nature Reserve, West Kalimantan, Indonesia (orangutan), Mahale Mountains
Research Station, Tanzania (chimpanzee), Karisoke Research Center, Rwanda
(gorilla) and the Lomako Forest, Zaire (bonobo). At each site, animals will be
followed and high quality tape recordings of vocalizations will be made. The
context in which the calls are uttered will also be noted. Playback experiments
will be conducted in which a tape recorded call will be played from a location
hidden to the subject animal, and the animal's reaction will be recorded. The
research addresses four specific questions. In what ways do great ape "loud
calls" differ among species? Do the loud calls of apes vary in acoustic
structure over the geographical range of a single species? Are there individual
differences in the acoustic structure of loud calls? Is there acoustic
variability within the calls of given individuals, and is this variability
related to differences in their contexts of emission? All great ape species are
endangered and their preservation is a high conservation priority. To do this
effectively, it is necessary to understand as much as possible about their
behavior, and this research will make a major step in that direction. While it
is clear that these species communicate vocally, this process has been studied
very little. The work is also important because it will set human language in a
broader biological context and possibly provide some insight into how this
uniquely human trait developed.