* 8805971
* RUI: Nourishment, Trophallaxis and Caste in Primitively     Social Wasps
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* James Hunt, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 07/31/1991
* USD 72,000.00

Is evolution dictated primarily by genetic factors or primarily by environmental
factors? Increasing emphasis in recent years has been placed on extrinsic
factors as significantly affecting evolutionary events and pathways. Another
major interest area is the origin and maintenance of helping behavior as opposed
to selfish behavior. A strict Darwinian interpretation of natural selection
would be that helping behavior should be rare outside of parent.offspring and
mate interactions, yet social behavior is widespread in mammals and is
particularly prominent in humans, and it also occurs in some birds and insects.
Social insects represent a valuable model system with which to test and evaluate
certain hypotheses that are central to these issues in contemporary biology.
Social insects can be manipulated experimentally to address questions with an
ease and economy unapproached in social birds, mammals, or humans. The proposed
research utilizes primitively social wasps ("paper wasps"), reared in the
laboratory according to strict experimental protocols, to attempt to resolve the
developmental basis of worker (helping) behavior in them. The work will at the
same time address the relative contribution of environmental factors
(nourishment, in particular) versus hypothesized intrinsic, genetic factors in
the evolution of worker behavior. Most recent research in the field has
emphasized genetic factors, whereas the present study will emphasize extrinsic
factors. Results of the research will thus bear directly on two areas of central
interest in biology today. In addition to addressing basic hypotheses in
biology, the specific knowledge gained about wasp nourishment and development
may be applicable to the managed rearing of paper wasps, which have high
potential as biological control agents where caterpillars (e.g., Cotton
bollworm, Tomato budworm, Cabbage looper, etc.) are plant pests, and chemical
control of the caterpillars is either unfeasible or undesirable.