* 8805618
* Lipase and Lipid Bodies in Seeds
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Anthony Huang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1991
* USD 208,600.00

This project focuses on the initial hydrolysis of triacylglycerols to fatty
acids in seeds. Lipase catalyzes the first step in the overall gluconeogenesis
and thus may be the rate-controlling, and there is evidence that its action is
subjected to internal and external controls. The triacylglycerols surrounded by
a half-unit membrane. In this project, the specific binding between the maize
lipase and lipid bodies will be probed. Their recognition signals will be
studied by different biochemical methods and by analyses of the protein
structures via their amino acid sequences. Site-directed mutagenesis of the
proteins will also be performed to complement the above studies in pinpointing
the binding sites. The general pattern of the findings on maize will be extended
to cotton lipases.%%% Seed germination and post germinative growth represent an
active and dynamic period of the life cycle. The system offers an ideal
opportunity for the study of metabolism and development. The most prominent
aspect of metabolism in seed germination is the mobilization of food reserves to
support the growth of the embryo. In the storage tissues of seeds, three major
food reserves are present; namely, lipids, protein, and starch. Most seeds
contain a sizable amount of lipids, with notable exception in cereal grains.
Even in cereals, some (2-5% of seed weight) storage lipid is present in various
parts of the grains, depending on the species and variety. Lipids are good food
storage in seeds since on a per volume basis they possess about twice as much
energy as starch or proteins. The storage lipid is mobilized to provide carbon
skeleton and energy for growing embryonic axis. This project supports studies on
how lipids are utilized in seeds.***//