* 8805655
* Principles of Acoustic Diagnostic and Monitoring Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1990
* Ben Jansen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 04/30/1990
* USD 49,906.00

Potential problems with mechanical equipment are often revealed by sound and
vibration. The acoustic signals therefrom are often used to diagnose defects and
monitor the performance of the equipment. The technology is not fully developed
and can benefit from further study. There are economic incentives to perfect
such diagnostic systems since they promise to provide the capability of rapid
inspection of large machines or structures with minimal interruption of
operations. Improving the sensitivity of such systems and minimizing their
potential for false alarms would represent a major step in advancing the
technology. This project addresses that goal. It could lead to new ways of
processing acoustic signals in order to extract the maximum amount of useful
information. The beam is chosen as the object of study because it is a basic
structural component and because there is an extensive theoretical literature on
its vibrational modes, including the effect of cracks. There is a variety of
uncertainties in the condition of beams in service which can cause variations in
their acoustic signatures. These uncertainties may arise from manufacturing
variations in dimensions and materials, wear, miscellaneous nicks and dents,
small delaminations, corrosion, dirt or internal stress. If changes in the
acoustic signatures of the beam caused by these harmless effects are great
enough, they may be the cause of false alarms in a detection system. This
project's goal is to be able to predict the extent of such effects and to
compare them with the effects of flaws of serious concern. The research program
concentrates on the modeling of unflawed vibrating beams and the construction of
an experimental fixture for laboratory data acquisition. The system modeling
effort focuses on the prediction of the response of unflawed beams, the
prediction of the response of cracked beams, and the preliminary prediction of
the effects of various other conditions specified above. The experimental
fixture activity focuses on the design of a test fixture, its fabrication and
assembly, data acquisition from unflawed beams, data acquisition from flawed
beams, data acquisition from beams of uncertain condition, and comparison of
signals from these experiments.