* 8805829
* REU: Collaborative Research: Spatial Scaling and the Effects of Patch Mosaic Structure in Semiarid Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1993
* John Wiens, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 07/31/1993
* USD 319,681.00

Ecosystems consist of mosaics of landscape elements or patches, and this
patchiness is evident at many spatial scales. This research will answer two
general questions: (1) Are landscape patterns repetitive over different spatial
scales?, and (2) How does the patch structure of a landscape mosaic affect
ecosystem dynamics and functions? The first question will be addressed by
determining the patterns of distribution of patches (vegetation and disturbed
areas as well as distributions of arthropod populations) at nested spatial
scales ranging from <1 m2 to >10 km2 in semiarid ecosystems. By determining the
degree of repetitiveness of mosaic patterns over ranges of scales in both
Euclidean and fractal dimensions, one can assess the domains in which ecological
patterns and processes operate independently of scale. These domains set the
limits within which results from studies at any particular scale can be
extrapolated to other scales. Establishing these limits is of critical
importance to any attempts to derive generalizations about ecological patterns
or processes in landscape mosaics or to compare the results of investigations of
different ecological systems. To address the second question, the movement
patterns of biotic vectors (ants and beetles) will be studied at fine to
intermediate scales to determine how they relate to the patch- mosaic structure
of the landscapes. By experimentally altering the patch structure of local
environments or the movement patterns of animals, the roles that these organisms
may play in the redistribution of materials or energy among patches in these
ecosystems will be estimated. To the extent that the investigations indicate
repetitiveness of patterns over a range of spatial scales, the studies conducted
at fine scales may serve as a "microcosm" representing larger-scale landscape
mosaics. Thus, although micro and macro-scale systems may differ biologically,
they may share statistical similarities in patterns, allowing the development of
procedures for experimentally investigating the movement of materials among
elements in a landscape by focusing on fine-scale analogs of macro-landscapes.
Research of this nature may be of fundamental importance in promoting the better
management of the natural resources of arid lands. Additionally, there could be
heretofore unrecognized benefits that would derive from the use of new
mathematical approaches to the analysis of ecological data.