* 8805587
* Structural Studies of Bacteriorhodopsin
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,05/31/1995
* Donald Engelman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/1995
* USD 695,400.00

The hypothesis that transmembrane helices are independently stable folding units
will be examined by studies of fragments of bacteriorhodopsin (bR) and intact bR
reconstituted in lipid vesicles. The consequences of sequence modifications will
be studied in a collaborative project with Dr. Khorana at MIT. The interaction
of fragments with each other will be followed using vesicle fusion techniques,
neutron and X-ray diffraction structural methods, spectroscopic measurements and
chemical modification techniques. The protein folding problem represents one of
the most important scientific challenges facing biochemists, biophysicists and
physical chemists as well as the major gap in the understanding of the flow of
information in living systems. Understanding the three-dimensional implications
of the linear, abstract information in DNA can be regarded as a true
understanding of the genetic code. Important principles remain to be established
and any attempt to engineer proteins de novo or to understand medical problems
in terms of altered genetic information must benefit enormously from insights
concerning macromolecular folding. However, in spite of the practical importance
and intellectual fascination of the problem, structural prediction and the
determination of pathways of folding remain elusive goals.