* 8805932
* Structure and Output Feedback in Singular Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Frank Lewis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/1991
* USD 144,628.00

Generalized state-space systems of the form Ex= Ax + Bu, with E generally
singular, arise naturally in the study of robots, networks, large-scale
interconnected systems, power systems, economic systems, delay-differential
systems, neural networks, and elsewhere. Our main contentions are that there are
some serious limitations in state-variable theory and that singular systems
provide a more general context that yields important insight into some deep
questions about state-variable systems. Two important cases will be studied in
the proposed research. First, we point out that the inverse of a state-space
system is not a state-variable system. Indeed, the inverse generally contains
derivatives of the output, so that it is a singular system. Therefore, singular
systems, not state-variable systems, provide the natural dynamical formulation
for the study of issues related to inversion. This includes high-grain feedback,
singular optimal control (in the traditional sense of incomplete control
weighting), and other important problems as well as the usual system inversion
problems. Our first goal is, therefore, to study the extensions and properties
of the Singular System Structure Algorithm which has been developed in
connection with inversion and optimal control of singular systems. Second, if
proportional-plus-derivative output feedback is applied to a state-space system,
the result is a singular and not a state- variable system. These systems
therefore provide a nature formulation for carrying out our second goal, the
study of proportional-plus derivative output feedback in state-variable and
singular systems. Recent results make it clear that using this technique, far
more can be achieved than the assignment of the traditional min(n, m+p-1) poles.