* 8805586
* Performance and Yield of Defect and Fault Tolerant Multi-   processors
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Dhiraj Pradhan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 02/29/1992
* USD 272,620.00

Issues on performance and yield in defect- and fault-tolerant multiprocessors
are being addressed in this research. Two different classes of multiprocessors
are being considered in the research: shared-memory multiprocessors and
multicomputer systems with local memory. Issues relating to metrics for
capturing the most important properties of multiprocessors and algorithms for
calculating the yield and performance of multiprocessors are being studied. The
benefits and drawbacks of increasing the level of integration in the design of
multiprocessors are being investigated. This research will result in an ability
to determine the best level of integration for a given defect- and fault-
tolerant multiprocessors system. Improvements in technology have reduced the
defect density as well as the failure rates of all components in multiprocessing
systems. However, the large increase in the number of components per system has
more than offset the increase in yield and reliability of a single component. It
is desirable that a given system have graceful degradation in performance in the
presence of faulty components. The proposed research addresses the important
issues of estimating performance and yield of multiprocessors and the benefits
and drawbacks of increased level of integration. Results obtained will allow the
design of more reliable and fault-tolerant multiprocessors. Support is strongly
recommended.