* 8805705
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of the d-bar Neumann    Problem to the Study of Weakly Pseudoconvex Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* David Catlin, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1991
* USD 96,870.00

The central theme of this work is geometric problems in several complex
variables. Three questions will be addressed in the current project, the first
being the Kuranishi problem. Here one is interested in real manifolds which have
structure similar to boundaries of domains in complex space. At issue is whether
or not smooth pseudoconvex C-R manifolds admit embeddings. The analytic side of
this question is one of solving a complex partial differential equation with
mixed boundary conditions. If the research proceeds as predicted, the embedding
result should be expressible in terms of the first two eigenvectors of the Levi
form for the manifold (they must be positive). Another line of work of a similar
nature concerns the fundamental first order d-bar-Neumann problem on
pseudoconvex domains. One is interested in finding solutions of the
inhomogeneous d-bar equation on a domain which are orthogonal to the space of
holomorphic functions on that domain. The question of global regularity of the
solutions depends not only on the geometry of the domain but also on the metric
(which determines the volume element.). Work will be done in establishing
conditions for global regularity on smoothly bounded pseudoconvex domains in
terms of curvature inequalities which must be satisfied by the metric. The third
element of this research concerns automorphisms or self-maps of bounded domains.
Recent work of Bell and Pinchuk has essentially classified all pseudoconvex
domains in two- dimensional complex space with noncompact automorphism group
(the domains must also be of finite type). A number of related questions remain
open which will be analyzed during this undertaking.