* 8805885
* Evolution of Ion Channels
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Peter A. V. Anderson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1991
* USD 161,644.00

This project will examine ion channels in neurons of the jellyfish Cyanea
capillata and cnidocytes (sting cells) in the sea anemone Anthopleura. Although
neurons in this jellyfish function in much the same way as neurons in all higher
animals, they have at least one property that may reflect their evolutionary
position. The physiology of their sodium-dependent action potentials is
essentially the same as that of sodium currents in other animals but the
pharmacology of those currents is that of calcium currents. Since these are the
most primitive animals to possess a nervous system, and the first to produce
sodium-dependent action potentials, this finding suggests that these neurons may
be intermediates in sodium channel evolution. The physiology and pharmacology of
sodium and other ionic currents in these neurons and in sting cells will be
examined with voltage clamp and single channel recording techniques. In
addition, information on the structure of the various ion channels will be
obtained from studies of the binding characteristics of various ion channel
blockers. This project will provide important information about how nervous
systems evolved. The physiology and pharmacology of ion channels in the most
primitive animals possessing a nervous system will allow comparison with
channels in primitive and more advanced animals. The results may provide useful
information to neurobiology in general by identifying subtypes of ion channels
with equivalents in higher animals.