* 8805156
* Time-resolved X-ray Studies of Kinetics of Metastable       Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Roy Clarke, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 10/31/1991
* USD 193,700.00

The use of materials in metastable states is becoming very pervasive in many
technological applications. Very often the atomic arrangements in such cases
have intermediate-range order somewhat characteristic of crystalline structure
but they are not in true thermodynamic equilibrium. The kinetic behavior of
metastable structures, and especially their relation to the equilibrium long-
range ordered state, is quite poorly understood at present. There has been
substantial progress in the theory of non-equilibrium processes using the
concepts of kinetic critical phenomena, but little experimental work which
probes directly the microscopic mechanisms. We propose a thorough study of this
area utilizing powerful ne techniques in time-resolved x-ray diffuse scattering.
The research exploits the recent developments in x-ray sources (very brightness
synchrotron radiation) and detectors (fast two- dimensional CCDs) which are
expected to revolutionize time- resolved studies. The goal of the research is to
identify universal features of the kinetics which can be incorporated into a
general quantitative description of non-equilibrium structural processes. Two
model systems have been chosen for these studies; the research will focus on the
rapid thermal annealing of thin- film heterostructures which have important
optoelectronic applications, and the growth and relaxation mechanisms of
electrochemically deposited dendrites and thin film structures.