* 8805161
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Integrated Paleontological,        Geochemical, and Paleonceanographic Studies on the Taconic  Foreland Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Thomas Anderson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 12/31/1991
* USD 45,001.00

Studies on a roughly five million year long Middle Ordovician sequence in the
Taconic Foreland Basin, New York are addressed to these questions: How did water
temperature and oxygen content vary with depth in going from a continental
carbonate platform down the outer slope of a subduction trench? Was oceanic deep
circulation driven by sinking of warm, saline water from low-latitude platforms,
as has been suggested for this and other times of highest sea stand? Twelve
years' background work on the stratigraphy and paleontology of the sequence,
including an ongoing two-year feasibility study, has made a unique opportunity
for answering these and related questions from carbon and oxygen isotopic
studies on shells of bathymetrically wide-ranging benthic invertebrates, and
from carbon analyses of sediments. Relative water depth is measured in terms of
position on downslope transects along individual volcanic ash layers and, over
time, through gradient analysis of fossil assemblages. Relative water
temperature will be determined from oxygen isotopic composition in one
articulate brachiopod (low-Mg calcite), two inarticulate brachiopods (calcium
phosphate), and other taxa selected for comparison. Evidently, texturally and
chemically well-preserved calcareous brachiopods are isotopically little-
altered: specimens from the same sampling station yield tightly clustered 18
values similar to those of the best-preserved Middle and Late Ordovician
material. The density of puncta on the articulate brachiopod's shell
(proportional to temperature in modern forms) is proportional to relative depth,
and may provide a check on 28 as a temperature measure. Research will aid in
paleoceanographic reconstruction and in identification of possible areas for
resource exploration.