* 8805546
* Improved Helioseismic data analysis and inversion for Solar Structure and Excitation Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Thomas Jordan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 02/28/1991
* USD 115,000.00

This grant will support a two year theoretical and observational study of solar
oscillations. The motivation for these studies is to bring geophysical data
analysis techniques, which have been developed for application to terrestrial
free oscillation data over the last two decades, to bear on similar problems in
the analysis of helioseismic data. The focus will be on four areas which have
terrestrial counterparts. These are: (1) The development of data analysis
techniques to produce more accurate oscillation frequency and amplitude
measurements; (2) The use of these frequencies to invert for the spherical
structure of the Sun; (3) The derivation of the general matrix elements for the
major solar asphericities and their use, together with the frequency estimates,
to invert for estimates of these asphericities; and (4) The development of
techniques by which constraints can be placed on the excitation of solar
oscillations. All aspects of the research will be characterized by a close
cooperation between M.I.T. and Harvard. This work represents an important step
in transferring terrestrial techniques in seismology to the new field of
helioseismology. The solar importance lies in furthering our understanding of
the solar dynamo and the 11 year variation. Hence, it is important to S/T
research.