* 8805451
* Surface Morphology of Pyroclasts from Mount St. Helens and  Vesuvius: Characterization and Interpretation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Michael Sheridan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1990
* USD 60,100.00

This project will develop and test a methodology for the identification and
analysis of morphological features on crystalline and glassy juvenile tephra
from two calssic pyroclastic deposits: 1) the 1980 products of Mount St. Helens,
and 2) the A.D. 79 deposits of Vesuvius. A wide range of deposits from lahars to
plinian falls were produced by these two events. The stratigraphy and eruptive
phenomena of both deposits have been well studied and characterized. Collective
features of primary grain-surface morphology will be interpreted in terms of the
successive changes in the character of these two eruptions. The relative effects
of mechanical and chemical processes on grain surfaces will be traced through
the eruption, transportation, deposition and cooling of the tephra. Data sets of
sufficient pyroclasts from every major stratigraphic level of these deposits
will be examined to identify key textures useful for interpretation of
environmental histories. In addition, experimental studies will be done to
investigate the morphology of hot fragments quenched in water, and the textures
produced by abrasion of primary clasts in a specially designed device.
Development of a methodology for pyroclast morphologic investigation and
verification of the results using computer analysis are integral parts of this
study. Various techniques for analysis of tephra morphologies will be tested to
determine which are best suited to determine the history of the deposits from
the characteristics of the individual components.