* 8805268
* Expression of Global Events in the Middle Eocene to Lower   Oligocene of the Coastal Plain
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Joseph Hazel, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 12/31/1990
* USD 90,148.00

The principal investigator will study the timing of global events such as
eustatic changes in sea level, extraterrestrial impact events, deep sea
hiatuses, changes in stable isotope compositions of sea water, intervals of
rapid faunal turnover in the stratigraphy of the middle Eocene to lower
Oligocene (Claibornian to lower Vicksburgian) of the Atlantic and Gulf Coastal
Province. A chronostratigraphic framework model based on the Graphic Correlation
technique and calibrated to time has been developed by the principal
investigator. It will be used to make long distance and regional correlations of
rocks, biozones, sequence stratigraphic units, and determine the age of regional
and global events, and measure durations and rates. In the interval near the
Eocene-Oligocene boundary the stable isotope compositions of three kinds of
microfossils (benthic and planktic foraminifers and ostracodes) will be examined
to see how curves developed with these data compare to those from the open
ocean. This stratigraphic interval will also be studied in detail for
magnetopolarity reversals. The predictive value of the chronostratigraphic model
is used to indicate stratigraphic intervals where microtektite and other
microspherules might be found. These will be sampled and the microspherules
studied for mineralogy and chemical composition. This research will provide
insight into the role of extraterrestrial impacts on the evolution of life.