* 8805390
* Collaborative Research in the LTER Network
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1988,01/01/1989
* Jerry Franklin, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* James R. Gosz
* 01/01/1989
* USD 214,368.00

This research project will further the development of long-term ecological
research including, but not confined to, work at the LTER (Long-Term Ecological
Research) sites currently supported by NSF. Objectives include: stimulating and
facilitating collaborative research, especially joint experiments and
comparative analyses, and syntheses of ecological concepts within and among
biomes; development of standardized sampling programs, experimental designs, and
data management procedures; and creation of a communication network for sites
engaged in long-term research. Substantial progress was made in these activities
during the last 4 years and the LTER Coordinating Committee (LTER/CC) recognizes
the potential of and its responsibilities for development of a functional multi-
site network. These activities will reflect an expanded commitment to realizing
the potential for intersite activities. The largest body of work will be a
series of comparative and synthetic studies led by senior scientists on: (1)
productivity and its controls, utilizing major environmental gradients
represented in the LTER systems; (2) disturbance and ecosystem dynamics,
including processes in secondary succession, prediction of vegetation dynamics,
and the role of various types of disturbances; (3) temporal variability across
biome types and patterns of response to global changes; and (4) landscape and
regional analyses. The data management working group will recruit a facilitator
for the extensive planned data exchanges, continue development of standardized
procedures, and implement electronic networking. The meteorological group will
conduct two comparative environmental analyses of the sites, revise existing
standards, and expand an earlier comparison of climates. Initiation of
comparative stable isotope studies will assist in propagating this technology
throughout the network. An intersite group will address major conceptual issues
in ecosystem modeling. Finally, the LTER/CC will continue major communication
activities, such as publication of newsletters, guidebooks, reports, and
articles and presentation of symposia. Emphasis is on specific tasks and topics
with a senior LTER scientist responsible for a productive conclusion to each
activity. Furthermore, higher level syntheses which will contribute to the
conceptual basis of ecology have been given priority. As before, individual LTER
programs will make major contributions of funds and personnel and include non-
LTER sites in all activities.