* 8805736
* Dissertation Research: Local Genetic Differentiation and    Adaptation of Quantitative Traits
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Douglas Schemske, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 10/31/1990
* USD 7,495.00

The research outlined in this proposal will examine the genetic and
evolutionary consequences of inbreeding in a population of the self-fertilizing
annual plant, Polygonum douglasii. Inbreeding occurs frequently in natural
populations of animals and plants, and has several important genetic
consequences which tend to reduce the overall genetic variation in a population
via random genetic drift. One extreme form of inbreeding is exhibited by plants
which habitually self-fertilize their seeds and do not rely on pollen from other
plants. Self- fertilizing plant populations are quite common in both wild and
crop species. These populations are thought to contain no genetic variability
for ecologically important traits and therefore can not respond to natural
selection in different environments. In this sense they are thought to be
"evolutionary dead-ends." This belief has not yet been thoroughly tested, but
some recent theoretical and experimental results suggest that substantial
genetic variation may be present within even highly selfing populations. This
study will test hypotheses regarding genetic variability and adaptation to
specific environments by relating the pattern of genetic differentiation in
ecologically important traits to (1) the level of inbreeding, (2) the local
environments, and (3) the spatial scale of local adaptation in a single large
population of P. douglasii. Breeding experiments in the greenhouse and
transplantations in the field will evaluate the extent to which this population
contains sufficient genetic variation to adapt to different environments. The
experiments will also address whether the population is in fact adapted to a
natural range of environments in the field. This study will help to clarify many
controversies regarding the evolutionary potential of inbreeding species, issues
which are important in designing strategies for improving the ability of the
many selfing crop species to thrive in a wide range of environments.