* 8805612
* Synthesis and Characterization of Thin Film Insulators:     Application to Inelastic Electron Tunneling Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Ursula Mazur, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* robert miller
* 12/31/1991
* USD 127,830.00

This Research Opportunities for Women Research Initiation Award project is in
the general area of Analytical and Surface Chemistry and in the subfields of
thin film deposition and inelastic tunneling spectroscopy (IETS). The IETS
technique has been limited by the reactivity of the substrate materials commonly
used and their tendency to decompose or reduce the adsorbate species. The
Principal Investigator will synthesize, by ion-beam deposition, a broad spectrum
of new insulating thin-film substrates with varying reactivity and electron-
transfer properties suitable for application with IETS. The film materials will
include metal oxides, metal nitrides, mixed metal oxides, and diamond-like
carbon. Structural characterization of the films will be performed by electron
microprobe analysis, transmission electron microscopy, infrared spectroscopy and
IETS. Tunneling spectra of a number of adsorbed probe molecules will be measured
in order to classify the substrate materials with respect to their barrier
quality and chemical inertness. Electronic and vibrational spectroscopies
utilizing photons as probes have contributed greatly to our knowledge of the
structure, bonding and reactivity of materials. They are limited, however, by
the selection rules that govern photon emission, absorption and scattering.
Inelastic electron tunneling is not limited by these optical selection rules and
is thus a powerful tool for spectroscopic characterization of adsorbed molecular
species. Low-lying electronic transitions and both allowed and forbidden
vibrational modes can be detected. Development of a catalog of insulating
materials with sufficient diversity that virtually any molecular species can be
matched to a relatively inert substrate for spectroscopic investigation will
greatly enhance the general utility of this technique. It will find increased
application both in fundamental molecular spectroscopy and in technologically
relevant fields such as corrosion, adhesion, catalysis and microelectronic
device fabrication.