* 8805630
* REU:  Molecular Systematics of the Legume Tribe Phaseoleae  and Allies
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1992
* Jeffrey Doyle, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1992
* USD 186,743.00

The Phaseoleae is the largest taxonomic tribe of the legume family. Among the
more than 80 genera of the tribe are a number of familiar food plants including
the garden bean, lima bean, soybean, hyacinth bean, pigeon pea, cowpea,
mungbean, and jack bean. Despite the economic importance of the tribe,
relationships among the genera are in most cases poorly known. Three levels of
systematic questions will be addressed by Dr. Jeffrey Doyle of Cornell
University in this project: 1) what are the natural grouping of genera? 2) how
are natural groups of genera related to one another? and 3) is the tribe as a
whole a natural, monophyletic group? This third question has important
implications for the phylogeny of the entire papilionoid (bean) subfamily of the
Leguminosae, because the tribal taxonomy is based largely on a few key
morphological characters of dubious validity. Thus to address the third
question, groups outside the Phaseoleae will also be studied. The characters to
be analyzed in the research are molecular in nature. Preliminary work has shown
that two major structural mutations of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) will be useful
for the circumscription of groups of genera at the levels of subtribe within the
Phaseoleae and of groups of tribes related to the woody Millettieae. An
insertion sequence in a storage protein gene characterizes the soybean and its
close relatives. A duplication for the gene encoding cytosolic glucosephosphate
isomerase has been silenced in various members of the Phaseoleae. The first
stage of the project, therefore, will be to use such rare mutations to delimit
groups of taxa, affording at least partial answers to the questions posed. Once
natural groups are defined, precise relationships among genera can be studied by
such techniques as cpDNA mapping and the sequencing of particular genes.