* 8805058
* Precise Dating and Location of Prehistoric Earthquakes      Using Tree-Ring Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Gordon Jacoby, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 12/31/1990
* USD 100,001.00

Our initial success in dating and locating a major earthquake, previously
unknown, on the San Andreas fault was the result of extensive sampling and
analysis over several years. The end product is a calendar date giving an exact
interval between that event and an event in the historical record in 1857. The
seismic implications are that strain release in the area may be episodic rather
than periodic. It is herein proposed to further apply tree-ring dating to
paleoseismology. Tree-ring analysis is virtually unique in being able to
absolutely date site-disturbing events like earthquakes. It is the absolute
dating of each and every annual ring prior to examination for disturbance that
makes this application determine if there was an earlier event just to the
northwest of our study area near Wrightwood, California; study the extent of the
1838 event in the Bay area; precisely date an event on the Little Salmon fault
at the southeast end of the Cascadia Subduction zone; and to investigate an area
in southern Italy where conditions seem very promising for locating undocumented
ground ruptures in an active seismic region. The knowledge gained from our
previous studies, including the disappointments, has equipped us to operate
efficiently and to target better zones for analysis. Another step to optimize
results is the inclusion of seismologists familiar with or working in the
proposed study areas. The background information furnished by them aids in
defining specific questions and in interpreting the seismic significance of any
results.