* 8805255
* The Novel Iron-Sulfur Clusters of Hydrogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Michael Adams, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 04/30/1992
* USD 193,700.00

The objectives of this proposal are to expand our knowledge of the structure,
function and chemical reactivity of biological iron-sulfur clusters, the most
ubiquitous electron carriers in nature. It has been shown that two hydrogenases
from the anaerobic bacterium, Clostridium pasteurianum, contain a new type of
iron-sulfur center, a 6Fe cluster, which is unprecedented in biological systems.
Moreover, it is intimately involved in catalyzing a chemical reaction, the
activation of the simplest molecule, H2, and it covalently binds CO, a potent
inhibitor. One of the hydrogenases catalyzes a reversible reaction while the
other preferentially catalyzes H2 oxidation and mechanisms have been proposed to
account for these differences. In the period of this research the reactive 6Fe
clusters will be modified with site-directed chemical probes, i.e. NO, N2O, PH3,
CH3NC and O2, and modify the hydrogenase proteins using amino-acid specific
reagents. The modified enzymes will be characterized by changes in the catalytic
activities and by electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (using
isotopically-enriched enzymes and chemical probes), redox potentionmetry and
peptide mapping. This study will provide information on the structure of their
novel 6Fe-clusters and the synergistic role of the cluster and the hydrogenase
protein in H2 catalysis. Proteins containing clusters of non-heme iron and
inorganic sulfur are the most ubiquitous electron carriers in nature. The
provide the cornerstone for such biological processes as respiration,
photosynthesis and nitrogen fix ation and participate in innumerable metabolic
processes. A very recent development is the realization that iron-sulfur
clusters fulfill functions other than or in addition to electron transfer. This
study focuses on an example of this. The two hydrogenases of Clostridium
pasteurianum contain a novel iron-sulfur cluster that is involved in both
electron transfer and catalysis and it covalently binds the inhibitor. An
elucidation of their catalytic mechanism is therefore of fundamental importance.
Dr. Adams has the expertise needed to pursue this project.