* 8805155
* On the Design and Study of Robust Catalysts for Alkane      Conversion
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Robert Crabtree, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 10/31/1991
* USD 281,531.00

This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is the area of organometallic chemistry. The goal of the project is to develop
more robust catalysts for conversion of alkanes to other organic compounds.
Alkanes are the principal constituents of petroleum, and efficient catalysts for
alkane conversion are therefore important in the industrial synthesis of
plastics and other materials from petroleum. Replacement of these catalysts as
they degrade is very expensive, and the development of catalysts which resist
degradation is thus of great economic significance. The focus of the project is
the development of homogeneous alkane conversion catalysts which are not subject
to deactivation by P-C bond cleavage. Particular emphasis will be placed on
transition metal polyhydrides which are stabilized purely by N-donor ligands and
which contain dihydrogen ligands. A variety of N- and S-donor ligands will be
explored, and the structures of the polyhydride derivatives will be studied by a
variety of physical methods, notably by Raman spectroscopy and variable
temperature NMR spectroscopy. In addition to studying catalysts of new types,
attempts will be made to extend the range of possible alkane conversions. Among
the types of reactions to be explored are hydroalkylation of unsaturated
species, alkylation of arenes and of CO, and dehydrocylisation. Such reactions
are either not currently known at all for alkanes or are only known to occur
over heterogeneous catalysts.