* 8805260
* Advanced models and Techniques for Expert Interactive       Retrieval Assistance
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Richard Marcus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/1991
* USD 118,931.00

Enhancement, experimental analysis and evalution will be accomplished on an
expert retrieval assistant named CONIT which seeks to capture and formalize some
of the intelligence embodied in a human expert searcher. In particular CONIT
assists users in developing a formalized problem description from which the
system derives and executes a search strategy in one or more of 400 databases in
three different retrieval systems. CONIT further assists the user in displaying
document records and reformulating the search strategy based on search results
and user desires. New assistance techniques to be studied include (1) ranking
documents by estimated relevance based on retrieval match criteria; (2) several
means for search evaluation based on estimates of recall plus time and cost
parameters; and (3) selection of the most propitious search modification tactics
for the current problem context. With these tools search strategy planning can
be based on more rational, quantitative decision- making procedures as opposed
to the more intuitive, qualitative procedures typical of current retrieval
modalities. Analysis of experiments conducted will consider how well the
particular techniques, and general retrieval models (subsumed under the term
"smart Boolean"), achieve these goals. An improved human- computer interface
will also be tested through conversion of the CONIT system from a mainframe to a
workstation environment.