* 8805882
* Thermodynamics of Aqueous Borate Solutions in Natural Water Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Rabindra Roy, Drury University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/1990
* USD 86,160.00

The boric acid-borate system is important in the control of pH for certain
medicinal preparations and the buffering capacity of natural waters, as well as
in bio- and geo-chemical processes in brines, ocean, and sea-waters in the
temperature range 5 to 90 degrees centigrade, and in the ionic strength range of
0.01 to 6.0 mols per kilogram. The main objectives of this study are (a) to
apply the precise electromotive force method (without liquid junction),
isopiestic, and densimetric techniques to investigate the effects of salts on
ionization equilibria involving boric acid in sea water; (b) to provide accurate
thermodynamic equilibrium data for aqueous ionic systems,. e.g., involving Ba,
Sr, Ca, Mg, Zn, Mn, Co, Ni, and Fe; (c) to utilize the full Pitzer's formalism
in natural water modeling; (d) to develop consistent ionic interaction models
for multicomponent electrolyte solutions; and (e) to update and extend
electrolyte theory with refined methods leading to new insights into natural
waters and the environment. An innovative experimental approach will be
utilized. This approach is related to ion-pair formation constants of boric acid
with different alkaline earth and transition metallic cations found in trace
quantities in natural waters. These new experimental data will assist in
geochemical calculations in brines and natural water modeling. The uniqueness of
the project would be the development of new chemical technology and the
application of electrolyte thermodynamics in response to the problems of marine
science and needs of social significance. Equilibrium thermodynamics of
bicarbonate ion-and boron-containing aqueous solutions are also of great
practical interest in a number of other engineering and geological situations:
clear brine completion fluids; boiler water chemistry; chemical oceanography;
mineral solubility; reaction modeling calculations of geochemical brines;
aqueous speciation and mineral saturation index; the development of geochemical
models for groundwater systems; water desalination; hydrometallurgy; as a
soluble and burnable neutron poison in the coolants of pressurized nuclear
reactors; geothermal energy; pH standards; oil (tar) sands, and enhanced oil
recovery.