* 8805151
* Improvement of Recombinant DNA Research Facilities
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1994
* Graciela Candelas, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 290,000.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was designed to
increase the participation of minorities in scientific and engineering research.
The program provides support to strengthen the research environment and
capabilities of institutions that have substantial minority student enrollments.
Eligible institutions must also have graduate programs in science or programs in
engineering. The principal investigators at the University of Puerto Rico (Rio
Piedras) will use RIMI support to purchase equipment to upgrade facilities for
recombinant DNA technology within the Department of Biology. Small equipment
will be provided for equipping individual laboratories while major equipment
items will be designated for shared access. These latter acquisitions will
result in upgrading self contained facilities which include a dark room, a four-
degree centigrade cold room and units employed for DNA sequencing radio
immunoassey and chromatography. This support will facilitate ongoing studies in
which recombinant DNA methodologies such as the preparation of gene librarea,
cloning, hybridization techniques and DNA sequencing are being employed to study
mechanisms of gene expression in a wide range of species, including spiders, sea
urchins, lizards, birds, yeast and protozoa. These studies address such
fundamental problems as the identification and characterization of regulatory
genes, the role of small RNA molecules in their interaction with regulatory
genes and the role of the DNA in the decoding process. The survival potential of
genetically engineered bacteria is yet the subject of another study. This
project will clearly meet the objectives of the RIMI program in several ways. It
will significantly strengthen the scientific research infrastructure, provide an
opportunity for an isolated population of minority students to become well-
educated in modern biotechnology and serve to promote cooperative research
projects with other institutions including industrial and government
laboratories. The principal investigator is an experienced and active minority
researcher. She has excellent qualifications for overseeing the development and
management of these new facilities as well as to guide and assist young
investigators in the application of this technology to their own research. This
RIMI project will encourage more minority students to consider research careers
in science and engineering.