* 8805893
* Cascading Trophic Interactions in Lake Ecosystems: Effects  on Bacteria and Their Consumers
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Michael Pace, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1991
* USD 194,896.00

Heterotrophic microorganisms process a substantial portion of the primary
production of aquatic ecosystems. This research will examine how food web
interactions control microbial productivity. Whole lake experiments are being
conducted at the University of Notre Dame Environmental Research Center that
manipulate fish populations that in turn modify the planktonic food web. This
project will study the response of the heterotrophic microbial community. The
effect of planned manipulations will be to decrease zooplankton biomass and
increase phytoplankton biomass and productivity. It is hypothesized that
bacteria, protozoa, bacterial production, and grazing on bacteria will all
increase in response to these manipulations. The enhanced microbial activity in
the manipulated lakes will also lead to higher rates of total water column
respiration. Measurements of the biomass, productivity, grazing by heterotrophic
microbes as well as community respiration will be made to test these hypotheses
at the ecosystem scale. The direct and indirect effects of the food web on
heterotrophic microbes will be further examined in enclosure experiments and
modeling studies. Results from this study will likely be of major significance
in terms of the basic understanding of the biotic dynamics of lakes and may be
applicable to new strategies for lake management.