* 8805819
* Dynamics of the Dayside Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* James Burch, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth H. Schatten
* 10/31/1990
* USD 100,000.00

Previous work on this grant has concentrated on the dynamics of the dayside
magnetosphere as determined from plasma measurements made on the Dynamics
Explorer 1 spacecraft. The area of prime emphasis in this research has been the
injection of solar-wind plasma through the polar cusp and its subsequent
transport within the magnetosphere. The new work will continue to focus on this
area primarily using data from the Dynamics Explorer 1 spacecraft, but with
correlative data from Isee-1, Isee-3, AMPTE, EISCAT, and ground stations in
Antarctica, Alaska, and Scandinavia. In addition, significant effort will go
toward the study of the mapping of the low-latitude boundary layer to
midaltitudes and of the dayside parallel and transverse acceleration of ions and
electrons. An important new phenomenon, the flux transfer event (FTE) will be
introduced in studying the interactions of the magnetosheath with the
ionosphere. Midaltitude signatures of FTE's, called reconnected flux tubes
(RFT's), will be correlated with magnetopause FTE's and ground signatures of FTE
effects in the ionosphere. Confirmation of ground signatures of FTE's under the
polar cusps will make available a vast set of FTE observations that can be used
to study the behavior of flows in the low-latitude boundary layer. The
importance of this work resides in the recognition that FTE's represent a major
source of magnetic energy for the magnetosphere. Spacecraft data have been used
to identify FTE's and now this work will use ground based data to investigate
ionosphere signatures. This is one of the objectives of Geospace Environment
Modelling (GEM) and, therefore, this work can be regarded as a forerunner to
GEM.