* 8805238
* Establishment of Dextrous Robotic Hands and Neural Networks Laboratory for Intelligent Controls Research
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Foad Vafaie, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/29/1992
* USD 291,750.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was designed to
increase the participation of minorities in scientific and engineering research.
The program provides support to strengthen the research environments and
capabilities of institutions that have substantial minority student enrollments.
Eligible institutions must also have graduate programs in science or programs in
engineering. Texas A&amp;I University will use RIMI support to establish a
laboratory for Intelligent Controls research involving dextrous robotic hands
and neural networks. Research studies will focus on robotic systems, automated
manufacturing, and machine intelligence. Subprojects will involve: dynamics,
sensor, and control issues related to smart (robotic hands for grasping and
manipulation); neural networks sensor integration and intelligent control
applications; and use of artificial intelligence to analyze flexibility in
automated manufacturing cells. This project on intelligent control systems will
help meet the research needs of a predominantly minority institution that is
striving to increase its research productivity. The principal investigator has a
strong background in classical dynamics and controls and in the applications of
neural networks. The Foundation has supported this project, in part, because
minority students at Texas A&amp;I University will have their research
capabilities strengthened by their involvement with state of the art
instrumentation for intelligent control research.