* 8805097
* Strengthening Research and Training in Plant Cell and       Tissue Culture and Related Biotechnolgies
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Govind Sharma, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/29/1992
* USD 287,475.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was designed to
increase the participation of minorities in scientific and engineering research
by providing support to strengthen the research environment and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions. Institutions eligible to participate in
this program must have in addition to a substantial enrollment of minority
students, graduate programs in science or programs in engineering. Alabama
A&amp;M University will use RIMI funds to strengthen research and training in
plant cell and tissue culture biotechnology. The research studies will develop a
tissue culture program in woody plants, expand a plant cell and tissue culture
program in Triticiae (wheat, rye and barley), and establish a molecular genetics
program in Triticiae. Tissue culture studies in woody plants will focus on the
cultivation of the holly and the analysis of variation in embryo-derived plants.
The plant cell and tissue culture program will explore the regeneration of
cereal plants from single cells. Initial studies will involve the development of
procedures for isolating single cells and screening of genotypes for
regeneration potential. In addition, recombinant DNA techniques will be employed
to explore interspecies genetic variability in wheat and rye. These studies will
be used as a basis for constructing genetic maps. This project will provide
support for graduate students, undergraduate students and post-doctoral
trainees. The principal investigator is a well-trained and experienced scientist
in plant and soil science who publishes regularly in refereed journals. Because
of this RIMI project, minority faculty and students will have increased
opportunities to participate in meritorious research in plant and soil science
at Alabama A&amp;M University.