* 8805930
* Expert-Database System for Method Selection and Sample Preparation: RUI
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Frank Settle, Virginia Military Institute
* Standard Grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 12/31/1990
* USD 72,302.00

This Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project is in the general area
of analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of computer assisted
chemical analysis. In this activity, Professor Frank Settle of Virginia Military
Institute and Professor Michael Pleva of Washington and Lee University and their
undergraduate research students in chemistry are collaboratively developing
software systems that can be readily implemented on popular microcomputers for
the purpose of optimally selecting either the appropriate surface analysis
techniques for a particular sample to be characterized or the appropriate sample
preparation protocol to be followed for the elemental analysis of a sample. The
first of these "expert systems" enables a person who is unfamiliar with the
capabilities and limitations of surface analysis techniques to select those
surface analytical methods which are most likely to yield meaningful data that
are relevant to the problem under investigation. The second expert system will
enable a person who wishes to perform an elemental analysis on a sample to
select a sample preparation protocol that will lead to analytical results which
are optimally informative. Upon completion, these two expert systems will be
made available to the scientific community at a modest cost through the National
Bureau of Standards (for commercial customers) and through Project SERAPHIM of
the American Chemical Society (for educational institution customers). This RUI
activity continues research in applications of computational methodologies to
problems in chemical analysis that were initiated under NSF grant CHE-8517147.
This development of expert systems drawn undergraduate research students in
chemistry into contact with sophisticated, commercially available data base
management software and leads them to the capability to customize and modify
such software as necessary for the successful development of optimized chemical
methods selection systems. These pursuits also serve to acquaint undergraduate
research students with a broad array of tools for sample preparation and
characterization. The anticipated primary benefit of this research is the
continued development of the manpower and human resource base in area of
analytical and surface chemistry.