* 8805856
* Significance of Predators in Restricting Host Range of      Phytophagous Insects
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1988,07/01/1989
* Elizabeth Bernays, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 07/01/1989
* USD 19.00

This research is an experimental study of predation on insect herbivores having
different diet breadths. The hypothesis to be tested is that generalist
herbivores are more efficiently found and/or utilized by generalist predators
than are specialist herbivores. If so, predators can be expected to be a
selective force for the high degree of specialization seen in insect herbivores
today. The obvious importance of mortality due to predation has not been
extended to its influence on host range: the chemical coevolutionary theories
have been given precedence in spite of the growing controversy over some of the
essential components of such theories. There is some field evidence that
predators restrict host range of herbivores, but direct comparison of relative
predation pressure on insects having different host-plant ranges requires
experimental manipulation to control for confounding factors such as initial
differences in density. This project will experimentally test the hypothesis
using an alfalfa system. Five aphid species having different diet breadths will
be tested. They will be tested in pairs that are taxonomically as similar as
possible but contrasting in normal host range. Four generalist predators
commonly in alfalfa fields will be used to examine any differential utilization
of prey. Results will address fundamental questions in community ecology and
will be an applied interest for biocontrol of aphids.