* 8805653
* Archeological Investigations of Medieval Settlements
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1989
* James Boone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1989
* USD 9,728.00

Dr. Boone and colleagues will conduct archaeological fieldwork in the Lower
Alentejo and Serra do Algarve region of Southern Portugal. The project includes
mapping and systematic excavation in a deserted village which dates to the
Islamic period and was probably abandoned soon after. Mapping of surface
features and limited soundings will also be carried out in two additional
villages. This preliminary small scale work will provide the basis for a larger
project. The fundamental question Dr. Boone wishes to address is how rural
communities respond socially and economically to cycles of economic and
demographic growth and decline associated with succeeding regimes of conquest
and administration. In Portugal these include the Romans, Visigoths, Muslims and
Christians and cover the period from approximately 100 to 1500 A.D. An ancillary
issue to be addressed is the problem of ethnicity and the social organization of
medieval populations inhabiting the dry, upland areas of the Iberian Peninsula
where irrigation was impossible. These populations are known to have been
distinct from groups in better watered regions. This research is important
because it will provide insight into how relationships develop and are changed
over time between urban and rural areas. The conditions which held in medieval
Portugal still apply today to many areas in the Third World and the complex
relationships which exist between rural inhabitants and the ruling urban elite
(who are often culturally distinct) complicate regional politics and development
efforts. Thus the work may have practical relevance. Archaeology has a unique
contribution to make in such studies because it can examine such relations over
long spans of time.