* 8805116
* Cloning and Characterization of BLM Genes
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1992
* Carol Moore, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1992
* USD 327,943.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was designed to
increase the participation of minorities in scientific and engineering research
by providing support to strengthen the research environment and capabilities of
predominantly minority institutions. Institutions eligible to participate in
this program must have in addition to a substantial enrollment of minority
students, graduate programs in science or program in engineering. The City
College of the CUNY system will use RIMI support to establish a molecular
genetics program in yeast. The long-range goal of this project is to understand
the control mechanisms of normal DNA function and maintenance and examine
strains which develop increased sensitivity bleomycin may also exhibit increased
sensitivity to radiation. Preliminary evidence suggest that these radiation
sensitive strains have been altered in their ability to repair DNA damaged by
radiation. Bleomycin sensitivity therefore marks certain genes (BLM) which in
some way control DNA functions. The proposed research will test this hypothesis
by first mapping and cloning the BLM genes. The isolated genes will then be
characterized by determining their nucleotide structure, how the genes are
expressed in the cell and the nature of the gene products. If these objectives
are achieved, the results will contribute to our understanding of DNA repair.
This research will add to and complement existing educational and scientific
programs in modern molecular biology at City College. The principal investigator
is a young talented minority woman scientist who has prior research experience
in yeast genetics and physiology and has published frequently in refereed
journals. The Foundation supports this project because it will allow a well-
trained scientist the opportunity to continue a promising career in molecular
biology and in general expand opportunities for minorities to participate in
meritorious research.