* 8805536
* Geophysical and Human-Induced Hazards and the Utility of    Geographic Information Systems
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1993
* Woodrow Nichols, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1993
* USD 295,175.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was designed to
increase the participation of minorities in scientific and engineering research.
The program provides support to strengthen the research environments and
capabilities of institutions that have substantial minority student enrollments.
Eligible institutions must also have graduate programs in science or programs in
engineering. The principal investigator at North Carolina Central University
will use RIMI support to study geophysical and manmade hazards and how
geographic information systems (GIS) may be utilized to determine the causes,
consequences, prevention, and mitigation of such disturbances. Investigators
will analyze rainfall patterns, flucitations in surface temperatures, flooding,
and factors that affect ground water chemistry. In addition, studies will
examine the indirect social and economic effects of hazards and what mechanisms
may be used by humans to cope when these events occur. This project will help
address the research goal of an urban institution that is attempting to build
its research and education base in the sciences. The principal investigator is a
well-trained geographer who publishes regularly in refereed journals. Minority
faculty and students will have their research capabilities strengthened by their
performance of meritorious research using GIS and modern instrumentation.