* 8805471
* The Late Prehistoric Political Economy of the Calchagui     Valley, Argentina
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1993
* Terence D'Altroy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1993
* USD 114,201.00

Dr. D'Altroy and colleagues have conducted excavations at archaeological sites
located in the Upper Mantaro Valley in the highlands of Peru. In particular,
they focussed on two cultural periods: Wanka II which dates from ca. A.D.
1350-1460 and Wanka III, from 1460-1553. During the earlier phase, the Wanka
societies were organized into warring chiefdoms with large communities serving
as population and political centers. During Wanka III times, however, these
groups were pacified and incorporated into the Inka empire. Settlements were
shifted to lower unfortified locations, and presumably, political organization
was altered. A new second phase of field research is based on these prior
results. Excavation will focus on both Wanka II and III sites to collect data on
the transformations that occurred in the political economy of the Wanka region
as a result of imperial occupation. Sites will include one indigenous Wanka
center each from Wanka II and III, an Inka provincial capital, and a subsidiary
Inka settlement. The excavations will focus on public and elite architecture.
Analyses of recovered materials - plant remains, animal bones, ceramics,
lithics, metals, and textiles - will provide information on imperial
administration, the subsistence support for elite institutions, and the
political/ceremonial relations between conqueror and conquered. This research is
important because it will provide insight into how large political organizations
are formed and how powerful urban elites relate to rural subjects. This
distinction exists today and characterizes many nations in the developing world.
The political and economic problems faced by many nations, such as the
Philippines, are influenced by just such factors. Archaeology is useful in such
a context because it provides an excellent long term perspective.