* 8805042
* Theoretical Morphology of Fossil Cephalopods:  Geometry and Hydrostatics of Compressed and Depressed Shells
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1990
* John Chamberlain, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 06/30/1990
* USD 25,000.00

Cephalopod theoretical morphology involves mathematical characterization of
planispiral shell geometry. Such analysis has been instrumental in facilitating
research on fossil cephalpood adaptation and evolution, particularly in matters
relating to the hydrostatic properties of the living animals. However, this
approach is handicapped by its strict applicability only to shells with circular
whorl cross sections. The research described in this proposal will remove this
shortcoming by developing equations for generating curve area and other key
geometric parameters of compressed and depressed shells. In addition, this work
will correct inconsistencies in the methods used by paleontologists to evaluate
stability and orientation of fossil cephalopods. The new procedures will then be
used to evaluate the effects of variation in shell geometry on buoyancy,
orientation, and hydrostatic stability over a much wider range of shell form
than could be achieved in the past. The objective is to determine how shell
compression and depression influence hydrostatic properties of the shell. The
results of this work will substantially improve knowledge of fossil cephalopod
life habits and paleoecology, and will make possible much needed work in
hydrodynamics, locomotion, and other areas of cephalopod adaptation and
evolution.