* 8805192
* Mathematical Sciences: Properties of Solutions of Linear andNonlinear Partial Integrodifferential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Hans Engler, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1990
* USD 29,095.00

This mathematical research is concerned with a class of partial differential
equations of second order arising in the description of viscoelastic solids or
liquids. The problems occupy an intermediate position between the basic
parabolic partial differential equations for diffusive phenomena and hyperbolic
equations modeling propagative phenomena. The goal is to establish the existence
of generalized solutions for arbitrary initial data under suitable assumptions
and to analyze their properties. Specifically, the asymptotic spacial and
temporal behavior of such solutions is to be studied. The question of whether
the damping mechanisms that are inherent in the equations can be powerful enough
to prevent certain discontinuities of the solutions (corresponding to material
instabilities) from appearing, will also be taken up. Specific tasks will
include the construction of weak solutions in unbounded domains and reflecting
problems of shear flows of viscoelastic liquids between two plates. Also,
solutions of quasilinear equations with nonintegrable kernels will be sought. A
passage to the limit of approximate solutions appears tractable in this setting
but has yet to be confirmed. The actual smoothness of the resulting weak
solution also would require study. A third specific task concerns detailed
analysis of linear equations with variable coefficients. There is evidence
suggesting that solutions may actually gain in smoothness over their data.
Standard techniques from partial differential equations (maximum principle,
variational characterizations) do not apply, so that new tools will have to be
developed before progress can be expected.