* 8805909
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations, GroupRepresentations and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Leon Ehrenpreis, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1991
* USD 60,492.00

Ehrenpreis 8805909 This project will encompass three areas of mathematical
analysis, each of which represents a continuation of earlier research. The first
concerns the extensions of solutions of partial differential equations from
domains which have the shape of convex wedges to surrounding domains when the
wedges share common boundary elements. In its general form the goal is to
determine the relations among the Cauchy data on the boundary which imly the
extendability of solutions. Solutions have been obtained for constant
coefficient equations in low dimentions. Work will also be done on problems of
scattering theory. A recent concept of nonabelian mechanics in which the poisson
bracket of space variables makes the space and momentum into seperate Lie
algebras (rather than vanishing), when suitably paired. This approach leads to a
new notion of completely integrable systems which can be applied to scattering
problems on nonabelian groups. Work planned seeks to develop this research in
higher dimensions. Efforts will also continue on the question of determining
when a left-invariant operater on a Lie group can be surjective on the
infinitely differentiable functions. This work derives from earlier research on
the so-called Lewy operater - a partial differential equation with no solutions.
Initial results using the Husenberg group suggest that a general framework for
deciding on the surjectivity of differential operators and hence the conditions
under which one can expect solutions of the corresponding inhomogeneous
equations.