* 8805434
* Theoretical Studies of Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1993
* Barry Honig, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 12/31/1993
* USD 534,900.00

Theoretical analysis and computer simulations will be used to address a number
of problems associated with membrane proteins. The goals will be to develop
insights, computational methodologies and models which will facilitate the
design and interpretation of experiments on membrane proteins in general and
retinal proteins in particular. Dr. Honig will focus on three general areas: 1)
he will address electrostatic questions with a recently developed method to
obtain electrostatic energies of macromolecular systems; 2) he will develope
methods to predict amino-acid side-chain conformations and helix-helix
orientations in membrane proteins; and 3) he will continue efforts to understand
the structure and function of retinal proteins. In the past few years there has
been a large increase in the understanding of the structure of membrane
proteins. A significant number of amino acid sequences have been reported and
these have revealed remarkable homologies between different families of
proteins. Sequence analysis and some structural information has suggested that
many transmembrane proteins share common structural elements. In particular, it
appears that alpha helices are a major structural motif in membrane proteins. A
number of laboratories now have the capability of modifying proteins essentially
at will. The problem though is what to modify. There is an absence of well-
defined testable models, due in part to uncertainties as to the principles that
govern the structure and function of membrane proteins. This project, hopefully,
should help to overcome this.