* 8805249
* Synthesis and Characterization of Ceramic Materials Made    From Polymeric Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1992
* John Haggerty, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 07/31/1992
* USD 557,260.00

This grant, funded jointly by Special Projects in Chemistry and the Division of
Materials Research provides support for the collaborative research of Prof.
Haggarty in Materials Science and Engineering and Prof. Seyferth in Chemistry at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The objective of the research is the
study of the direct synthesis of inorganic materials in their final forms from
polymeric organometallic precursors. The research program closely couples
materials synthesis (Seyferth) and materials characterization (Haggarty). Non-
oxide ceramic materials for structured applications have been selected from the
many possible choices for chemistries and optimized properties. This combination
will serve as a model for other classes of ceramic materials and applications.
The synthesis program will involve both established and new sythetic routes
which give products readily amenable to characterization and property
measurements. Reaction kinetics, product intermediates and dimensional changes
will be determined during the pyrolysis reactions using several advanced
analytical techniques. The characterization portion of the research program has
three broad objectives. The first is to provide measurements and observations
which will enable the design of synthetic procedures phenomenologically and
mechanistically. The second is to make property measurements necessary to
evaluate the potential of these materials in specific applications. Density,
pore-size, surface area, microstructure, bulk composition, microscale
composition, surface composition, bonding, crystallinity, strength, hardness and
toughness will be characterized. The third integrates the results of the other
two; the relationship between synthesis process variables and properties will be
determined. Each of the microstructural and chemical characteristics influences
the final properties. The third defines the limitations, if any, that this
polymeric precursor processing route places on fabrication techniques, part
dimensions and/or resulting properties.