* 8805441
* Solvent Extraction Studies of Group VIII Metals
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1993
* Curtis McDonald, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1993
* USD 235,750.00

The Research Improvement in Minority Institutions (RIMI) program was designed to
increase the participation of minorities in scientific and engineering research.
The program provides support to strengthen the research environments and
capabilities of institutions that have substantial minority student enrollments.
Eligible institutions must also have graduate programs in science or programs in
engineering. Researchers at Texas Southern University will use RIMI support to
conduct research on the extraction of Group VIII metal ions from aqueous
solution. Special attention will be given to any periodic trends between the
various halides, such as binary compounds of chlorine, fluorine, and iodine, and
the Group VII metals (nickel, pallodium, and platinum). Investigators will
propose mechanisms for new extraction methods. In addition, several variables
such as the rate of extraction, halide metal ratio, temperature and ionic
strength will be examined. These studies will contribute to our knowledge of
water detoxification. This project on extraction correlations and reactions will
increase the research and training capabilities of a predominantly minority
institution and will encourage more minorities to select careers in science and
engineering. The principal investigator has widely published in the area of
metal ions in agueous solution and is well qualified to direct this study.