* 8805123
* Molecular Analysis of Avirulence and Basic Pathogenicity    Genes in Xanthomonas Campestris pv Vesicatoria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Brian Staskawicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1992
* USD 272,300.00

The ability of avirulent isolate of Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria to
induce a hypersensitive reaction on near- isogenic resistant cultivars of
Capsicum annuum or widely divergent species is controlled by the presence of
specific avirulence genes. In this proposal, we plan to characterize the race-
specific avirulence genes, avrBs1 and avrBs2, and a member of unique class of
non-host avirulence genes, avrZ. The molecular characterization of these genes
will provide a solid molecular foundation which will allow us to compare
structural similarities or differences in protein products and regulation of
avirulence gene expression. The characterization of these genes and the
production of polyclonal antisera to their respective proteins will put us into
a position to design experiments to elucidate the biochemical processes involved
in cellular recognition and the subsequent signal transduction processes
responsible for eliciting plant defence mechanisms. The complementation analysis
of the Hrp gene cluster and its possible functional relationship with specific
avirulence genes will addressed by defining the genetic organization of this
region of DNA and the effects of specific mutations on the regulation of
avirulence gene expression. Finally, we will investigate the molecular genetic
control of host range exclusion in X. c. vesicatoria on non-host species and
determine the inheritance patterns of plant host genes that determine
resistance. Many plant pathogens follow a "gene-for-gene" relationship with
regard to whether or not they cause disease in a particular strain of host
plant. Disease ensues only when the pathogen carries a specific allele of one of
its own genes, and when the host carries a specific allele of one of its own
genes. Any combination of other alleles of these particular pathogen and host
genes precludes disease. This genetic relationship has been understood for forty
years, but the biochemical functions of the genes involved in the determination
of the occurrence of disease have remained completely obscure. Dr. Staskawicz
has been one of the first investigators to succeed in isolating disease-
determining genes from a plant pathogen. In this project he will characterize
the products of these genes, in order to lay the foundation for understanding of
the molecular basis of the host-pathogen interaction. Apart from its intrinsic
biological interest, this work also has obvious practical importance for future
efforts to control plant diseases.