* 8805335
* Tectonic Evolution of the Virgin-Beaverdam Extensional      Breakaway Zone, Nevada, Arizona and Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Brian Wernicke, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 02/28/1990
* USD 30,069.00

The physics of lithospheric deformation is primarily a continuum problem
relating stress and strain through rheological properties. Progress towards
understanding physical processes involves laboratory experiments that directly
measure rheological properties in earth materials, and through well-posed
natural experiments of lithospheric deformation. This project is aimed at
determining the response of the lithosphere to extreme tectonic unloading in an
extensional environment. A potential study area is located along the western
margin of the Colorado Plateau in the Virgin Mountains, where large-scale mid-
Miocene extensional tectonism along down-to-the-west normal faults has
transported crustal fragments originally adjacent to the plateau 50-100 km to
the west. In the wake of these transported fragments the extensional "breakaway
zone" at the edge of the plateau experienced at least 5 and possibly as much as
20 km of uplift. This proposal will examine the Gold Butte block in detail, by
structural mapping and laboratory fluid inclusion studies, to determine the
degree of internal disruption and the amount of differential uplift and erosion
across the rotated block. Results will bear directly on the appropriateness of
this area determining the role of isostatic uplift in continental extension, and
also on extensional response of the lithosphere generally.