* 8806117
* Dissertation Research: Spatio-Temporal Variation in Habitat Use and Foraging Behavior of Migrant Neotropical Warblers   During Nonbreeding Seasons
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Daniel Petit, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 10/31/1990
* USD 7,000.00

A major goal of avian ecologists has been to quantify and explain patterns of
species co-occurrence and community structure. Until recently, most emphasis in
this area was placed on birds at temperate latitudes during the breeding season.
However, because species may be subjected to the most stringent selective
pressures during the nonbreeding seasons (winter and migration), ecologists in
the 1980s have emphasized a year-round approach to the study of bird community
structure and foraging ecology. In addition to those theoretical considerations,
the unfortunate destruction of native tropical vegetation creates a need for
immediate action to assess effects of habitat alteration on overwintering
migrant and resident bird species. This study investigates a number of
unresolved problems in neotropical bird ecology on wintering grounds and in
migration. Specifically, effects of: (1) vegetation structure, (2) food
resources, (3) presence of hetero- and conspecifics, and (4) season on the
foraging ecology of and habitat use by migrant wood-warblers in Belize, Central
America, and Tennessee will be assessed. Simultaneous quantification of the
above variables will provide insight into their effects at the individual,
population, and community levels. Integration of these results can elucidate the
year-round ecological constraints imposed on populations of migrant neotropical
birds that breed in temperate areas.