* 8806604
* Physiological Ecology and Evolution of High Altitude        Tolerance in Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1993
* Marvin Bernstein, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1993
* USD 206,730.00

Many birds live and fly at extremely high altitudes, where the oxygen supply
may be only one-fourth to one-third that at sea level. At such altitudes, which
extend beyond 9,000 meters (29,500 feet), mammals including humans become
oxygen-starved, cold, and comatose, especially if they try to exercise. The
feats of high-flying birds are especially remarkable because the oxygen
requirement for flight is 20 to 40 times greater than at rest, and greater than
the oxygen demand for any other form of exercise. To understand fully the
physiological ecology of birds, therefore, it is necessary to study them while
they fly at high altitudes. No information presently exists about the
physiological ecology of high-altitude bird flight, although some information
has been obtained under resting conditions. To answer the questions--How do
birds fly at high altitude, and how did they evolve this ability?--this project
will investigate the mechanism of oxygen transport from regions of low supply
(the atmosphere) to regions of high demand (the flight muscles). The research
will study birds actually flying ( in a wind tunnel) under simulated high
altitude conditions. For comparison, birds will also be studied while flying at
low altitudes and while resting at simulated high or low altitudes. Most of the
research will focus on the role of the blood, blood vessels, heart, and lungs.
The spleen, a storage site for the red blood cells that carry oxygen, may
increase the red-cell supply during flight, so this will also be investigated.
Most birds previously studied, including the White-necked Ravens (Corvus
cryptoleucus) and Rock Doves (Columba livia) to be used in this research, are
never found at high altitude. Yet they tolerate exposure to extremely high
altitudes while at rest, and their tolerance improves with increasing exposure.
These acclimational adjustments turn out to resemble the ones observed in
mammals, including humans, that exercise regularly. Does exercise in birds evoke
changes similar to the ones caused by altitude acclimation? If so, then this may
indicate that high- altitude tolerance in birds may have evolved secondarily to
flight. To answer this question, the research will also address the effects of
exercise conditioning. In addition to its contributions to our understanding of
physiological ecology and evolution in birds, the research will shed light on
mechanisms by which a prominent group of warm blooded air breathers tolerate
oxygen-starving conditions. It is hoped that such knowledge may be useful in
ultimately dealing with pathological oxygen starvation in humans, which often
occurs in association with heart, vascular, lung, and blood diseases.