* 8806648
* Mechanisms and Specificity of Bacterial Co-existence on     Leaves
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Steven Lindow, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 01/31/1992
* USD 200,000.00

Bacteria are common inhabitants on leaf surfaces and are both of practical
importance and of scientific interest because they can cause plant frost injury
and plant disease, produce phytohormones, fix nitrogen, and have other direct
and indirect effects on plants and other organisms. Considerable interest exists
in modifying the microbial composition of leaves and roots by application of
microorganisms or by other means to control plant diseases or frost injury.
There is also considerable interest in predicting the effects of intentionally
or inadvertently introducing recombinant microorganisms with unique traits into
natural habitats such as on plants. This study will emphasize factors that are
important in intraspecific competition of bacteria on leaves. Competition for
limiting environmental resources of leaves best explains the exclusion of ice
nucleation active (Ice+) Pseudomonas syringae strains from leaves previously
colonized by recombinant Ice- strains of this species both in greenhouse and in
field tests. Ice+ P. syringae strains that either coexisted with or which could
not coexist with reference Ice- P. syringae strains on potato leaves have been
identified and will be compared for relative competitive ability against Ice- P.
syringae strains both in the laboratory and under field conditions and will be
contrasted with competition exhibited by isogenic Ice+ P. syringae strains.
Spatial and nutritional heterogeneity of different P. syringae strains on
leaves, and other features that might condition competition of bacteria on
leaves, will be related to different patterns of competition on and "invasion"
of leaves exhibited by these strains. Tests will be also made of hypotheses that
different strains avoid direct competition by inhabiting spatially distinct
sites or utilize different resources at the same physical site on leaves.