* 8806050
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Biosensor Laboratory
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Young Lee, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1989
* USD 13,723.00

Commercially available dissolved oxygen probes for bioreactor applications have
a number of undesirable characteristics such as calibration drift and flow
sensitivity. By making use of the state- of-the-art integrated circuit
fabrication technology, it is proposed to develop a steam-sterilizable dissolved
oxygen probe, which does not exhibit these shortcomings. Also, microprobes with
a sensing tip of a few-micron size are to be developed for monitoring local
concentrations of various fermentation substrates and products within the
immobilized cell layers. These proposed sensors are especially useful for
monitoring bioprocesses involving shear-sensitive mammalian cell cultures and
immobilized cells, which gained significant industrial importance in recent
years. A successful application of the microcircuit fabrication technology to
constructing dissolved oxygen probes is expected to open wide ranging
possibilities in fabricating sensors for bioprocess monitoring in general. By
integrating several sensors on a single chip, many parameters can be monitored
simultaneously. By incorporating enzymes and monoclonal antibodies, sensor chips
can be made for detecting various small and large molecules involved in
downstream as well as upstream bioprocesses. The proposed microprobes for
immobilized cell applications will enable measurements of layers. Such
measurements, which have not been possible previously, are expected to help
scientists and engineers greatly in studying the physiological behaviors of the
immobilized cells. The knowledge obtained can then be applied to optimitzing
bioreactor operations and designs. The proposed sensors are thus expected to
contribute significantly in advancing biotechnology, an area of national
prominence.