* 8806179
* Synthesis, Reactivity and Catalysis of Novel                Metallacarboranes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* M. Frederick Hawthorne, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 11/30/1991
* USD 432,100.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is concerned with the synthesis and chemical properties of new main group
element carborane derivatives and metallacarboranes. Studies in four areas are
being pursued. In the first of these, studies of main group carborane
derivatives are continuing, with an increased emphasis on reactivity
relationships aimed at a greater understanding of the chemistry of these unusual
compounds. Of particular interest is the chemistry of novel ?Ne!-core main group
element sandwich complexes, as well as exploration of potential applications of
these and related carborane derivatives. The second area is the synthesis of
novel carborane-based cyclic and polymeric materials derived from the
dicarbanastide cage. In the third area novel insertion of metal cluster
fragments into polyhedral boron hydride cages is being used for the synthesis of
dinuclear metallaborane complexes. These complexes are of fundamental interest
because they meld the chemistries of polyhedral boron hydrides and metal
carbonyl clusters. The final category of studies is an effort to synthesize new
lanthanide element derivatives of the metallacarborane type. Some of the new
materials which will be synthesized are expected to have interesting physical
properties possibly including desirable electronic and/or spectral properties,
and some will be useful precursors for the synthesis of interesting materials.