* 8806530
* The Genetics of Dimorphism and Reproduction in Plant        Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Thomas Meagher, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 01/31/1991
* USD 123,000.00

The evolution of populations is characterized by a balance between factors
acting to promote change and genetic constraints imposed on such change. In the
present study, the evolution of morphological differences between the sexes
(sexually dimorphic traits) within dioecious populations is being used as a
model system to investigate this balance. The evolution of sexually dimorphic
traits involves genetic tradeoffs between male and female reproductive
performance. Such tradeoffs are the result of genetic correlations between the
sexes, which in turn reflect the extent to which corresponding traits in the two
sexes, such as flower size, are controlled by similar genetic influences. In the
previous funding period, males and females of the dioecious plant Silene alba
were subjected to sex-specific selection for calyx diameter and flower number to
evaluate both the genetic basis for these traits in the sex under selection and
to assess correlated response in the other sex. This work has generated
populations in which males have become either more extremely male-like or more
female-like, and a similar series of populations for female traits. The primary
objective of the proposed study is to take males (or females) from these
different lines, place them in a semi-natural environment, and evaluate their
comparative reproductive performance. Thus it will be possible to evaluate the
consequences of modifying such traits in either male or female plants, and by
evaluating performance of their female or male relatives, respectively, to
determine the genetic consequences of correlated response to selection in the
sex not under direct selection. This work will contribute to our overall
understanding of the evolutionary dynamics of sexually dimorphic traits as well
as the affects of genetic correlations between the sexes.