* 8806830
* Star-Formation Processes in Small Galactic H II Regions
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1990
* Deidre Hunter, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Pol C. Delosreyes
* 04/30/1990
* USD 25,000.00

Ionized hydrogen (HII) regions in our Galaxy present a different scale of star
formation than is easily observed in other galaxies. Extragalactic systems
provide unique opportunities for looking at the largest star forming centers,
which are seen as giant HII regions containing numerous, sometimes hundreds of,
hot, early type stars. In our Galaxy, on the other hand, HII regions which are
ionized by only one or two massive stars can be examined in detail. By comparing
studies on both the large and small scales, that is other galaxies and our own
Galaxy respectively, the question of differences in the star formation process
is addressed. The nature of the star formation process plays an important role
in the evolution of a galaxy. Dr. Hunter is beginning a multi-wavelength
observing project to investigate the nature of small, optically visible regions
of ionized hydrogen in our Galaxy to compare with data she has previously
obtained on star forming regions in external galaxies. She will use optical,
near infrared, and far infrared data to measure the stellar content of a sample
of small star forming regions in our Galaxy. Observations of the carbon monoxide
molecule in these same regions will yield information on the properties of the
neutral gas clouds out of which the stars are forming. This grant is a Career
Advancement Award under the Research Opportunities for Women (ROW) program.