* 8806727
* Mathematical Sciences: Post Doctoral Program in Analysis andApplied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Henry McKean, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/1992
* USD 521,000.00

This project supports postdoctoral visitors at the Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences at New York University. The postdoctoral program will
expose young scholars to the mix of analysis and applied mathematics research
ongoing at the Courant Institute. The Courant Institute embraces a number of
fields that are linked to mathematics with researchers working in physics,
engineering, biology, and several other branches of science. An area of
particular strength at the Courant Institute has long been the theory of partial
differential equations studied both in itself and in connection with specific
applications. Many of the postdoctoral visitors coming to the Courant Institute
are interested in extending their knowledge in partial differential equation or
in one of its many applications. The scientific excellence of the Courant
Institute has been recognized in many ways. Seven of the faculty have been
elected to membership in the United States Academy of Sciences, and several have
been elected to the national academies of other countries. Many prizes and
honors, such as the Birkoff Prize, the Crafoord Prize of the Royal Swedish
Academy, the Wolf Prize, two MacArthur Foundation Prize Fellowships, and other
prizes of professional societies and of the National Academy have been awarded
in recent times to members of the faculty. This project provides support for
four postdoctoral appointments of young investigators to study in mentorial
relationship with senior faculty at the Courant Institute of Mathematical
Sciences.