* 8806170
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:   Multichannel Data   Acquisition System for Structural Dynamic Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Richard Keltie, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 11/30/1989
* USD 43,646.00

This project provides equipment, the MASSCOMP data acquisition and signal
processing system, for support of structural dynamics research. Two projects,
entitled Energy Flow in Mechanical Systems, and Wavenumber Processing Techniques
will utilize the equipment. The first project addresses a set of unresolved
structural dynamics issues. These include the ability to model structures with
closely spaced modes whose resonant bandwidths overlap in the frequency domain,
and damping mechanisms at structural interfaces. This project uses both a three
dimensional space truss and a plate or shell like structure supported on a grid
or truss system. Securing useful data requires placing arrays of twelve
accelerometers at two locations on the structure. Twenty four simultaneous
channels of data can thereby be acquired and processed by the MASSCOMP system.
The second project focuses on developing practical experimental techniques for
studying the phenomenon of mode conversion. This occurs when flexural motion
associated with one mode in one part of a structure couples with longitudinal
motion associated with a different mode in an adjoining part of the structure.
The method used here is the spatial frequency or wavenumber processing
technique. It also requires taking simultaneous samples of structural
deformation data from an array of accelerometers and then processing the data
through the MASSCOMP system.