* 8806990
* Estimation: Inference and Model Selection for Neural        Network Models in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Halbert White, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 07/31/1991
* USD 93,095.00

Cognitive scientists have recently developed a rich and interesting class of
nonlinear models inspired by the neural architecture of the brain (neural
network models). These networks are capable of learning through interaction with
their environment, in a process which can be viewed as a recursive statistical
estimation procedure. The promise of these models and associated estimation
procedures and the excitement evident across a spectrum of disciplines including
psychology, computer science, genetics, linguistics and engineering is founded
on the demonstrated success of neural network modeling in solving a diverse
range of difficult problems. Especially impressive have been solutions to
problems which had previously resisted conventional attempts at solution, as
well as relatively quick and reliable solutions to problems which had previously
yielded comparable effective solutions grudgingly, and after several man- years
of more conventional effort. The objectives of this project are (1) to
investigate the applicability of neural network models to the study of economic
phenomena and to refine and extend these models in directions suitable to the
study of economic phenomena, (2) to refine and extend the learning methods
(estimation procedures) used to train the networks so as to obtain parameter
estimates which converge quickly and reliably when faced with economic data, and
(3) to apply model specification and selection techniques developed by the
investigator in previous funded research to neural network models in order to
develop techniques for choosing between competing neural network architectures
for particular problems. This is an exciting project because no one has ever
applied neural network models to economics. These new methods will dramatically
reduce the computational time needed to solve complex economic problems. The
neural network models will provide a new methodology for studying the way
economic agents learn from their environment. Neural networks appear to be
particularly well suited to nonlinear economic forecasting, so these new methods
could provide us with better predictions of the economic future.