* 8806414
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Integrated           Semiconductor Waveguide/Etalon Optical Based Logic Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1990
* Gregory Sonek, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sarah A. Clark
* 01/31/1990
* USD 28,013.00

Novel methods for integrating optical interconnect elements such as waveguides,
etalons, and photorefractive media, are key elements to the development of new
algorithms, architectures, and compact processors for optical computing and
neural network applications. Proposed, for the first time, is the experimental
implementation of new GaAs-based integrated optical logic networks that
corporate orthogonally intersecting rib waveguides and selectively defined
nonlinear aluminum gallium arsenide and indium gallium arsenide superlattice
etalon regions. Continuous wave and pulsed tunable infrared dye laser techniques
will be used to demonstrate data encoding and arithmetic logic in coupled
waveguide/etalon arrays which transmit optical data in both a pipelined and
parallel fashion, simultaneously. The operation of the network is based upon the
local interaction of three optical beams, two of which propagate in the sample
plane and overlap in a region of saturable absorption, while a third control
beam is used to set the output optical logic state. It is shown that crossbar
networks can be used as logic gates or passive intensity and polarization
modulators, depending upon the wavelengths and intensities of the data streams
within the optical waveguides. Possible techniques for nonlinearity enhancement
and the integration of volume storage elements will also be explored.