* 8806068
* REU:  Genetically Variable Complex Life Cycles in           Heterogeneous Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1992
* Nancy Moran, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1992
* USD 148,453.00

This study is concerned with causes of variation in the life cycles of
plant.feeding insects. The aphid, >Pemphigus> >betae>, feeds on cottonwood trees
during one part its life cycle and on roots of herbaceous plants at other parts.
Some colonies of these insects switch between the two kinds of plants frequently
while other colonies switch less often. Preliminary evidence suggests that
genetic differences among aphids are partly responsible for the variation in
frequency of host switching. In addition, environmental factors such as
temperature and level of crowding in colonies contribute to the differences. In
this study, Dr. Moran will examine how these different genetic and environmental
factors interact to determine whether or not the aphids switch between hosts.
Also, experiments are designed to determine whether and how life cycles of these
insects are genetically adapted to local conditions of host plant availability
and host plant resistance. For example, Dr. Moran will determine whether the
aphids can delete the cottonwood phase of the life cycle in locations where the
cottonwood trees are resistant to aphid attack. The project is also very
relevant to the practical management of agricultural and forest pests. Findings
will increase current understanding of how plant feeding insects evolve in
response to variation in their host plants. Such evolutionary responses on the
part of agricultural pests have important consequences for their economic impact
on crops and forests and for the design of long.term pest control strategies.