* 8806639
* Role of Predation and Plant-Small Mammal Interaction in     Chilean Mediterranean Scrub Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1988,03/31/1991
* Peter Meserve, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 03/31/1991
* USD 90,000.00

Previous studies of Chilean mediterranean-type ecosystems have suggested a
major role for predation, and plant-animal interactions in structuring small
mammal assemblages, and in community level interactions. However, few long-term
or carefully replicated field experiments have been conducted in temperate
Neotropics, and such studies are needed to assess the generality of patterns
elucidated largely from Northern Hemispheric communities. This research will
investigate the specific effects of major predator groups on small mammals, and
the evidence for significant plant-small mammal interactions in a semi-arid
mediterranean community in a Chilean national park which has received
considerable previous effort on small mammal population dynamics, resource
partitioning patterns, predator diets, and floristic associations. Replicated
fenced and/or net- covered exclosures permeable to small mammals, and small
mammal- proof exclosures will be used to assess predation impace, and consumer
effects, respectively, In addition to moitoring of direct effects, the evidence
for changes in small mammal foraging patterns and habitat utilization will be
assessed. Detectable responses to predator, and small mammal exclusion are
expected to be rapid, and the proposed work will be among the first such large
scale studies of these processes in temperate Neotropical small mammals.