* 8806176
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Microwave and        Millimeter Wave Scattering Measurement Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Leung Tsang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/1990
* USD 53,988.00

This Engineering Research Equipment Grant is for the acquisition of two major
instruments, an HP8510B vector network analyzer system to be used for microwave
and millimeter wave experiments, and a MicroVax 3500 computer system to be used
for numerical studies of microwave and millimeter wave scattering. The PIs have
been conducting extensive research supported by NSF in three major areas:
imaging in random inhomogeneous media; microwave remote-sensing of geophysical
media; and subsurface object scattering and detection. All of these areas
require studies of the interactions of waves with random or inhomogeneous
natural media. Major objectives are the development of basic information on
imaging, remote-sensing, and detection in the geophysical media including
hydrometeors, fog, hail, turbulent air, vegetation, soil, rock, snow, and ice
where multiple scattering and scattering by complex objects are particularly
important. The efforts have been directed by extensive theoretical
investigations, numerical studies, and controlled experiments including optical
and microwave scattering measurements. The proposed microwave and millimeter
wave scattering systems should materially advance their ability to conduct the
experiments and numerical studies and to develop theoretical models of wave
interactions with geophysical media. It will also enhance their current and
future research on imaging, remote-sensing, and detection.