* 8806548
* Theoretical Aspects of Population and Quantitative Genetics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1992
* Michael Turelli, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 06/30/1992
* USD 166,000.00

The proposed research is a theoretical investigation into the causes of genetic
variation in natural populations and the changes that occur in this variation as
a result of natural selection. Genetic variation is measured at many different
levels, ranging from DNA at the lowest level to the overall morphology of the
organisms at the highest. At each of these levels there is a substantial amount
of genetic variation, although the forces that are responsible for this
variation remain a mystery. It is the intent of the proposed research to
investigate the relative roles that natural selection, mutation, and genetic
drift might play in the maintenance of genetic variation in natural populations.
Unique to this research is the hope that a comprehensive theory will emerge that
allows the variation at all levels to be explained within the context of a
single theory, rather than the current state where a different theory is used
for each level of variation. Evolution not only maintains variation, but it also
changes the genetic state of a population. The most familiar expression of this
is the changes in morphology seen in the fossil record. A second goal of this
research is to provide a theory to explain these changes in morphology that is
compatible with our understanding of genetics and the forces that maintain
variation. The proposed research will not only provide insights into the genetic
bases of evolution in natural populations, but may also help to understand some
of the problems facing human populations. Humans share with other organisms the
property of having an extraordinary amount of genetic variation between
individuals. This variation is undoubtedly at the root of some of the
differences that are observed between individuals in such important attributes
as disease susceptibility. Yet we are as ignorant of the cases of variation in
human populations as we are of the variation in natural populations. The
insights gained from this research will hopefully provide a better understanding
of the role of genetic variation in the human condition.