* 8806726
* Nonlinear Hyperbolic Equations, Elasticity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Fritz John, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1991
* USD 43,229.00

This project continues and expands upon earlier work focusing on the
formulation of singularities in solutions of nonlinear hyperbolic equations. In
particular recent new developments related to systems will be continued. The
immediate aims are to obtain asymptotic estimates for the time when the first
singularity occurs. This point is frequently referred to as the moment of blow-
up. Initial conditions involve data of compact support of fixed shape and size.
The immediate aim of this work is to obtain asymptotic estimates for the time at
which blow-up occurs based on the initial size. Earlier work on the nonlinear
wave equation and systems of elasticity equations only produced lower bounds for
this critical time. Projected work will be concerned with the derivation of
supplementary upper limits which would, in turn, imply blow-up in finite time.
In addition to these estimates work will be done in analyzing the behavior of
solutions near blow-up time. While these questions are relatively simple in one
space dimension, the situation for general three-dimensional solutions is much
more complicated. One will have to analyze the extent to which higher angular
derivatives may eliminate contributions from lower radical ones. Efforts will
also be made to understand long-term behavior of quasilinear systems which
reduce to homogeneous linear systems with constant coefficients for
infinitesimal solutions. An example of this type of problem arises in the study
of finite amplitude waves in an unistropic hyperelastic material.