* 8806276
* Investigation of the Evolution of Mesoscale Systems and     Processes Associated with East Coast Cyclones during GALE
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Gerald Watson, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/1992
* USD 215,075.00

The rapid development and intensification of winter cyclones in coastal regions
presents a major weather forecasting problem. Along the East Coast of the United
States, the development of cyclonic storms and frontal systems often occurs
along the coastal region of the Carolinas. These weather systems may lead to
severe weather in the heavily populated northeast corridor in the form of
freezing rain, heavy snowfall, blizzards and extensive coastal erosion. A
complex interaction of cold continental air, warm ocean currents, traveling
atmospheric disturbances and local geography all appear to contribute to the
rapid development of these systems; however, the processes are not well
understood and the phenomena are often poorly forecast. In January-March 1986 a
cooperative research project to study winter storms in this region was held by a
consortium of universities and Federal agencies. Entitled GALE (Genesis of
Atlantic Lows Experiment), the project was designed to provide detailed
information on the role of air- sea interaction, planetary boundary-layer
processes and mesoscale meteorological processes. The Principal Investigator
intends to investigate the evolution of mesoscale precipitation distribution
associated with evolving east-coast cyclones by: (1) investigating the influence
of the three-dimensional kinematics and topography on the evolution of the
precipitation patterns; (2) discerning the dynamic factors that control the
location and evolution of the boundary between rain-snow areas; (3) discerning
the influence of gravity-wave activity on the precipitation distribution.