* 8806495
* REU:  Quantitative Genetic Analysis of Dimorphism in Diopsid Dipterans
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1988,11/30/1992
* Gerald Wilkinson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* None
* 11/30/1992
* USD 135,080.00

The primary goal of this research is to understand the evolutionary mechanisms
involved in causing morphological and behavioral differences in the sexes. This
is a particularly active and controversial area in evolutionary biology. Several
competing alternative explanations are still being considered, in part because
appropriate data have not yet been obtained. While any group of species that
showed differences between members of the opposite sexes could, in principle, be
used, this research focusses on a group of flies which have three important
attributes that make them ideal for this research. In some species, males have
eyes on the ends of stalks which can attain lengths greater than two.times the
male's body length while females have much shorter stalks. Other closely related
species show less dramatic sexual dimorphism and a few species exhibit no
dimorphism at all and have very short eye stalks. The group is uniquely suited
to this research because 1) these dramatic differences are limited to a single
trait. 2) several species occur in the same local area and can be studied in the
field, and most importantly, 3) most of these species can be reared in the
laboratory. This latter feature is critical because breeding experiments can
identify the genetic basis underlying this trait as well as the genetic
influence on female mate choice behavior. The results of this research should
not only allow better understanding of the exaggerated head form of these flies,
but should also provide insight into the mechanisms and consequences of sexual
dimorphism in other species.//