* 8806737
* Twenty-one Centimeter Hydrogen Line Studies of Galaxy       Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Franklin Briggs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 02/28/1990
* USD 18,712.00

Nearby galaxies which have an unusually large amount of neutral hydrogen gas can
be studied by radio astronomical techniques. The objectives of the observations
will be to define the gaseous structures of large, gas-rich galaxies and to see
if there are dynamical processes at work now that might have been important in
the past. A collaborative program that uses the new receiving systems at the
Westerbork (The Netherlands) Synthesis Radio Telescope (WSRT) will be initiated
to study the highly redshifted 21 cm wavelength absorption line of hydrogen gas.
The instrument is uniquely suited to this type of experiment. The optical survey
work on the galaxies which is already in progress will provide candidates for
study at radio wavelengths. It is important to emphasize that radio astronomy
techniques complement the optical data by providing: (1) Very Long Baseline
Interferometric (VLBI) measurements of the spatial extent of the absorbing gas,
(2) the neutral hydrogen gas (HI) temperature estimates, and (3) details of the
kinematics in the high column density clouds at the heart of the absorption
system. This program will be a collaborative effort with an astronomer from the
University of Pittsburgh and Netherland astronomers. VLBI spectral line
experiments will be carried out to compete with the WSRT. The galaxy system in
PKS 0458-02 (redshift z = 2.04) is well-suited to more detailed study. There is
radio structure in the background source on a wide range of scales, and the
absorption itself is very strong. The precision of the spectral line VLBI
observations of this system will be improved and intermediate-length baseline
experiments will be attempted, which should detect the structure in the absorber
on typical galactic scales. A four-station VLBI experiment including WSRT,
Arecibo, Green Bank, and Jodrell Bank would be very useful since the WSRT-
Jodrell Bank baseline would be short enough to define the absorption in front of
the large (about 2 arcsecond) structure. The intercontinental baselines would
detect the fine structure in the absorber against the more compact components.
Both Arecibo and Green Bank are already equipped with receivers. Jodrell Bank is
planning to build a low noise preamplifier in order to include the 250-foot
telescope in the experiment. Since receiving systems have improved by a factor
of about 4 in sensitivity since the previous experiment was performed, the VLBI
observations of the lower redshift systems (z = 0.69) in the spectrum of 3C286
will be repeated. The inclusion of WSRT and Jodrell Bank in this experiment
would be of great interest since the background radio source in 3C286, like PKS
0458-020, has structure on a wide range of scales. The results of the project
should improve our understanding of the structure and evolution of galaxies.