* 8806288
* Role of Transport Phenomena in the Impregnation of Porous   Media by Active Catalytic Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Eli Ruckenstein, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1990
* USD 105,000.00

The effect of transport phenomena (including electrokinetic effects) during the
preparation of supported metal catalysis by wet impregnation is examined
theoretically. A model for the transient diffusion - adsorption process coupled
with the Poisson- Boltzmann equation for the electrical potential (which arises
because of the presence of pH - dependent charged sites on the support surface)
is developed for a cylindrical pore. The influence of process variables, such as
the pH and ionic strength of the impregnating solution and of the addition of a
competing species on the catalyst weight loading and distribution profile, is
considered. The question of the values of the process variables for given
catalyst design conditions is also addressed. Detailed calculations are carried
out for Pt on alumina catalyst. The relevance of the proposal resides in the
fact that the appropriate conditions (pH, ionic strength, nature of the
substrate and concentration of the impregnant) for the preparation of the
desired catalytic materials can be identified. The novelty of the approach
consists in the inclusion of the electrokinetic phenomena in the description of
the impregnation process. In this manner, the charge of the substrate and the
influence of the pH and ionic strength on the impregnation process are taken
into account.