* 8806898
* Tropopause Level Studies Associated with GALE and ERICA
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Ronald Smith, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/1992
* USD 397,400.00

The rapid development and intensification of winter cyclones in coastal regions
presents a major weather forecasting problem. Along the East Coast of the United
States, the development of cyclonic storms and frontal systems often occurs
along the coastal region of the Carolinas. These weather systems may lead to
severe weather in the heavily populated Northeast Corridor in the form of
freezing rain, heavy snowfall, blizzards and extensive coastal erosion. A
complex interaction of cold continental air, warm ocean currents, traveling
atmospheric disturbances and local geography all appear to contribute to the
rapid development of these systems; however, the processes are not well
understood and the phenomena are often poorly forecast. In January-March 1986 a
cooperative research project to study winter storms in this region was held by
an consortium of universities and Federal agencies. Entitled GALE (Genesis of
Atlantic Lows Experiment), the project was designed to provide detailed
information on the role of air- sea interaction, planetary boundary-layer
processes and mesoscale meteorological processes. As one of the core
investigators of the GALE, the Principal Investigator was instrumental in
designing and executing the experiment. The Principal Investigator's research
focussed on the upper troposphere. The primary data sources were aircraft
surveys using the National Center for Atmospheric Research Sabreliner research
aircraft, the specialized GALE upper-air sounding network, and satellite data.
Using GALE data, the Principal Investigator proposes to continue his research on
the role of the jet stream and tropopause structure in the rapid development of
winter cyclones and on comparison of remote sensing techniques of the tropopause
with in situ verification. Additionally, contingent on successful tests of new
temperature and humidity instruments, the Principal Investigator may enhance the
GALE data by participating in the Office of Naval Research Sponsored Experiment
on Rapidly Intensifying Cyclones over the Atlantic (ERICA) to be conducted
during the Winter of 1988-89.