* 8806049
* Genetic, Environmental and Maternal Influences on           Grasshopper Life Histories
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Hugh Dingle, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 12/31/1991
* USD 164,020.00

Among the most important features of life histories are the rates and schedules
of births and deaths because they determine the "success" of organisms in their
environment. In, insects, these schedules are also affected by migration and
diapause (the insect analogue of hibernation). Dr Dingle's research is
especially concerned with how life histories, including migration and diapause,
are influenced by genes and the environment because these factors act in concert
to determine rate and direction of evolution. The lesser migratory grasshopper
is particularly interesting because it ranges widely both latitudinally and
altitudinally. By studying it over an altitudinal gradient from sea level to
10,000 feet it will be possible to determine how natural selection has molded
life histories over a wide range of environments. This grasshopper is also
interesting because females determine whether or not their eggs diapause, and
crowding produces dramatic changes in morphology and development rates. The
latter, of course, influences the schedule of births and so affects life
histories. Genetic and environmental influences on the interplay of all these
factors are the focus of this study. This research also has significant applied
aspects. Grasshoppers, including the lesser migratory grasshopper, are notorious
outbreak species and periodically produce large populations which devastate
crops over wide areas. It is important to understand the genetics and ecology of
grasshopper life histories in order to understand why outbreaks occur and to
predict where they will occur so that control measures can be instituted.