* 8806255
* Microbial Mediation of Organic Carbon Transformations in An Emergent Macrophyte-Dominated Habitat of the Okefenokee     Swamp Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Charles Hopkinson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 01/31/1992
* USD 447,000.00

>> Decomposition will be studied in an emergent macrophyte.dominated habitat of
the Okefenokee Swamp ecosystem in southeastern Georgia. In this detritus.based
ecosystem, lignocellulose from the emergent Macrophyte >Carex> >walteriana> is
the most abundant source of carbon. Since lignocellulose is largely indigestible
to animals they cannot use its carbon (energy) until it is degraded by
microorganisms. Thus, having an understanding of microbial transformations of
lignocellulosic material and the factors controlling rates of its breakdown are
key to understanding how the Okefenokee and other wetland ecosystems work. The
research will be divided into three parts; detailed process studies, integrative
system.level measurements, and modeling syntheses. The detailed process studies
will focus on decomposition in field and laboratory efforts designed to clarify
the temporal and spatial aspects of transformations, fate, and controls on
decomposition not only of lignocellulosic, but also of non.lignocellulosic
carbon. Techniques to be used in these studies include: the radiolabeling of
substrates with .1.4C to determine the fate of the decomposed material; and the
labeling of bacteria with ı.3H! thymidine to determine the efficiency of
particle incorporation. The system.level measurements are designed to put the
decomposition studies in context of the site's overall carbon budget. Standard
methods including flow.through metabolic chambers and .1.4C "spiked" light.dark
bottles will be used in the system level studies. Modeling will function as a
synthesis tool in this research. Extant models of microbial degradation of
lignocellulose will be expanded to: 1) consider spatial and temporal aspects of
decay related to detrital inputs; and 2) incorporate more explicit and detailed
controls on rates of decay including the influence of N, P and S. Finally,
detailed flow and sensitivity analyses will be made of the modified models. The
significance of this research is that it will help us to understand how
wetlands, a major ecosystem type, worldwide, function. This research should
provide a scientific basis for wise management of this important landform. Drs.
Hodson, Wiegert and Hopkinson are very capable scientists with strong research
records. The institutional support available to them is excellent.