* 8806123
* 1988 Midwest Regional Developmental Biology Conference at   the University of Illinois, Urbana, June 2-4, 1988
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1988
* David Stocum, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 11/30/1988
* USD 2,000.00

This proposal is a request for support for the 1988 Midwest Regional
Developmental Biology Conference to be held at the University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, from June 2-4. The topics to be represented include: 1)
Control of Gene Expression During Development, 2) Cellular and Molecular Aspects
of Limb Development and Regeneration, 3) Neuronal and Muscle Development and
Regeneration, and 4) Embryonic Organization and Pattern Formation. The primary
emphasis will be on participation by graduate students, post-doctoral fellows
and undergraduates since this Conference provides an ideal setting for first-
time exposure of students to a critical audience outside their own laboratory.
Some of the speakers, however, will be established investigators in order to
insure the quality of the platform presentations. %%% The purpose of the meeting
is to provide a forum for exchange of information on all aspects of
developmental biology. The Regional Developmental Biology Conference constitutes
an important supplement to regular meeting of professional societies for several
reasons. Because it is smaller, less formal, and less rigidly structured than a
national meeting, the Regional Conference provides an environment that
encourages active participation by graduate students and post-doctoral fellows,
including informal interactions with established investigators. Moreover,
because the conference is generally held at a university facility close to the
home institutions of the participants, the cost does not prohibit attendance by
students and investigators with limited budgets for travel.