* 8806674
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  A Surface Force      Instrument for Adhesion Membrane Transport and Polymer      Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Douglas Lauffenburger, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1990
* USD 55,000.00

The equipment provided by this project allows three investigators who recently
have been awarded an NSF "minicenter" grant to study cell separations mediated
by receptor-ligand interactions. The surface force instrument (SFI) provides
direct information on the strength of such bonds, the distances over which they
are effective, and in the case of fluid membrane surfaces (modeled by lipid
bilayers deposited on the mica surfaces) how rapidly the bond-forming molecules
can diffuse into close proximity to one another. The transport of molecules
through membranes is also of great interest to two other researchers. The SFI
provides direct information on the partitioning of molecules between pore
(modeled by the thin slit "pore" of the two mica surfaces) and bulk liquid.
Predictions suggesting an oscillatory variation in the partition coefficient as
pore radius changes can be tested. Many fundamental materials properties are
directly dependent on intermolecular forces. These properties, in turn, are used
directly in chemical engineering calculations to predict and correlate polymer
solubility, colloid stability, adhesion, membrane permeation, adsorption, and
other phenomena. In the past, it has been necessary to use derived quantities as
a measure of these interactions. The SFI permits direct measurement of these
forces and how they vary with position. It therefore has the potential for
making important contributions to many areas of chemical engineering: in
producing accurate "first-principles" data, in testing theoretical predictions
based on molecular interactions, and i helping to produce improved correlating
functions.