* 8806553
* Determination of the Adjoint Model of the NMC Global and NGMModels and Their Application to 4-D Data Assimilations
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Ken Johnson, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/1991
* USD 351,527.00

"Determination of the Adjoint Models for NMC's Global and Nested Grid Models and
Their Application to Four Dimensional Data Assimilation" A numerical weather
prediction model requires a complete and accurate specification, or analysis, of
the state of the atmosphere at the initial time. The process of introducing
observations which are distributed in time into a forecast model is known as
four dimensional data assimilation. Observations cannot perfectly describe the
state of the atmosphere at a given time. Ideally, an assimilation should produce
the best "fit" of the data observations while satisfying the dynamical
properties of the governing equations as embodied in the model. Under this
award, the PI and his colleagues will employ an assimilation method which uses
optimal control theory to minimize the differences between the evolution of the
observations and the dynamical constraints of the model. This technique requires
the determination of the adjoint of the models employed, in this case, models
used at the National Meteorological Center (NMC). Determination of the adjoint
model of a particular forecast model is a complex numerical problem. The PI has
developed a staged approach, working on models of increasing complexity. At each
stage, the adjoint method for four dimensional assimilation will be tested in
cooperation with NMC scientists. In the course of the research, the PIs will
have to develop new methods for dealing with problems introduced by the use of
more complex models. For example, determination of the adjoint models requires
that quantities be differentiable, but certain physical processes, such as
convection, are not. This research is being supported as part of an NSF-NMC
cooperative effort to support basic research in numerical weather prediction.