* 8806589
* Genetics, Environment and Family Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Robert Plomin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 01/31/1992
* USD 212,410.00

The field of behavioral genetics has demonstrated that heredity influences
differences among people for many aspects of behavior, including cognitive
abilities, personality, and psychopathology. However, little is known about the
extent to which genetic factors influence behavioral interactions for pairs of
individuals. From the perspective of child development, some of the most
important interactions are those within the family, yet essentially nothing is
known about such family relationships from the perspective of behavioral
genetics. Since 1985, NSF has supported research to study family relationships
as part of the longitudinal Colorado Adoption Project (CAP). A unique aspect of
the CAP families is that one- half consist of genetically-unrelated adoptive
relationships (that is, adoptive mothers and their adopted children and adoptive
siblings) and the other half of the families are non- doptive families. By
comparing relationships in adoptive and non-adoptive families, it is possible to
begin to understand the role of genetic factors in the development of family
relationships. In early childhood, when the younger sibling was between three
and five years of age, visits were made to the home of 150 CAP families in order
to videotape mother-child, child-sibling, and mother-child-sibling interactions,
as well as to conduct interviews and unstructured observations. The current
research will study the same families three years later in middle childhood,
after the younger sibling has begun school. This longitudinal extension of the
study will make it possible for the first time to explore the genetics of family
relationships during the important developmental transition from early childhood
to middle childhood. This study is embedded within the longitudinal CAP which
collects extensive information on the CAP children and their home environment
from infancy to adolescence. Thus, it will be possible to study antecedents and
consequences of family relationships, and to consider the role of heredity in
these associations.