* 8806775
* Spectroscopic Determinations of Excited State Properties of Organometallic and Inorganic Compounds
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Jeffrey Zink, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 06/30/1991
* USD 218,884.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program supports basic
research in inorganic photochemistry. This project is at the forefront of an
area with the potential to benefit society in numerous ways: catalysis, optical
and electro-optical devices and photoconversion of energy. The proposed research
program is a three-fold investigation of the electronic excited states of
organometallic compounds, especially metal carbene, carbyne, olefin and nitrosyl
compounds. The first group of experiments is the assignment of excited states by
using single crystal polarized spectroscopy. New experimental techniques make it
possible to measure absorption bands with high extinction coefficients of
oriented molecules in crystals at low temperatures. Detailed assignments will be
made. Vibronic structure, when present, will be used to determine the excited
state distortions. An additional result is the quantitative experimental
measurement of metal-ligand sigma and pi interactions which will be compared
with both ligand field and molecular orbital theory. The second component of the
program is the determination of excited state distortions by using a combination
of pre-resonance Raman spectra, electronic spectra and time-dependent theory.
This combination makes it possible to calculate the magnitudes of all of the
distortions along normal modes in the excited state potential hypersurface. The
third group of experiments is the measurement of geometries of molecules in
excited electronic states by using excited state pump-probe Raman spectroscopy.
In these experiments, excited states are produced by absorption of one photon
and the vibrational spectrum of the molecule in this excited state is measured
by Raman spectroscopy with a second photon. This method is complementary to the
above techniques and will be especially useful for studying extremely large
distortions and metastable intermediates. The goal of the three groups of
experiments is the unified understanding of excited state obital
characteristics, potential surface displacements, and excited state geometries
of organometallics.