* 8806676
* Symposium on Sex Attraction, Mating Behavior, and           Insemination in Crustacea; San Francisco, California;       December 1988
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1989
* Joel Martin, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/1989
* USD 7,245.00

Drs. Raymond Bauer and Joel Martin have organized a symposium on the
reproductive biology of the Crustacea, scheduled for the December 1988 meeting
of the American Society of Zoologists (ASZ). The three major themes of the
symposium are 1) the chemical, visual, and acoustic mechanisms used by
crustaceans for attracting mates, 2) courting and mating behavior, and 3) the
morphological variation and functional considerations of mating structures.
Research on these phenomena has accelerated in the past decade, and the proposed
symposium will be the first attempt to integrate them. A synthesis of these
areas would illuminate the evolutionary role of mate selection, reproductive
structures and mating behavior. The symposium is being cosponsored by the
Invertebrate Zoology Division of the ASZ and by the Crustacean Society. The day-
long symposium will include 12 invited speakers and several sessions of
contributed technical presentations. The organizers plan to publish a
proceedings volume of corresponding manuscripts. The proposed symposium and
proceedings volume have important potential impact on a number of areas.
Researchers on other arthropod groups, such as the insects, will gain insight
into the larger questions of evolution of reproductive systems. Ecologists will
gain valuable new data on population and reproductive biology of a diversity of
crustaceans, which are commonly used environmental indicators. Most of all, the
symposium will set in motion a generation of highly integrative research on
evolution, reproductive biology, and mating behavior.