* 8806691
* Labile Dissolved Organic Matter In Riverine Saltmarsh       Estuaries: Origins and Biological Utilization
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1992
* Brian Fry, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 07/31/1992
* USD 910,729.00

The biological utilization will be measured and the origins will be identified
for dissolved organic matter (DOM) fueling microbial metabolism in riverine
saltmarsh estuaries. Because most heterotrophic activity in estuaries is
bacterial in origin, this research will focus on sources of DOM used by bacteria
in order to elucidate a major pathway of energy use in coastal ecosystems.
Stable isotope signals will be utilized to identify the ultimate source of DOM
used by bacteria, tracing organic matter flow from riverine, saltmarsh, and
phytoplankton sources of DOM that have distinct stable isotopic compositions. To
trace DOM use, a bioassay has been developed that involves growth of natural
bacteria in filtered water coupled with subsequent determination of the delta
13C value of bacterial biomass, and in some cases, delta 15N. The isotopic
measurements will indicate the source of DOM utilized. Bacterial growth rates
and yields in the bioassay indicate the nutritional quality and quantity of the
labile substrate source. Experiments will be extended throughout an annual cycle
in the Parker River of northern Massachusetts to determine the isotopic
composition of estuarine DOM that is ultimately derived from phytoplankton,
Spartina, and upland plants, and to document the relationships between these
sources of organic matter and bacterial growth via stable isotopic tracer
measurements. Additional experiments will be conducted in a broad suite of other
estuarine systems with substantially different presumptive sources of organic
carbon in order to broaden the comparison and generalize the research results.
The research group for this project is excellent. Facilities for the research
are first class. Productive collaborations will be pursued. Practically, the
research will provide information pertinent to the understanding of biological
productivity of estuaries. Such estuaries are often characterized is the fragile
nurseries for the commercial fishing industry.