* 8806594
* Spectroscopic Studies of O-Type and Wolf-Rayet Stars
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Peter Conti, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* minette wilson
* 04/30/1991
* USD 297,600.00

The investigators plan a systematic program of spectroscopy and photometry of O,
B, and WR (Wolf-Rayet) stars in the Magellanic Cloud. The goal is to identify,
classify, and analyze the spectra of these hot stars to determine their numbers,
luminosities, effective temperatures, and other stellar parameters. The results
will inform us about the evolution of such hot stars and help make correct
interpretations of distant galaxies where individual stars are not resolved.
Selected observations will extend this investigation to other galaxies of the
Local Group. The hottest stars in our Galaxy are important because their
formation and their astronomically almost immediate violent deaths stir up our
Galaxy, facilitate formation of ordinary stars like the Sun, and contribute
heavy elements that are later used in other stars and in planets. Very hot stars
are also among the brightest signposts expected to be useful for understanding
distant galaxies, but it is not yet known whether those stars are really the
same in distant galaxies and in our Galaxy. Conti and Garmany are exploring the
very hot stars in the nearest galaxies, specifically in the Magellanic Clouds,
both to learn more about such stars and to help interpret observations of
distant galaxies. They will use a new and very efficient spectrograph at the
Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile.