* 8806256
* Development of Mathematical Models and Control Strategies   for Solid State Device Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Isaac Trachtenberg, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/1991
* USD 297,866.00

Low pressure, nonequilibrium, electric discharge (plasma) processes are used in
the microelectronics industry to deposit and etch thin films. Plasma enhanced
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) enables film deposition at low temperatures and
can provide new materials with special material and electronic properties.
Plasma etching is presently used for etching of masking materials, silicon,
silicon-containing materials, compound semiconductors, and metals. In the
production of a typical microchip, ten or more steps may involve plasma etching.
In this industry, processing is rarely automated to a high degree. Real- time
monitoring and control could aid in exploiting the fine geometry transfer
available in plasma etching as well as increase process yields by introducing
dynamic treatment of process variables. The PIs plan a comprehensive study of
mathematical models and process control strategies for plasma etching, reactive
ion etching and CVD. Plasma deposition and etch rates are affected by a large
number of process variables including gas composition, pressure, temperature,
reactor geometry, electric discharge frequency, and power. To model and develop
control strategies for such systems both theoretical and experimental studies
are planned. A research etcher utilizing a radial flow configuration with
analytical systems and data acquisition has already been constructed and the PIs
plan to construct laboratory-scale CVD apparatus. Based on experimental results,
physico-chemical models will be developed and verified followed by the
formulation and implementation of both dynamic and steady state control
strategies.