* 8806627
* Collective Phenomena in Highly Correlated Systems:  Quantum Hall Effect and Planar Antiferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Edward Rezayi, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1992
* USD 81,520.00

Numerical work is proposed to help resolve outstanding problems in the
fractionally quantized Hall states of two-dimensional electrons in strong
magnetic fields. Such states are realized in semiconductor MOSFETS and
hetrostructure devices which, apart from applied perspective, are valuable
testing grounds for the understanding of physical phenomena in the extreme
quantum limit where cooperative effects occur. In particular, the project
addresses questions on: the off-diagonal long range correlations; the reversed
spin excitations and their importance to even denominator rational Landau-level
occupations; the approach to the classical limit of a Wigner crystal; and, the
role of disorder in degradation of the fractional quantum Hall states. Also
proposed is a finite-size study of planar antiferromagnets on both square and
triangular lattices. The square lattice systems are realized in the oxygen-
copper layers of high temperature superconductors and are deemed important to
the ultimate understanding of superconducting mechanism. Detailed studies of the
ground state and the excitation spectrum plus the effect and the behavior of
holes in the frustrated model with next-neighbor antiferromagnetic coupling have
been proposed. A parallel study of the excitation spectrum of the triangular
antiferromagnet where very strong quantum fluctuation effects are also present
will be carried out.