* 8806202
* Pattern and Scale in Disturbance-Mediated Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Simon Levin, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 01/31/1992
* USD 198,930.00

>>>This project will involve the application of descriptors ofspatial and
temporal patterns in the interpretation of theheterogeneous dynamics of
disturbance>.>influenced systems. First,the properties of a range of standard
and less common patterndescriptors will be explored theoretically, through
computersimulations of a general model and a number of more specializedmodels.
The descriptors to be used include semivariance,spectral analysis and fractals.
Next, the descriptors will beapplied to a well>.>developed data set for the
serpentine grass>.>land at Jasper Ridge, California. The goal in this case is
thedevelopment of models that can describe vegetation pattern atJasper Ridge and
other disturbance>.>influenced sites. Finally,the models will be tested for tree
communities of Barro ColoradoIsland, Panama, an experimental field in central
Illinois, andthe Duke Forest. The long>.>term goal for these pattern analysis
exercises is toimprove our ability to interpret landscape patterns and
theircauses. Ultimately, it will be important to explore the effectsof biotic
patterning on ecosystem processes includingbiogeochemical cycling. Dr. Levin is
a leader in the field of pattern analysis inecology. The cooperation between
Levin and Dr. Mooney, andempiricist in charge of the Jasper Ridge project, must
beconsidered a strong point of this proposal. This institutionalsupport for this
research in excellent.