* 8806960
* Enzymatic Reactions Involved in Nucleic Acid Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Jerard Hurwitz, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1991
* USD 338,000.00

The P.I. plans to study the splicing of pre mRNAs carried out by HeLa nuclear
preparations. This project will focus on the separation and charaterization of
proteins and the U-rich RNAs that are involved in this process. He will continue
to study the interaction of SnRNPs with pre-mRNA as well as auxiliary activities
that are directly involved in splicing or contribute to the specificity of this
system. He specifically plans to examine the synthesis of SnRNPs from RNA and
proteins that constitute these particles. For this purpose, he plans to use
labeled RNAs snythesized from cloned DNA sequences that code for the U-rich
RNAs. The proteins that interact with these RNAs will also be isolated from HeLa
cells. The goal of this approach is to reconstitute SnRNPs and to study their
role in the splicing of pre-mRNAs in higher eukaryotes. The P.I. also proposes
to examine the replication of bovine papilloma virus with the goal of
determining how the replication of this DNA is regulated by the host cell cycle.
He has initiated studies on the replication of this DNA by cell-free extracts
from mouse cells carrrying a BPV plasmid. Significance: In recent years it has
been learned that ribonucleic acid (RNA) as well as proteins can act as
catalysts (enzymes) of metabolic reactions. In the former case the reactions
catalyzed have been restricted to those splicing out pieces of the RNA
transcipts from gene to form a "messenger" RNA of reduced size. The applicant
proposes to continue his studies of the mechanism by which these RNA catalyzst
are put together.