* 8806221
* Engineering Research Equipment:  High Pressure Technology inNoncatalytic Reaction Engineering Problems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Vladimir Hlavacek, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/1989
* USD 70,000.00

This equipment grant is for the purchase of a high volume, high temperature,
medium pressure (200 atm) unit in which the PI will produce advanced ceramic
materials. Simultaneously, General Electric is donating several small volume,
high temperature, high pressure (80,000 atm) units to this research group thus
establishing a viable core of equipment for the study of optimal reaction
conditions needed for the manufacture of these materials. SUNY-Buffalo is
providing additional space to the PI to enhance the overall effort and make this
a world-class experimental facility. Advanced ceramics are differentiated from
traditional ceramics by the specialized properties they posses as well as by the
sophisticated processing they require. Some examples of advanced ceramic
materials are silicon nitride (Si3N4), silicon carbide (SiC) and aluminum
nitride (AlN) and they might have many uses for example as heat - and wear-
resistant parts to electronic and optical devices. The PI has developed a new
concept for high-temperature, high-pressure, self-propagating simultaneous
synthesis and sintering in a single reactor in a very short period of time
utilizing the liberation of heat by the strongly exothermic reactions involved.
He is also looking at a new concept for bonding between different ceramic
materials or ceramics and metals, specifically bonding silicon nitride, aluminum
oxide and ceramic materials to molybdenum and stainless steel. This specific
apparatus will be used for samples of larger dimensions (e.g. 6" x 6" x 2") such
as welding of TiB2 and SiC tubes, welding to Mo sheets, combustion of Si powder
in N2, etc.