* 8806539
* Systematics, Ontogeny, Osteology and Historical             Biogeography of Paddlefishes (Chondrostei:  Polyodontidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1991
* William Bemis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1991
* USD 128,680.00

Despite the small size of this family of fishes, the paddlefishes or
Polyodontidae are of great interest to comparative anatomists and
paelontologists. The two living species occur in the Yangtze river of China and
in the Mississippi, and several fossil taxa are known from western North
America. Drs. Bemis and Grande are studying the anatomy of the living and fossil
species as well as the ontogeny of the living forms, to determine their
phylogeny and historical biogeography. They are focusing on three major topics:
1. The evolutionary relationships among fossil and living paddlefishes and their
significance for studies of other ray-finned fishes; 2. The origin of extreme
anatomical specializations, as represented by modifications for filter feeding
and elaboration of electoreceptors; and 3. The extraordinary disjunct
distribution of paddlefishes in North America and China. Three practical factors
make the study possible and timely: 1. Recent collecting efforts in Wyoming have
produced a series of unusually well-preserved fossil paddlefishes; 2. A new
fossil species from Montana has become available for analysis; and 3. Methods
developed by public fish hatcheries for the culture of paddlefish allow the
study of large series of developmental stages. Results from this comprehensive
comparative anatomical study of living and fossil forms will improve
understanding of the evolutionary history of ray-finned fishes in general and of
the peculiar paddlefishes in particular.