* 8806238
* Prehistoric Political Economy in Mesoamerica's Northern     Periphery
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1992
* Ben Nelson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1992
* USD 76,951.00

The site of La Quemada located in the Malpaso valley of Mexico has been known
to archaeologists for many years because of its large scale architecture, its
system of associated roads, and its associated "ball court" which indicates
major ceremonial activities. The site has also interested archaeologists because
of its unusual location, well North of the Valley of Mexico where most large
sites from this time period are situated. However, surprisingly little is known
about the site and little excavation has been conducted there. Dr. Nelson and
his collaborator, Mexican archaeologist Peter Jimenez, will lead a team and
conduct one season of research at La Quemada. They will produce a detailed map,
conduct test excavations in trash middens to recover cultural material, excavate
in the ceremonial ball court, and analyze the materials obtained. The data thus
collected should permit a detailed chronology to be established. It should also
be possible, through analysis in the differences between middens and grave
items, to determine the degree of social stratification at the site. Finally,
through study of ceramics and chemical analysis of turquoise, the investigators
will determine the relations between La Quemada and contemporary sites both in
the Valley of Mexico and the U.S. Southwest. This will permit archaeologists to
fit the site into a broader regional picture and to elucidate the relationships
between Middle America and the Southwest U.S. In recent years archaeological
focus has shifted from a site specific to a more regional perspective, and
researchers have come to realize that the development of social complexity is
closely tied to expanded areal networks. Through study of what may be a northern
"outpost" or "outlier", Dr. Nelson and his colleagues should gain new insight
into the rise of Middle American civilization.