* 8806731
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential Equations, Probability, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Louis Nirenberg, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1991
* USD 1,444,135.00

Broad areas of mathematical analysis will be covered by work to be done. The
central theme is partial differential equations, both theory and applications.
In addressing a variety of a fundamental questions techniques will be employed
from probability, topology, calculus of variation and geometry. The equations
arise from diverse sources such as mathematical physics, liquid crystals, nerve
conduction, elasticity and fluid dynamics. Among the specific topics addressed
are questions concerning fully nonlinear elliptic equations. Typical of these is
the Monge-Ampere equation. In contrast to classical partial differential
equations, the fully nonlinear ones are not solvable in all domains. To date,
strictly convex domains have provided satisfactory solutions, but a
determination of natural conditions on domains for solvability is not yet on the
horizon. Recent progress in the use of variational methods on nonlinear problems
has produced important information regarding the existence of time-periodic
solutions in vibration problems. Using index concepts it has been possible to
determine multiple solutions of minimal period. The index concept will be
studied further in the context of general nonlinear wave equations to find
analogous period solutions of minimal period. The appearance of theta functions
in the theory of integrable Hamiltonian systems of differential equations such
as the Toda lattice and Korteweg - deVries equations suggests that analogous
functions and geometry lies behind most of the classical infinite systems.
Efforts in several specific cases have borne fruit in the establishment of a
complete apparatus of curves, divisors, differentials, Abel sums etc. in each
case. Further work will continue along these lines. Other work will focus on
similarity of nonlinear flows for partial differential equations, on the failure
of scattering in Burger's equation and on resonance of continuous spectra. The
conclusions of Hartman's major result on similarity of solutions of ordinary
differential equations to solutions of linear equations do not apply when one
goes over to infinite systems, leaving many important questions unanswered at
this time.