* 8806688
* RUI/ROW: Life Stage Associated Geographic Variation in an Insect
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Carol Pappas, Peru State College
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/1991
* USD 75,492.00

Members of the genus Culicoides are biting flies known to transmit viral
diseases in some parts of the world. Dr. Carol Pappas of Peru State College in
Nebraska proposes a study of the morphological variability of several species of
the genus in North America. These species were chosen because of their
preference for tree-hole habitats, which can be characterised in terms of
height, moisture content, and ambient environment. By characterising both the
morphological variation in local populations and the associated environment, Dr.
Pappas will build a database that will facilitate a modern systematic treatment
of the group as a whole. Data acquisition will be accomplished with a
microcomputer-based image analysis system. In addition, the project will analyze
the degree to which geographically peripheral or ecologically marginal
populations vary, relative to central populations. The "central-peripheral
variation hypothesis" is of wide interest throughout ecology and evolutionary
biology. This research effort will provide a uniquely detailed and thorough case
study of this phenomenon. The proposal was submitted under two NSF Cross
Directorate activities: Research at Undergraduate Institutions and Research
Opportunities for Women. The proposal will instruct undergraduates in the entire
research process, from sampling design, through the use of a state-of-the-art
morphometrics system, to the statistical analysis and interpretation of results.
The project will also complete Dr. Pappas' return to research following a
family-related interruption.