* 8806601
* Carbon and Nitrogen Cycling in the Main Wetland Habitats    within Louisiana's Barataria Basin
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Ronald DeLaune, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 08/31/1990
* USD 59,928.00

The major focus of this one.year research period will be a synthesis of
previously collected data on carbon and nitrogen cycling in three wetland
habitats of the Barataria Basin, Louisiana . the freshwater upper basin, the
brackish middle basin and the saline lower basin. In addition to the synthesis
of extant data, a small field research effort will do two things: 1) determine
the importance of fertilizers and sewage as nitrogen sources to Barataria Basin;
and 2) determine the amount of a denitrification product, N.2, that is trapped
in the sediments. The synthesis will include modeling at two hierarchical
levels; detailed process level models for each of the three major habitats in
the basin, and models that are less detailed, but link the three major habitats.
The models will be validated with extant and newly collected field data that
will not have been used in model development. Newly collected field data will
result from state.of.the.art measurement technologies. For example, stable
isotope ratios of nitrogen (.1.5N/.1.4N) will be used to distinguish fertilizer
and sewage nitrogen sources from each other. The significance of this research
is that it will provide important basic information on the functioning of one of
our country's major wetland ecosystems. Data on the carbon and nitrogen cycles
and how humankind is changing them are necessary if we are going to wisely
manage this valuable wetland resource. Dr. Patrick and his colleagues at
Louisiana State University have productive records in wetlands research. The
institutional support available to them is of very high quality,