* 8806412
* LTREB:  Competition and Plant Community Structure Along     Experimental Gradients of Disturbance and Nitrogen
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1993
* G. David Tilman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1993
* USD 233,681.00

In spite of a general concensus that nutrients, disturbance and competition are
the most important factors controlling plant community structure, there is
considerable controversy over the relative importance and the modes of action of
these factors. This controversy can only be resolved through experiments that
simultaneously manipulate all these variables. This has never been done. The
objectives of this work are 1) to examine the effects of nutrients and
disturbance on plant community structure in a full factorial experiment that
will allow both their interactive and independent effects to be examined; and 2)
to investigate the role of both above and below ground competition in shaping
community structure in a range of nutrient and disturbance regimes. A factorial
nutrient and disturbance experiment will be constructed in a well-studied old
field at Cedar Creek Natural History Area in Minnesota. The limiting nutrient
(nitrogen) and the most important disturbance (gopher mounds) in this field will
be applied for five years to allow the communities to approach equilibrium under
the experimental treatments. The effects of treatments on soil, light and the
plant community will be measured annually. After the communities have had three
years to equilibrate, we will transplant four "target" species into the
gradients and use removal experiments to test whether competitive hierarchies
and competition intensity vary with nutrients and disturbance. The results of
this experiment will allow explicit tests of current, divergent hypotheses about
the interactions of nutrients, disturbance and competition in shaping community
structure.