* 8806364
* Environmental Radio Noise Generated by Cities and Towns
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1990
* George Swenson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomas E. Gergely
* 01/31/1990
* USD 31,300.00

Radio emission generated by human activity can be classified as intentional and
unintentional. The former category includes transmitters, radars, and numerous
other devices and is the subject of an extensive body of regulations. Many other
devices, such as digital computers, electric switches, and radio and television
receivers, generate radio emissions as a byproduct of their activity. Still
other devices, such as cordless telephones, garage door openers, or home alarm
systems, do emit intentionally but presumably at fairly low levels. Both of
these categories of devices are only minimally regulated. Such low level radio
emissions constitute a major source of interference for radio astronomers and
other scientists, who are passive users of the spectrum, in detecting and
studying natural radio emissions. The aggregate effect of unintentional radio
emitters is to raise the natural noise floor level. This effect interferes not
only with passive users of the spectrum but also with a number of other
scientific activities which make use of low level radio signals, such as
wildlife tracking. That the noise floor has already been raised considerably
near major population centers has important implications. Airline pilots, for
example, find it increasingly difficult to listen to instructions as they near
major population centers. Knowledge of the noise level due to unintentional
radiators is important for a number of reasons, such as the planning of
interference prevention strategies, prediction of future trends, and
documentation of the invasion of such devices into the passive bands allocated
to radio astronomy. Measurements are difficult to carry out, however, and are
practically nonexistent, except for a few frequency bands of interest to special
groups. The Principal Investigator (PI) will obtain such measurements from
aircraft, at frequencies allocated to radio astronomy, within the 30-3,000 MHz
range, approximately. The PI obtained and published a similar, but less
sophisticated, set of measurements in 1972. No other measurements exist to
indicate the time evolution of this important activity. The research is of the
kind that is fundamental to preserve a sound scientific environment. The PI is
very experienced and has a proven track record. An additional strong point is
that most work will be carried out by a graduate student. Few researchers are
working in this important area and the addition of trained manpower is highly
desirable.//