* 8806581
* Experimental Evaluation of Microbial Biomass and Production in Limnetic Food Webs Dominated by Planktivorous Fish
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1989
* William Shelton, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 06/30/1989
* USD 54,700.00

This research will determine how microbial biomass and production (bacteria,
algae less than 5 um in diameter, and protozoa) respond to changes in the
remainder of the limnetic food web brought about by planktivorous fish.
Experiments will be conducted in 18 large outdoor tanks to compare the effects
of three planktivorous fish (Dorosoma cepedianum, Tilapia aurea and Menidia
beryllina) on microbial and other components of the limnetic food web. Because
these fish have different selectivities on zooplankton and phytoplankton, we
expect significant indirect responses of microbial biomass and production, and
in the transfer of microbial production to other food web components.
Experiments will be conducted in different seasons to compare fish effects on
plankton communities representative of different weather regimes. During each
tank experiment, grazing rates of protozoa on bacteria and algae, and grazing
rates of metazoan zooplankton on bacteria, algae, and protozoawill be determined
by measuring ingestion of radioisotope-labelled bacteria and algae by protozoa
and metazoan plankton. The grazing impact of planktivorous fish on protozoa will
be measured in short-term feeding trials associated with each tank experiment.
These experiments provide an integrated experimental approach to the
determination of the role of the microbial loop in planktonic food webs.