* 8807826
* Comparative Biogeochemistry of Soil Humic Substances in     Forested Watersheds
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Howard Patterson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 07/31/1991
* USD 140,000.00

> The patterns of variation in soil humic substances in forests will be
investigated and equilibrium and kinetic models that predict the behavior of
humics in these systems will be developed. More specifically the goals of the
research are to: 1) identify the analytical methods that provide the best
discrimination among soil humic samples; 2) quantify the range of chemical and
functional variation in soil humics at the local and interregional scales; 3)
determine how the variation is related to environmental differences in plant
species composition, soil drainage, season, and other soil physical.chemical
parameters; and 4) develop a quantitative model that accounts for the chemical
behavior of humic substances in two study watersheds. The two watersheds to be
studied are the Big Moose/Pancake.Hall Creek in the Adirondacks of New York and
the Camp Branch watershed in the Cumberland Plateau of Tennessee. They provide
contrasting combinations of forest cover, soil orders, and climate. The
hydrologic transport and major ion chemistry have been well studied and so the
results of the humic acid study can be integrated into a well understood
biogeochemical framework. State>.>of>.>the>.>art empirical and modeling
techniques will be used in the humic acid research. For example, XAD>.>8
adsorption chromatography will be used to isolate hydrophobic and hydrophilic
acids from material samples. The ILWAS model, a geochemical model recently
developed for acid rain research, will form the basis for representing
ecosystem>.>level behavior of humic substances. The significance of this
research is related to the fact that many of the key reactions and processes
affecting the biogeochemical behavior of elements are controlled by soil humic
substances. For example, soluble organic acids, including humic and fulvic acids
exert a major influence on the rates and stoichiometries of mineral weathering,
phosphorus and nutrientcation availability, and leaching in surface soil
horizons. This research should further our understanding of factors controlling
biogeochemical cycling in forests and provide an enlarged scientific management
basis for these systems. Dr. Cronan has a very good record of productivity in
research on forest soils. The institutional support available to him is
adequate.