* 8807867
* Realism and Scientific Instrumentation
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1988,01/31/1989
* Harold Brown, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 01/31/1989
* USD 7,660.00

There has been a long and as yet unresolved debate between realism and
instrumentalism in the philosophy of science. Realists of various stripes want
to argue that the theories of science are either true or are becoming closer and
closer approximations to the truth about how the world works. Realists, for
example, would argue that quarks really exist. Instrumentalists (anti-realists)
argue that it is impossible to know whether our theories are true. Rather, they
argue, the only valid point in our study of science is to see if the theories
work, i.e. whether they make correct predictions. They would argue that it is
impossible to know whether quarks exist, but they do serve as a good
"instrument" for predicting what will happen in certain experiments. Under this
grant, Dr. Brown is seeking to develop and defend a new version of scientific
realism that he calls "weak realism." Weak realism can be summarized in two
theses: (1) One aim of science is the development of theories that provide true
descriptions of features of the world; (2) Because of the growing variety and
sophistication of scientific instrumentation, our ability to pursue this goal
has been increasing. Weak realism stands in contrast to those antirealist views
which deny that the pursuit of truth is a legitimate scientific aim. Weak
realism also stands in contrast to other extant versions of scientific realism
since weak realism does not require that any current scientific theories be true
or approximately true, or that the entities postulated in these theories exist.
Still, the view that Dr. Brown calls "weak realism" is a considerably stronger
form of realism than others currently under debate. What is especially important
about this approach, in contrast to earlier efforts, is the emphasis on the role
of increasingly sophisticated instrumentation in the argumentative route to
realism. Dr. Brown will carefully examine in a way that philosophers of science
have not previous done the role of this highly complex instrumentation in the
development of contemporary scientific theories.