* 8807924
* Mathematical Sciences: The Degree of Regularity of          Quasiregular Mapping and Minima of Related NondifferentiableFunctions in the Calculus of Variations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Tadeusz Iwaniec, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1990
* USD 40,000.00

Work to be carried out on this project will focus on quasiconformal and
quasiregular mapping of Euclidean space. These mappings - (the distinction being
that quasiconformal maps are univalent) - arise in a number of analytical and
geometric contexts. They play important roles in our understanding of classes of
partial differential equations. The problems to be investigated are closely
related, motivated by both theoretical interest as well as by their
applicability to regularity theory for elliptic equations and estimates of
singular integrals. Quasiregular mappings are known to be solutions of n-
dimensional Beltrami systems of partial differential equations, which may have
discontinuous terms. One of the objectives of this work will be to find
minimizers for the total energy among suitable classes of these mappings. The
variational problems associated with this minimization arise in nonlinear
elastostatics. It has been recognized that the correct way of measuring the
degree of regularity of a quasiregular mapping as well as studying the mimima of
non-differentiable functionals is through the Holder exponent or by the exponent
of integrability of their derivatives. A second objective of this work will be
to identify the best exponents or at least describe the quantitative character
of the allowable exponents. Related work will seek to find sharp estimates for
two-dimensional Hilbert transforms and to examine the asymptotic behavior of the
power norms of the transform.