* 8807903
* Citizen Participation in America
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Sidney Verba, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/1991
* USD 511,227.00

Scholars have long been interested in who does and does not participate in the
voluntary social and political activities that are a fundamental part of
American life. This study attends to this topic at a time in contemporary
society when individuals are more active and the ways in which they participate
have expanded considerably. Despite this heightened activity vast disparities
exist in the effectiveness with which certain groups - - the poor, racial and
ethnic minorities, women, immigrants - - are entering the participatory system.
Of central concern in this investigation is a focus on these groups in order to
understand better whose interests are represented and whose ignored by the major
social and political institutions. By analyzing the process by which some
citizens become active while others do not, the researchers may generate
practical knowledge for dealing with the gap between democratic ideals of equal
representation and reality. The investigators will undertake a carefully crafted
and comprehensive empirical study, one of the main purposes of which will be to
develop a data resource on participation in American life. In order to obtain a
representative sample of politically active respondents, the investigators will
conduct a telephone screener survey of approximately ten minutes in length with
15,000 respondents. This will be followed by a sixty minute face-to-face
interview with 2,000 respondents that is weighted toward activists. This
research design will allow the researchers to screen for, and interview, enough
minorities and highly active participators to achieve maximum reliability and
validity of results. The output of this research will yield important findings
about who participates in political activities and should provide the most
detailed description of American political behavior ever available. The
investigation will also produce a much more theoretical and nuanced picture of
American political and voluntary activity.