* 8807478
* Mathematical Sciences: Models for the Spread of HIV;        Equations with Piecewise Continuous Argument; Dynamics of   Discretizations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Kenneth Cooke, Pomona College
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1991
* USD 135,466.00

This project will focus on three scientific areas. The first concerns
mathematical analysis of epidemiological models for the spread of HIV (human
immunodeficiency virus). Mathematical models for the spread of the virus will be
developed and evaluated. The models will be based on dividing the population
into groups according to criteria such as sex, sexual behavior and socioeconomic
categories. They will be represented in terms of ordinary and delay-differential
equations. Stability and bifurcation phenomenon will be analyzed, simulations
performed and comparisons made among the predictions of the different models. A
second line of investigation concerns differential equations with piecewise
continuous delays. Such equations arise in a number of physical contexts
governed by memory effects. An objective of this work is to develop theory and
applications of initial and boundary-value problems. Conditions for stability
will be sought; periodic and oscillation phenomena will be studied for equations
with bounded and unbounded delay. General functional differential equations of
alternating type will also be considered. Work will also be done investigating
Liapunov functions and the qualitative behavior of discretizations. This
research will focus on stability questions related to nonlinear difference
equations using an extension of Liapunov's direct method and the invariance
principle. The relation between the asymptotic dynamics of classes of
differential equations and the dynamics of discretized and semidiscretized
versions of these equations will be explored. Applications to population
dynamics and chemical kinetics will be sought.