* 8807406
* Investigatio of Silica Fouling and Its Prevention by        Magnetic Devices: REU Supplement
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1992
* Shih Chan, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 06/30/1992
* USD 232,202.00

The first area of this proposed research addresses the fundamentals of silica
fouling. It includes research on the chemical kinetics of silica fouling, the
measurement of transient local and overall fouling thermal resistance on a heat
exchanger surface and the analytical modeling of the solubility and silica
fouling of brines containing multi-component dissolved salts. The other major
subject of research pertains to silica fouling prevention by magnetic means.
Magnetic effects on silica fouling will be investigated by an array of
alternative means. They include optical transmission, solubility,
polymerization, silica scale formation on heat exchanger surface and direct
measurement of in-situ residual magnetization in brines, all aiming to reveal
basic mechanism and effectiveness of magnetic anti- scale devices. Silica is an
abundant material in nature and exists in large amounts in underground
geothermal reservoirs. When the underground water is utilized, as in geothermal
power systems, the dissolved silica will precipitate out and deposit on heat
exchanger surfaces, forming a thermal insulating fouling layer and reducing the
overall heat exchanger efficiency with severe economical and technical
consequences. The present research aims to study under what conditions silica
fouling will occur and why it does occur. The other objective is to investigate
the effectiveness of silica fouling prevention by anti-scale magnetic field
devices. The success of the proposed research will greatly improve the
efficiency of heat exchangers involving underground water and will expedite a
greater utilization worldwide of geothermal energy for power generation.