* 8807552
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1988,05/31/1992
* SAM PEARSALL, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/1992
* USD 15,850.00

Nature reserves have been recognized as an important means of preserving a
diverse range of biological species, but such protected areas have generally
been selected on a site-by-site basis. Ecologists and biogeographers have a
growing sense that ecological sustainability and adaptability also are important
criteria that must be met to maximize the benefits of reserves, and that a
complementary set of reserves (rather than an unrelated collection of
independent sites) offers the greatest potential for preserving the largest
number and broadest range of plant and animal species. This doctoral
dissertation research project will test the hypothesis that a system of nature
reserves, which is systematically selected using prevailing principles of
landscape ecology and conservation biology, will be more effective in preserving
biological species than will traditional means of selecting reserves one at a
time. The hypothesis will be tested through development of a small-scale
geographic information system (GIS) into which data for a case study area on two
large islands in Western Samoa will be loaded. These data on vegetation,
animals, soils, other physical characteristics, human features, and land
ownership will be analyzed to determine a set of core sites and connecting
corridors on each island to constitute the bases of systems of nature reserves.
The resulted sets of reserves will be systematically compared with each other,
with randomly generated hypothetical networks, and with networks based on
research by other scholars. These analyses then will provide the basis for
development of general geographic models to describe the locales that should be
included in a system of reserves that best preserves flora and fauna. The
practical results of this research will include the development of a specific
plan for nature reserves for possible implementation by the Western Samoan
government. Of far greater long- term benefit, however, is the specification of
a general geographic model for species preservation through a network of nature
reserves. This model can be simulated for other sites using independent data in
order to determine its generalizability, therefore providing a broader base of
understanding of how systems of nature reserves can alter rates of change among
plant and animal species.