* 8807518
* Research Initiation:  Projective Methods for Global         Optimization of Quadratic Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Bahman Kalantari, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1991
* USD 51,728.00

It is proposed to study extensions of Karmarkar's algorithm to global
optimization of quadratic programs. Quadratic Feasibility over Simplex (QFS)
refers to the problem of determining if a given quadratic form attains the value
of zero over a simplex. This problem is fundamental to quadratic programming.
Our feasibility algorithm, which is essentially an algorithm for QFS with a
positive semidefinite form, consists of repeating the following steps:
calculation of a "good" descent direction for an appropriately defined potential
(barrier) function based on optimization over a circumscribing sphere, a line
search for the potential function, and centralization using a projective
transformation. It is proposed to generalize this approach to the indefinite
case. Despite the NP-hardness of the indefinite case, the convergence of this
approach in general for some special cases (even in worst-case exponential time)
would result in an alternate algorithm for nonconvex programming which is
expected to be competitive with those which, in the worst-case, are of
exponential time and space complexity. Having studied convergence, it is planned
to investigate computational approaches for such a procedure. As an alternate
method for the calculation of descent direction, feasible direction methods with
projective transformation will be investigated. It is also planned to study the
effectiveness of projective algorithms within our earlier methods for nonconvex
quadratic programs which require repeated application of a linear or convex
quadratic programming algorithm. Finally, the implementation of the resulting
algorithms using parallel architectures, such as NCUBE10 or ETA10
supercomputers, is planned.