* 8807915
* Evaluation of Intergranular Liquid Phase Distribution       and Its Relationship to Hot Cracking
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Raymond Thompson, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 01/31/1992
* USD 351,000.00

The experimental plan is to characterize the grain boundary chemistry of a
series of Nb-bearing nickel alloys and then melt and resolidify these boundaries
using a rapid heating and cooling cycle typical of a tungsten-arc weld. The
liquid chemistry, liquid phase distribution (LPD), and volume fraction of liquid
will be determined at selected temperatures during heating and cooling. The
solidification behavior of the liquid will be characterized in terms of its
eutectic or solidus temperature and its terminal solidification products,
typically a Laves phase. The deviation of this behavior from equilibrium will be
determined by comparison to isothermal treatments. The hot cracking
susceptibility will be determined by measuring the nil ductility temperature
using a hot ductility test. The proposed research will provide information on
several fundamental and technical issues. It will show how the LPD evolves
during the nonequilibrium stage cooling and how the thermal cycle dictates the
LPD through its control of diffusion. It will identify the role of grain
boundary chemistry on intergranular liquid phase chemistry, liquid phase volume
fraction, and LPD. It will also show the correlation of these to intergranular
hot cracking in nickel alloys such as 718, a critical material in gas turbine
jet engines.