* 8807894
* Reactions to Receiving and Providing Aid in Two Types of    Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1989
* Margaret Clark, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 12/31/1989
* USD 67,343.00

Coming to understand the processes involved in giving and accepting aid is
central to understanding social relationships. To date considerable literature
has accumulated identifying determinants of whether and when a person will give
aid to another and a smaller amount has accumulated identifying determinants of
people's reactions to receiving aid. However, there are notable gaps in this
literature. Almost no research exists aimed at identifying how potential donors
of aid react to having provided (or having failed to provide) aid. Moreover,
what research does exist on reactions to receiving and to providing aid has
failed to consider how the type of relationship that exists or is desired
between the donor and the recipient might mediate reactions to receiving and to
having provided help. This research will begin to fill in these gaps. Two
studies will examine reactions to receiving aid. In the first, people will be
led to expect either a "communal" relationship (e.g. a friendship) or an
"exchange relationship (e.g. a business-like relationship) with a potential
donor of aid. Then they will or will not receive aid. Finally their mood states
and self- evaluations will be assessed. In the second, people who naturally vary
in their chronic levels of communal and exchange orientation toward
relationships will either receive aid or not. Then, as in the first study, their
mood and self-evaluations will be assessed. It is predicted that moods and self-
evaluations will improve as a result of receiving aid when a communal
relationship is desired or expected but will remain the same or even deteriorate
when an exchange relationship is desired or expected. The third and fourth
studies will assess reactions to having provided aid to another. In the third,
people will be led to expect either a communal or an exhange relationship with
another and they either will or will not be induced to provide aid to that
other. Then their mood states and self-evaluations will be assessed. In the
fourth, people who naturally vary in communal and exchange orientation will or
will not be induced provide aid to another. Then their moods and self-
evaluations will be assessed. It is expected that regardless of relationship
type people's self-evaluations will improve as a result of having helped
another. However, moods are expected to improve only if a communal relationship
is expected or desired. This work will expand our currently scarce knowledge of
reactions to receiving and providing aid. It should also reveal that expected
relationship type is an extremely important moderator of these reactions. The
latter contribution is viewed as very important since, although we have long
known that most help is given and received within the context of friendships and
family relationships (i.e. relationships that tend to be communal in nature),
most social psychological work on the helping process has focused on helping
that takes place between strangers. The research will also expand our knowledge
about relationship types and individual differences in relationship orientation-
areas of research that are just beginning to blossom. Finally, gaining an
understanding of what types of persons and what types of situations are
associatd with the most positive reations to providing and to receiving aid may
have a very practical payoff. In may better enable us to recruit volunteers for
helping projects as well as to better design ways of aiding the needy without
eliciting resentment.