* 8807542
* Cenozoic Sea-level and Glacial Variation in the Western     Ross Sea, Antarctica
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1990
* David Harwood, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 07/31/1990
* USD 41,600.00

Long-term research: Cenozoic sea-level and glacial variation in the western Ross
Sea, Antarctica. This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long
and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program is
designed to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research
abroad at research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide
opportunities for the conduct of joint research and the utilization of unique or
complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign
countries. Awards are selected on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to
the applicant's field of science, the prospective potential of the applicant for
professional growth, as well as criteria relevant to the furthering of
international cooperation in science and engineering. The program is
particularly directed to scientists and engineers who are embarking on their
research careers. The project is under the direction of Dr. David M. Harwood,
Byrd Polar Research Center Ohio State University Research Foundation, Columbus,
OH, in collaboration with Dr. Peter J. Barrett, Antarctic Research Centre,
Christchurch, New Zealand. The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as
appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents
allowance, if applicable, language training, if required, and a flat
administrative allowance of $250.00 for the U.S. home institution.