* 8807059
* Absorption Cross Sections and Primary Quantum Yields for Several Aliphatic Aldehydes and Ketones of Atmospheric Interest
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Jeffrey Joens, Florida International University
* Continuing grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1992
* USD 169,504.00

Photodissociation is the major sink for aldehydes and ketones in the troposphere
and is a primary source of free radicals which are important reactive
intermediates in the chemistry of other atmospheric constituents including ozone
and compounds that contribute to the formation of acid rain. The competition
between photodissociation and chemical reaction of aldehydes and ketones is an
important factor controlling tropospheric free radical concentrations.
Uncertainty in the absorption cross sections, quantum yields for
photodissociation, and primary photolysis products for aliphatic aldehydes and
ketones represents a significant source of error in models of tropospheric
chemistry. The proposed research is a systematic study of the spectral and
photochemical properties of aliphatic aldehydes and ketones. The gas phase
absorption spectra of these compounds in the wavelength region 200-400 nm will
be measured in nitrogen/oxygen gas mixtures as a function of temperature to
determine their absorption cross sections under conditions found in the
troposphere. Absorption spectra will also be measured in aqueous solution to
determine the cross sections for these compounds in atmospheric droplets. The
primary quantum yields for gas phase and aqueous phase photodissociation of
several of the compounds will be determined as a function of photolysis
wavelength, temperature, partial pressure of aldehyde or ketone and total
pressure (for gas phase measurements), and pH and dissolved oxygen concentration
(for aqueous phase measurements). The results from the research will clarify the
role of aliphatic aldehydes and ketones in the chemistry and photochemistry of
the troposphere.