* 8807881
* Collaborative Research: Plant Community Structure Across    Resource Gradients from Grassland to Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1991
* William Lauenroth, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 09/30/1991
* USD 309,567.00

A general synthesis of how patterns of constraint and system scaling vary among
ecosystems within different environmental regimes will be developed through
mathematical modeling. The search will be organized around three objectives: (1)
To synthesize existing data from a spectrum of ecosystems as represented by
various LTER sites, in particular, the gradient of sites across the North
American continent that includes the deciduous forest on the east through the
Konza LTER site in the tall-grass prairie to the Central Plains LTER site in the
short- grass prairie. This work will focus on the role of key environmental
drivers (insolation, temperature, moisture, nutrients, and disturbance regimes)
in structuring specific ecosystems. (2) To implement an integrated set of
computerized simulators which are sufficiently general that they may be applied
across this gradient. (3) To test model-generated hypotheses and predictions
against independent data representing ecosystems that were not involved in the
model development. The ecosystem-level phenomena of interest in this research
imply spatial scales as typically connoted by the term "landscape" or larger,
and decadal to centennial time scales. The emphasis on transitions between
ecosystem types implies an extension to spatial scales that are at least
regional, and ultimately continental, in extent. Four models, which are already
developed and well documented, will serve as the starting point for this
research: (1) the CENTURY model of carbon and nutrient dynamics; (2) the MAGIC
model of soil and water chemistry; (3) the FORET model of forest dynamics; and
(4) the STEPPE model of succession in semiarid grasslands. A principal task in
the research will bethe development of appropriate interfaces between these
models in the context of simulating the pattern in the continental scale
gradient. The significance of this research is that it will help us to develop a
modeling base in support of comparative ecosystem analysis among sites in the
LTER network and the development of ecosystem theory. The research will also
address the issue of how measurements made at small scales in space and time can
be extrapolated. Both the development of theory and an understanding of issues
of scale are essential to the development of sustainable management regimes for
the Earth's ecosystems. Drs. Shugart, and Lauenroth are leaders in the field of
ecological modeling. The institutional support available to them is superior.