* 8807952
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Phase Equilibrium andMolecular Thermodynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1989
* Stanley Sandler, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1989
* USD 25,100.00

This project provides funds for two different items of specialized research
equipment. The first includes various pieces of equipment to build a static
vapor-liquid equilibrium cell. This equipment would allow for the measurement of
vapor-liquid equilibrium in classes of mixtures, of both industrial and academic
importance, that are not currently possible at the University of Delaware. The
second item is a Sun Workstation for use in theoretical and modelling related to
phase equilibrium studies, as well as a gateway for use in supercomputer work.
Uniqueness/Innovation: The vapor-liquid equilibrium data to be obtained are for
new mixtures of interest in process modelling, developing and testing new
thermodynamic models, and determining the applicability of group contribution
methods. Current equipment restricts studies to mixtures whose relative
volatility is approximately ten or less. The new phase equilibrium equipment
would allow for a large extension of this, and, thus, allow for consideration of
many mixtures that cannot now be studied. Currently, the data obtained are being
used to determine new group contribution parameters and to test the industrially
important group contribution method. In addition, some data are used directly by
industry for example, by DuPont in the design of a process to make a new polymer
and by Chevron in reservoir simulation.