* 8807974
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  Characterization of    Liquid Crystals and Colloidal Semiconductor Particles by    Positron Annihilation
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Janos Fendler, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1990
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support a group of researchers at Syracuse University under the
direction of Prof. J. Fendler to carry out collaborative research with a similar
group at the Instituto National de Investigaciones Nucleares in Mexico City,
Mexico, under the direction of Prof L. A. Fucugauchi. Over the past several
years the collaborators have been successfully engaged in the preparation and
characterization of micelles, microemulsions, liquid crystals, vesicles and
polymerized vesicles. All of these molecular aggregates have a common theme in
that they mimic the functions of a biological membrane. For the proposed period
of collaboration, the researchers intend to pursue the investigation of membrane
mimetics using nuclear techniques with the long range goal of increasing our
understanding of the chemistry of biological membranes. The collaborators' work
has been characterized by its productivity, and mutual benefits. Vesicles and
polymerized vesicles have been prepared in the United States while
microemulsions and liquid crystals have been prepared and characterized in
Mexico. The structures and morphologies of the aggregates have been investigated
by the U.S. group using static and dynamic light scattering and intrinsic and
extrinsic spectroscopic methods. The Mexican group, on the other hand, has used
polarized light microscopy for the characterization of liquid crystals and is
experienced in the use of positron annihilation techniques to determine phase
changes in the different systems. The use of these techniques has allowed the
investigators to detect subtle and significant changes in surfactant
morphologies. Additionally, the proposed research has a significant potential
for application to enhanced oil recovery, controlled drug release, catalysis,
and the control of various chemical processes.