* 8807321
* Expedited Award for Novel Research:  Preparation of High Tc Superconductors Through Chemical Processing Involving       Microemulsions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Dinesh Shah, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1990
* USD 30,000.00

A novel technique for the production of uniform, ultrafine (~100), dense,
monodispersed superconducting ceramics is undertaken in this expedited award.
This method exploits the ability of single compartment water-in-oil
microemulsions to form a highly selective barrier between its exterior and
interior, thus creating a microvolume reactor in the emulsion microdroplets
space. By appropriate processing, coprecipitation of the mixed metal hydroxides
(precursors of the superconducting, ceramics) can be induced in the internal
region of these microemulsions only. A mixed metal chloride solution consisting
of precalculated ratios of Cu++, Cu+, Ba++, and Y+++ ions along with ~1 percent
w/w dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine will be sonicated at slightly above the
lipid gel-liquid phase transition temperature to encapsulate some of the metal
and chloride ions inside the water-in-oil microemulsion. This collaborative
project with the University of Rhode Island represents the first attempt at
using single compartment vesicles for coprecipitation of metal hydroxides which
are precursors for the recently discovered high temperature superconducting
ceramics. The critical transition temperature as well as the critical magnetic
field strength are intimately related to the stoichiometry and composition of
the ceramic phase. These can be varied easily in the proposed technique by
changing the ratio of the cations in the original solution. In contrast,
however, the critical current density depends upon the processing steps used to
obtain the final product. By producing ultrafine, dense and uniform particles,
it is expected that higher critical current density will be obtained than that
presently available with sintered superconducting ceramics.