* 8807784
* Empathy: Conceptualization, Socialization and Correlates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1993
* Nancy Eisenberg, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 02/28/1993
* USD 281,859.00

Many mental health professionals and social scientists have claimed that
empathy plays an important role in social and moral life--that the individual
who feels another's distress or feels sympathy for a distressed or needy other
will be more likely to assist the distressed person and less likely to harm
him/her. At the present time, however, the empirical research is not entirely
supportive of these assumptions. This failure may be due in part to the use of
some indices of empathy that have questionable validity. Moreover, very little
is known about how individuals develop a predisposition to respond
sympathetically. Thus, the purposes of the present research are to use multiple
methods to assess and differentiate various modes of affective responding that
relate to empathy and sympathy and to examine the socialization antecedants of
empathic responding. The investigators will examine age- related changes in the
expression of empathy/sympathy and how the various indices of empathy relate to
prosocial behavior. Specifically, in studies with people aged 4-5 years to
adulthood, three types of measures of emotional responding will be used: self-
report measures (e.g., verbal or written responses to specific questions),
changes in facial expressions, and changes in physiological responsiveness
(i.e., changes in heart rate and skin conductance). Facial and physiological
indices are included because they may be less influenced than self report
indices by individuals' conscious desire to present themselves in a positive
light, and because young children may have difficulty reporting their emotional
reactions. Moreover, these measures will be used in settings that are more
naturalistic than those laboratory settings used in past research. Finally, the
investigators will examine parental socialization practices with regard to
emotionality (i.e., how parents deal with emotions in the home, how they talk
about emotions, and how they handle their children's expression of emotions) and
the relation of these practices to children's emotional responsiveness. Thus,
this research program has important practical as well as important scientific
value. The research may help us identify important parenting practices that are
related to the development of prosocial behaviors in children. Moreover, the use
of multiple measures in the research allows us to explore a variety of methods
that can be used to distinguish among various types of empathic responding and
how these are theoretically and empirically related to the development of
positive modes of behavior.