* 8807984
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research:  Topological Concepts and  Anomalies in Quantum Field Theory
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1991
* Roman Jackiw, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1991
* USD 9,870.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Roman Jackiw, Department of Physics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to pursue with Dr. Choonkyu Lee,
Department of Physics, Seoul National University, and Dr. Jae Hyung Yee,
Department of Physics, Yonsei University, for a period of 24 months, a program
of cooperative research on topological concepts and anomalies in quantum field
theory. These researchers seek to produce significant discoveries and/or new
understanding in connection with theoretic realization of various symmetry
algebras, anomalies, and quantum adiabatic phase (Berry's phase). In this
collaborative research, these scientists will investigate further various
physical/mathematical aspects of anomalies, Berry's phase, and other related
phenomena within the Schrodinger-picture framework of quantum field theories. A
better understanding of anomalous gauge theories in four dimensions also will be
addressed. Drs. Jackiw, Lee, and Yee are highly respected scientists in the
field of the research. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.