* 8807383
* Research Initiation:  Multi-Channel Wavelength-Division-    Multiplexed Technique in a Soliton-Based Optical Fiber      Communication System
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Chih-Chung Yang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sarah A. Clark
* 05/31/1991
* USD 60,000.00

Since the invention of low-loss optical fiber, to increase the communication
capability in a fiber channel has been the goal of much scientific effort. In a
conventional fiber channel, either single- mode or multiple-mode, the bit-rate
is usually limited to below 50 MHz with frequent use of electronic repeators.
Recently, the coherent detection was developed in a fiber channel. This
development can raise the bit-rate up to several GHz. However, in a coherent
communication system, the limitation on communication capability due to
dispersion effects still exists. The discovery of soliton propagation creates a
new possiblity for increasing the bit-rate to over 100 GHz with a long fiber
length (up to 1000 km) without using an electronic repeator. The major problem
is to investigate from the propagation viewpoint the possibility of applying the
multi-channel wavelength-division- mutiplexed technique to a soliton-based fiber
communication system. In this problem, two important considerations are to be
studied. The first issue is the mutual interaction among the pulse trains of
different channels. These interactions include at least the cross-phase
moduation and Raman conversion. The shapes and propagation speeds of the pulses
insuch a multiple-channel fiber will be changed. The second issue is the Raman
compensation for linear loss in such a multiple-channel system. It is likely to
achieve an optimal compensation for multiple channels by including the Raman
conversions among different channels.