* 8807752
* Incorporation of Observed Precipitation Estimates in        Four-Dimensional Data Assimilation Schemes for Mesoscale    Models
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/1988,04/30/1993
* Glen Lesins, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/1993
* USD 309,358.00

A potential for significant improvement in mesoscale numerical weather
prediction lies in finding the optimal use for the new data sets (from next
generation radar, or NEXRAD, satellites, automated surface observations, wind
profilers, aircraft reports, etc.) that will become available operationally
during the next decade. These observations are incorporated into a four-
dimensional analysis process that produces an initial state compatible with the
forecast model. The research under this award specifically addresses the issue
of how to include precipitation measurements in this analysis process so that
the model's rainfall rates will resemble the atmosphere's as closely as possible
as the forecast begins. The principal investigators will explore methods to
using raingauge, satellite and radar data to determine the vertical distribution
of heating in the lower atmosphere. This information is then incorporated into
the atmospheric analysis during a pre-forecast integration in which the mass and
wind fields are brought into dynamical balance with the imposed condensational
heating. This approach should greatly reduced the problem of "spin-up" in the
model prediction. This project is part of a joint program between NOAA's
National Meteorological Center (NMC) and NSF. An important aspect of the
research will be to test the new algorithms that are developed in the NMC
operational models.