* 8807110
* Role of Structures Within The Hippocampus in Learning and   Memory
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1990
* Leonard Jarrard, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 05/31/1990
* USD 2,676.00

Long-term research abroad: Role of Structures Within The Hippocampus in Learning
and Memory This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long and
Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program is designed
to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at
research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the
conduct of joint research and the utilization of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. Awards
are selected on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to the applicant's
field of science, the prospective potential of the applicant for professional
growth, as well as criteria relevant to the furthering of international
cooperation in science and engineering. The program is particularly directed to
scientists and engineers who are embarking on their research careers. The
project is under the direction of Dr. Leonard E. Jarrard, Department of
Psychology, Washington and Lee University, in collaboration with Professor
Jeffrey A. Gray, Institute of Psychiatry, University of London and Dr. Richard
G. M. Morris, Department of Pharmacology, University of Edinburgh Medical
School. The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate,
international travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents allowance, if
applicable, language training, if required, and a flat administrative allowance
of $250.00 for the U.S. home institution.