* 8807531
* Research Initiation:  A Knowledge-Based Methodology for     Composite Products Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1988,08/31/1988
* Venkat Venkatasubramanian, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifton Leach
* 08/31/1988
* USD 0.00

This award is to support the design of composite objects and blends with
desired properties is an important and diffi- cult process in the industry.
Industries are the key and emerging technological areas such as novel materials,
specialty chemicals, biotechnology and pharmaceutical, etc. critically depend on
accurate, efficient, innovative and rapid design of new products that satisfy
functional and processing constraints in order to compete effectively in a
changing international market. This class of design problems encompasses a wide
vari- ety of products such as polymeric composites and blends, cera- mics,
alloys, drugs, solvents, paints and varnishes, etc., that amount to tens of
billions of dollars in sales every year in the United States alone. In order to
understand this design process and to develop a design methodology that can be
formalized and automated, a knowledge-based framework will be developed. This
methodology approaches design as a constrained knowledge-guided search by
modeling the design sub-space interactions as a hierarchy of operators that
cause motion in the search space. Knowledge represented in a hybrid form of
frames, rules, and procedures. Flexible control of reasoning is facilitated by
using a combina- tion of weak methods, namely, generate-and-test and means-ends-
analysis. A blackboard architecture will be developed to imple- ment this design
methodology. The methodology should lead to a design environment that will
facilitate rapid exploration of preliminary design candidates.