* 8807747
* Design and Processing of Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1991
* Robert Barnhill, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/1991
* USD 199,987.00

The aims of this research are the creation of new surface forms and the
determination of geometric properties of surfaces. More particularly, under the
first topic, rational curve and surface schemes will be developed and studied.
Rational B-spline curves and surfaces are becoming the industry standard for
Computer Aided Design/Computer Aided Manufacturing information. Moreover,
although polynomial B-spline curves and surfaces have been studied for some
time, their rational counterparts have received considerably less attention,
particularly in connection with design. Thus there are both scientific and
application motivations for studying this class of curves and surfaces. The
determination of geometric properties of surfaces is called "Geometry
Processing." For an already constructed curve or surface, geometric properties
may be desired to understand the surface better or the geometric property may
itself be desired for an application. Examples of geometric properties which
help explain a surface are curvatures and reflection lines. Geometric properties
of interest per se include surface/surface intersections, offset surfaces, and
surfaces on surfaces. The full sweep from constructive mathematics through the
implementation of algorithms and the interactive computer graphics display of
surfaces is utilized in this research.