* 8807860
* Regulation of Photosynthesis: Crassulacean Acid Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Irwin Ting, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1991
* USD 223,500.00

Using Portulacaria afra, Peperomia species, Clusia species, and Xerosicyos
danguyi, the study will examine the shift from C3-photosynthesis to CAM-cycling
to CAM-idling or to CAM. Studies will be conducted at the metabolic, enzymatic,
and genetic levels. Detailed studies of CO2 exchange, acid flux, activities of
key enzymes, properties of PEPC, PEPC protein levels and their rate of
synthesis, as well as measurements of mRNA for PEPC will be conducted during the
shift from C3 to CAM-cycling and ultimately to CAM. The shifts will be induced
by drought, as a funtion of season, and as a funciton of development. Also to so
be pursued is the hypothesis that abscisic acid (ABA) or other hormone is
related to the shift, at least in response to drought. By monitoring genes and
their expression, it will be determined at what stage during the shift in
photosynthetic metabolism that fixation of CO2 shifts from light to dark, when
acid flux begins, at what stage mRNAs for key enzymes such as PEPC appear, and
when the various enzymes and regulatory proteins appear. %%% The regulation of
photosynthesis is one of the most important aspects for the understanding and
control of plant growth and development. It has direct relevance to the
production of food, fiber, and chemicals. In this project, photosynthetic
regulation will be studied in plants which can shift their photosynthetic mode
during water stress, in normal development and with seasonal change.