* 8807838
* Quantifying Mixing and Its Impact on Heat Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1990
* Pamela Eibeck, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tammi Owens
* 02/28/1990
* USD 30,000.00

The objective of this research project is to establish "mixing parameters" that
will quantify the degree of mixing that is introduced by a perturbation to a
flow. Mixing devices are often used to enhance heat transfer rates. The research
approach will be to make experimental measurements of the flow characteristics
and the degree of mixing that occurs in a channel containing three different
arrangements of large-scale protuberances. Velocity measurements will indicate
the magnitude of the secondary motions, as well as the magnitude and length
scales of the turbulent fluctuations. The level of mixing that has occurred in
the different flows will be quantified with both spatial and temporal
probability distribution functions of the temperature field. These experimental
measurements will be used to link two global mixing parameters to the actual
mixing levels. One of the parameters indicates the extent of convective mixing
by gross secondary motions, and the other indicates the magnitude of turbulent
diffusion. A successful choice of generalized mixing parameters could have a
major impact on the field of heat transfer since it will provide a means for
comparing the effectiveness of various devices on mixing, and possibly provide a
predictive technique for the augmentation of heat transfer. Increasing heat
transfer rates is a critical problem for engineers designing devices that are
limited in performance by their temperature, such as high-power computer chips
and gas turbine engines. Cooling flows may not be sufficient, and so devices
that mix the flow are often used to enhance the heat transfer. While mixing is
known to increase heat transfer, there is no general parameter that indicates
the level of mixing in a flow and how that mixing augments the heat transfer
rates. In this fundamental study, experiments will be conducted to establish
relevant "mixing parameters" based on the important physical mechanisms.
Experimental measurements of a simulated electronics cooling channel with
different mixing devices will be made to evaluate the ability of the "mixing
parameter" to predict mixing levels and resulting heat transfer.