* 8807672
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  CVD Synthesis of     Multilayer Ceramic Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Rishi Raj, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 12/31/1989
* USD 80,000.00

Funds are provided for Cornell University to install a Chemical- Vapor-
Deposition (CVD) system for the growth of multilayer, multiphase metal and
ceramic thin films. The CVD system will be used to fabricate multilayer films
with an A/B/A/B architecture on the scale of a few nm, where A and B are
different materials. These multilayer films will be incorporated into fiber
reinforced composites in order to control the shear and the tensile properties,
and the high temperature corrosion resistance of interfaces. Thin films from
carbon (graphite or diamond), alumina, zirconia, silicon- carbide, silica,
platinum and chromium will be synthesized. These components can be used to
construct multilayer interfaces that are compatible with a variety of ceramic
fibers (carbon, silicon carbide, titanium boride or alumina) and with matrix
materials that include metals, intermetallics, and ceramics. The CVD facility
ultimately will be utilized to prepare thin films of single crystal ceramic
materials, beginning with such simple materials as nickel oxide and zirconia,
and leading to the synthesis of single crystal films of multicomponent ceramics
such as tuned ferroelectrics with giant electro-optic coefficients and high Tc
superconductors. The ability to synthesize single crystal ceramic films will
measurably enhance the capability to understand the structure of ceramic and
metal- ceramic interfaces.