* 8807725
* "Development of Appropriate Adaptive Control Laws            for Time-Varying Plants"
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1988,07/31/1989
* Hosain Ali Pak, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 07/31/1989
* USD 11,551.00

Medium-term research abroad: Development of Appropriate Adaptive Control Laws
for Time-Varying Plants. This award recommendation is made under the Program for
Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program is
designed to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research
abroad at research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide
opportunities for the conduct of joint research and the utilization of unique or
complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign
countries. Awards are selected on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to
the applicant's field of science, the prospective potential of the applicant for
professional growth, as well as criteria relevant to the furthering of
international cooperation in science and engineering. The program is
particularly directed to scientists and engineers who are embarking on their
research careers. The project is under the direction of Dr. Petros Ioannou,
Department of Electrical Engineering Systems, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles CA 90089, in collaboration with Professor Graham C. Goodwin,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Newcastle, New
South Wales, Australia, and Prof. BDO Anderson, Australian National University.
The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international
travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents allowance, if applicable,
language training, if required, and a flat administrative allowance of $250.00
for the U.S. home institution.