* 8807341
* RUI:  The Importance of Clays and Dissolved Organic Matter  to the Trophic Base of Turbid Lake Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Owen Lind, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 12/31/1990
* USD 100,000.00

Clay turbidity inhibits the phytoplankton production of lakes. This research
will investigate a compensatory role for clays in an alternate trophic pathway.
It is hypothesized that dissolved organic matter (DOM) is more available to
higher trophic levels through concentration on clay particles. Specifically: (1)
clay particles adsorb significant quantities of DOM (the nutritional value of
which varies with the source) to facilitate bacterial production; and (2) as a
result of bacterial surface growth, clay particles with adsorbed DOM aggregate
into larger particles. The research will examine the relative importance of
autotrophy and heterotrophy, and the mechanisms by which clay particles are
important in lake food webs. The project answers four questions: (1) Does the
quantity of clay turbidity affect the absolute as well as the relative amounts
of bacterial production and phytoplankton production? (2) Does the quantity of
clay turbidity affect bacterial use of phytoplankton exudates? (3) Does the
sorptive or aggregative capacity of the clays vary with the nature of the DOM
(allochthonous vs. autochthonous)? (4) Does bacterial growth on aggregates
affect the size of the clay-organic-bacteria aggregates? Lake Chapala's
predictable spatial and temporal gradients of suspended clay concentrations
allows a combination of laboratory and field experimentation to test hypotheses.
Answers will permit a new trophic model appropriate to lakes and reservoirs with
high clay turbidity. Managers may be able to replace management practices (water
quality and fisheries) based on traditional models. This alternate pathway is
especially important in tropical lakes because year-around warm waters enable
consistently high bacterial activity. This project is funded under the RUI
initiative. It is unique in its involvement of undergraduates in field work in
the tropics and through its use of international collaborators.