* 8807880
* Stable Isotope Feasibility Study for Testing the Role of    Algal Carbon in a Tropical Floodplain
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1990
* William Lewis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1990
* USD 80,000.00

The Orinoco basin is one of the few locations where a large unregulated river
adjoins a minimally-altered floodplain. The Orinoco therefore presents special
opportunities for the study of natural floodplain phenomena. Past studies of
mass flux along the Orinoco main stream and of the phasing in physical,
chemical, and biological events on small segments of floodplain have produced
several lines of evidence that indicate an unexpectedly high importance of algal
organic matter (phytoplankton, periphyton) in sustaining the aquatic food webs
of the Orinoco floodplain ecosystem. Other prominent sources of organic matter
for the system include particulate material from upstream terrestrial
environments, riparian litterfall, and aquatic vascular plants. However, current
evidence indicates that the majority of biomass from these sources is degraded
microbially without passing efficiently into consumer food chains. Stable
isotopes appear to offer the best prospect for a direct test of this hypothesis.
However, the usefulness of stable isotopes is to some degree site-specific
because of variations in isotope signatures and in the number of compartments
that must be resolved through the use of these signatures. For this reason, the
present proposal outlines a plan for testing the feasibility of using stable
isotopes in resolving the broad hypothesis concerning algal carbon in the
Orinoco floodplain. Means and variances will be established for stable isotope
signatures of C, N, and S in major organic-matter compartments at a
representative site on the Orinoco floodplain, and methods for physical
separation of functionally different compartments such as detritus and suspended
algae will be tested. This information will be used in quantifying the resolving
power of stable isotopes in the Orinoco floodplain.