* 8807090
* A New Reformulation Technique for Tightening Relaxations of Some Combinatorial Optimization Problems with Application tothe General Linear Complementarity Problem
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Hanif Sherali, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1992
* USD 114,969.00

This proposal deals with a novel reformulation technique for combinatorial
problems which can be modelled as mixed zero-one programming problems. The model
may include polynomial terms without products among continuous variables. The
research, however, concentrates on two important, general subclasses which arise
in numerous engineering, economic and industrial applications, namely, the
linear mixed-integer zero-one programming problem and the linear complementarity
problem (LCP). The reformulation technique uses an enumeration of variable
factors to multiply constraints and create new nonlinear constraints which are
subsequently linearized by defining new variables. The motivation is to provide
a tight linear programming relaxation which closely approximates the convex hull
of feasible solutions and hence admits a successful application of discrete
optimization techniques. It is conjectured that this technique indeed
characterizes the convex hull of feasible solutions for binary knapsack problems
(we have verified this for two and three dimensions), and therefore would be
particularly beneficial for unstructured, sparse problems. Various
implementation schemes and constraint generation procedures based on this
reformulation are proposed for investigation. As a special test case, and also
to study a problem important in its own right, we propose an elaborate algorithm
for the general LCP. The algorithm includes the use of the new reformulation
technique as well as other specialized constructs such as strengthened convexity
cuts based on new viewpoints of the problem. A plan for research is proposed
which will lay the groundwork for extending this research effort into developing
effective algorithms for a rich variety of problems which exploit this
reformulation strategy.