* 8807196
* Labor Market Segmentation and Gender Stratification:  A     Cross National Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Rachel Rosenfeld, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1991
* USD 76,000.00

A perennial problem in the sociology of gender concerns the inequality of
earnings between men and women. Various explanations have been offered for this
inequality, including discrimination, women's family responsibilities, and
differences in men's and women's human capital and other characteristics. These
factors also produce occupational segregation, wherein men and women occupy
different jobs (labor market segmentation), which in turn contributes to wage
inequality. This research explores the extent of, and reasons for, earnings
inequality among men and women. Using already collected data from 11 advanced
industrialized countries, the study will examine differences within and between
these countries in how earnings are shaped by men's and women's labor market
locations, family statuses, and human capital. Since these countries differ
considerably in their industrial relations systems, political and economic
institutions, policies facilitating (or hindering) the integration of work and
family roles, and other characteristics this research design will be useful in
identifying how these factors segment labor markets and contribute to gender
inequality in earnings. The study draws on and extends existing sociological and
economic explanations of the gender gap in earnings. Its principal contribution
will be the systematic exploration of differences by country and the attempt to
explain them on the basis of political, economic, social, and cultural
differences among nations.