* 8807783
* Improving the Usefulness of the Snow Entomological Museum tothe Systematics Community
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1994
* James Ashe, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 01/31/1994
* USD 174,191.00

The Snow Entomological Museum at the University of Kansas is a valuable and
important resource for the study of systematic entomology. The collection is
strong in almost all major groups of insects, particularly North American
representatives, and in some (e.g., bees, water bugs, leafhoppers and scorpion-
flies) the Museum's holdings are worldwide in scope and rank among the best in
the world. Recently, there has been a great increase in concern for the
conservation of diverse forms of life and the loss of diversity through
destruction of natural habitats, such as tropical rain forests. Museums of
natural history are the repositories of examples of animal and plant diversity.
And since tree-fourths of all known species of animals are insects,
entomological museums are facing a growing number of requests to store specimens
(samples of diversity) and to lend these to researchers studying the systematics
or classification of insects. This projects will help the Snow Entomological
Museum to increase its usefulness to the scientific community. Added technical
assistance will speed the processing of loan requests. Visiting specialists will
be brought to the Museum to sort from unidentified materials those specimens
useful to their own research or that of colleagues studying related groups of
insects. Equipment provided by the grant (e.g., insect drawers) will greatly
increase the Museum's ability to deal with space needs resulting from detailed
identification of specimens.