* 8807771
* Influence of Topography on Soil Acidity and Hydrogen Ion    Budgets in an Arctic Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* David Valentine, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 01/31/1991
* USD 110,000.00

>The mechanisms by which topography influences soil acidity and H.+ budgets
along an elevation gradient in the Alaskan tundra will be studied. A central
hypothesis of the proposal is that H.+ production and consumption in a tundra
elevation gradient are regulated primarily by belowground chemical and microbial
processes that depend on topographically induced variation in redox potentials.
To examine the topographic variation in soil acidity and test the central
hypothesis, six ecosystems along an elevation gradient of about 300m on the
banks of the Sagavanirktok River, north of the Brooks Range, will be examined.
Part of the study will be descriptive. Patterns of acidity will be determined by
measuring free H.+, and titratable acidity, exchangeable cations, and the acid
strength of the exchange complex. In addition, estimations will be made of the
major components of H.+ budgets, including atmospheric inputs, internal
ecosystem production and consumption, and export. The study will also include
experimental manipulations to test the controls of H.+ production in three of
the six ecosystems along the elevation gradient. A combination of standard
methods will be used to measure the various components of the H.+ budget. Among
these are: 1) denitrification by anaerobic laboratory assays using the acetylene
block procedure; 2) nitrification by the buried bag procedure; and 3) plant ion
balance by the biomass accumulation procedure. A H.+ budget serves to validate
our understanding of biogeochemical cycling in an ecosystem. Better
understanding of biogeochemical cycling in the tundra is needed for its wise
management. Dr. Binkley is a productive researcher who has substantial
experience in developing H.+ ion budgets. The institutional support available to
him is very good.