* 8807392
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Structure and Function of Chemoreceptor Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1993
* Gerald Hazelbauer, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1993
* USD 21,653.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Gerald L. Hazelbauer, Department of
Biochemistry/Biophysics, Washington State University, to pursue with Dr. Chankyu
Park, Department of Biological Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative
research on the structure and function of chemoreceptor proteins. The general
aim of this research is to contribute to an understanding of the mechanisms
involved in the functioning of transmembrane receptor proteins. A basic feature
of living cells is the ability to respond to specific, external chemical
signals. The bacterium, Escherichia coli, contains specific receptors, exposed
on the cell surface, that recognize relevant compounds. These bacteria are
chemotactic as the result of the functioning of a multicomponent, sensory
response system that links receptors to flagella. Understanding the mechanisms
by which any of these receptors functions requires an understanding of how
ligand binding or covalent modification at one place on a protein can affect
activity of a domain separated from that site, how alterations at different
sites on a protein can interact cooperatively or antagonistically, and how
information is passed across a membrane. The present project involves a study of
bacterial chemoreceptor proteins, called transducers. Genetic approaches
involving isolation of mutants defective in one or a subset of transducer
functions will be combined with biochemical approaches involving the
characterization of mutant proteins in vivo as well as in vitro in a detergent-
stabilized, purified state. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.