* 8807200
* REU:  Episodic Winterkill, Pulsed Predation, and the        Structure of Benthic Assemblages in Lentic Aquatic Ecosytems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Frank Rahel, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 09/30/1991
* USD 119,125.00

Infrequent, episodic stress can have long-term effects on ecological
communities. In shallow ponds or lakes, episodic winter hypoxia (low oxygen) can
affect benthic invertebrate communities, either through direct mortality, or by
promoting pulses of fish predation. In such waters, benthic areas become hypoxic
while adequate oxygen often remains near the ice-water interface. To persist,
benthic taxa must tolerate low oxygen or migrate to regions with adequate
oxygen. However, behaviors such as increased activity or movement toward the
ice-water interface that are adaptive in avoiding low oxygen conditions would be
maladaptive in avoiding fish predation. Although avoidance of low oxygen and
behavioral changes in the presence of fish have been documented separately, no
one has examined how invertebrates balance these conflicting demands. This
research will examine the interaction of an abiotic stress (winter hypoxia) and
a biotic factor (fish predation) in structuring benthic invertebrate
assemblages. In laboratory experiments, the ability of benthic invertebrates to
balance the conflicting demands of avoiding both hypoxia and fish predation will
be examined. Taxa will be ranked according to their vulnerability to fish
predation as the benthic environment becomes hypoxic. These predictions will
then be tested in outdoor ponds where hypoxia of the benthic region will be
manipulated. The behavioral response of benthic invertebrates to developing
hypoxia in ponds with and without fish will be monitored using an underwater
video camera. To determine if laboratory rankings of species' vulnerability are
observed in the field, fish diets will be be quantified before, during, and
after the benthic zone becomes hypoxic. Abundance of invertebrate taxa before
and after benthic hypoxia will allow us to determine the effect of winter
hypoxia alone and in combination with fish predation in structuring benthic
invertebrate assemblages.