* 8807546
* Surface Mechanisms in the Chemical Vapor Deposition of      Diamond
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Robert Hauge, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* robert miller
* 01/31/1992
* USD 409,340.00

This grant, funded jointly by the Office of Special Projects in Chemistry and
the Division of Materials Research provides support for the collaborative
research of Drs. D'Evelyn and Hauge in Chemistry and Dr. Margrave in Materials
Research at Rice University. The objective of the research is the elucidation of
the surface mechanisms in diamond growth prepared by chemical vapor deposition
(CVD) under well-defined conditions. Synthetic processes for the production of
diamond films is an area of high technological interest. The work will employ
chemically activated precursors, and will combine surface science studies of
chemisorption and reaction with studies of the growth of macroscopic diamond
films by low pressure CVD. This work will explore the structure and reactivity
of adsorbed hydrogen and CH species, the relationship between the reaction
conditions and the growth rate and quality of diamond films, the importance of
nonthermal reactions in the growth process, and reactions of dopant precursors.
Clean and adsorbate-covered single-crystal diamond surfaces will be
characterized by low energy electron diffraction, Auger spectroscopy, electron
energy loss spectroscopy and other advanced surface analytical techniques. Rate
constants for elementary surface reactions will be determined. Diamond films
grown by CVD using C-13 labeled precursors on diamond substrates will be
characterized by Raman spectroscopy, reflection electron diffraction, electron
microscopy and infrared attenuated total reflectance. The utility of laser-
desorption mass spectrometry and laser ellipsometry as in situ probes of CVD
growth will also be explored.