* 8807302
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Plant Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Ralph Dewey, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 04/30/1991
* USD 79,200.00

This is a Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Plant Biology to support Dr.
Dewey's research and training under the mentorship of Dr. Daniel Klessig. The
proposal outlines experiments designed to define the targetting signals
necessary for extracellular protein transport, and intracellular
compartmentalization into the central vacuole, in higher plants. To determine
the factors required for extracellular protein secretion, a pathogenesis-related
protein of the PR1 family from tobacco will be used as a model system. To
determine factors required for compartmentalization to the vacuole, a proteinase
inhibitor from tomato will be used. Thess model systems are particularly
suitable for the proposed studies because of the small sizes of the polypeptides
and the wealth of background information available about their structure and
biosynthetic processing. Genetic manipulations of the genes coding for these two
proteins will be performed, including interchanging of gene sequences between
them, and attachment of the sequences to reporter genes. The results of these
experiments are expected to provide us with important insights into the protein
structural features which contain the information required for proper routing of
newly synthesized proteins to their ultimate subcellular destinations.