* 8807021
* Maintenance of Escherichia coli K-12 Stock Culture          Collection
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1994
* Mary Berlyn, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 01/31/1994
* USD 1,888,356.00

The Escherichia coli Stock Center maintains a collection of around 7,000
genetically defined stock cultures of the bacterium, E. coli strain K-12, and
distributes upon request about 5000 cultures of these mutants each year.
Requests come from scientific investigators and teachers in the fields of
microbial genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, biophysics, medical
research, recombinant DNA technology and related fields who are working in
academic and governmental laboratories, non-profit research institutes,
industrial laboratories and recombinant DNA firms. The Stock Center archives
information on the histories, derivations and genotypes of mutant derivatives of
E. coli K-12 and also acts as a center for information on the identification and
genetic mapping of these organisms. The Stock Center's curator, Dr. Barbara
Bachmann, publishes revisions of the E. coli K-12 linkage map and pedigrees of
E. coli mutants. The Center also coordinates the assignment of gene symbols,
allele numbers and strain designations. To facilitate the above functions,
during this award the Center will computerize its extensive records and search
procedures. New stocks will be added to the collection in response to needs as
new types of mutants are isolated and new techniques of genetic analysis are
developed.