* 8807729
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Nitrogen Fixation by     Free-living Blue-green Algae (Cyanobacteria) in Flooded     Rice Paddies
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* G-Yull Rhee, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 09/30/1991
* USD 22,460.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. G-Yull Rhee, Health Research, Inc.,
Center for Laboratories and Research, New York State Department of Health, to
pursue with Dr. Jeuson Maeng, Department of Biology, Sogang University, for 24
months, a program of cooperative research on nitrogen fixation by free-living
blue-green algae (cyanobacteria) in flooded rice paddies. The collaborators will
investigate (1) seasonal distribution and succession of nitrogen-fixing blue-
green algae, (2) seasonal changes in nitrogen-fixing activity, and (3) the
effect of light and phosphate on growth and nitrogen-fixing characteristics of
three unialgal isolates of the most prominent nitrogen fixing blue-green algae
in flooded rice paddies. The occurrence of nitrogen fixers in rice paddies is of
ecological as well as economic interest because they contribute a significant
amount of nitrogen to the nitrogen budget of the paddies. The distribution and
nitrogen-fixing activity of these organisms in the flooded paddy ecosystem vary
with climatic factors such as light and temperature, pH, the chemistry of the
soil and irrigating waters, and agricultural practices such as tillage,
fertilization, and the application of pesticides. Thus, their ecology and their
economic importance in rice fields may vary widely with geographic region, from
a temperate to tropical climate. Few investigations of these algae have been
made in a climate such as that of Korea. The information obtained in this study
is important for (1) evaluating the extent of nitrogen fixation by free-living
blue-green algae and the potential for utilizing them to improve the nitrogen
fertility of temperate-zone rice paddies and (2) the general understanding of
the algal competition and succession, and the impact of human interference such
as fertilizer and pesticide application on species interactions in rice paddies.
This interference in rice paddies may be comparable to the effects of
eutrophication and chemical pollution in the aquatic environment. This study
also will provide the basis for a comparative study of algal ecology in
temperate and tropical zone paddies. The collaborators are highly respected
scientists in the field of this research who have collaborated successfully in
the past. The present project will allow them to combine their talents and
interests for mutual benefit. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project
is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).