* 8807171
* Research Initiation: Compilation of Logic Programs for      Multiprocessor Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Dean Jacobs, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 11/30/1990
* USD 57,236.00

Knowledge-based techniques are being used to solve an increasingly wide range of
complex problems and this has resulted in higher performance demands for
symbolic computation. Researchers have therefore shown great interest in
exploiting the inherent parallelism in logic programming languages such as
Prolog. Among the many approaches which have been proposed, DeGroot's Restricted
And-Parallelism (RAP) execution model seems particularly promising. This model
is notable in that it achieves a great deal of parallelism automatically, i.e.,
without explicit commands from the programmer, yet the run-time support
mechanisms have low overhead. This is accomplished by compiling programs into
special control expressions, called Execution Graph Expressions (EGEs), which
initiate goals on the basis of tests on program variables. Research on the RAP
model has focused primarily on the problem of implementing EGEs efficiently on
multiprocessor computers. The research proposed here will focus on the
complementary problem of compiling clauses into EGEs. A clause is first
converted into a graph- based computational form which achieves Maximal And-
Parallelism. This graph is then gradually transformed into an EGE, potentially
at a loss of parallelism, using two rewrite rules over a hybrid execution model.
A specific compilation algorithms for Prolog using this framework will be
designed, developed and evaluated.