* 8807735
* Functions of the REPI Region of Plasmid ColV-K30 in         Escherichia coli K12
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1993
* Jorge Crosa, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1993
* USD 378,200.00

The goal of this project is to identify and characterize the functions present
in the PColV.K30 REPI region that are associated with control of its
replication. This replicon is part of a replication.aerobactin iron.transport
unit that we found to be conserved in plasmid carrying the aerobactin iron-
transport system genes. The REPI replication region endows the cells with
incompatibility properties corresponding to the IncFI group and must have been
instrumental in the preservation and epidemiological spread of the aerobactin
iron-transport system. Although it is a replicon frequently found in bacterial
plasmid, little is known on the mechanisms controlling its replication and the
mechanisms that result in the expression of the IncFI incompatibility phenotype.
The following experiments are being performed: 1. Analysis of the product(s)
involved in the control of replication of REPI containing plasmid. 2.
Characterization of a trans.acting protein RepI which is necessary for REPI
replication, and its mechanism of action. 3. Elucidation of the role of the
novel incompatibility region incF and the already known incE in the mechanisms
of REPI incompatibility that result in the IncFI phenotype. Dr. Crosa's work on
this bacterial plasmid to date hasestablished the overall framework of the
elements replication, and the proposed future work deals with further
elaboration of the features he has found. Understanding of how this replicon
functions will certainly advance our understanding of plasmid replication and
compatibility between different plasmid. In addition this study may improve our
understanding of how these plasmid spread and are maintained in bacterial
populations.