* 8807920
* Mechanical Force in the Cytoskeleton Underlying Neuronal    Shape and Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Robert Buxbaum, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 02/29/1992
* USD 188,847.00

Neurons are dependent upon their highly unusual shape for function. The axon is
an exceptionally long "electric wire" extension of the neuron and conducts the
electrical signals generated in the nervous system. In developing, embryonic
vertebrates, a substantial portion of the elongation of axons occurs as a result
of tension applied to the axon by the expansion of the growing embryo. Previous
studies on cultured neurons suggest that tension, exerted by the motile growth
cone, is responsible for axonal elongation. The filamentous proteins of the
cytoplasm (actin), microtubules, and intermediate filaments compose a dynamic
skeletal structure for cells, i.e. a cytoskeleton, that underlies the ability of
axons to elongate. Mechanical tension is expected to regulate the cytoskeleton
during axonal elongation. This idea is supported by thermodynamic considerations
that suggest the assembly of filaments is affected by mechanical forces. This
research project proposes to investigate the affect of mechanical tension on the
elongation and cytoskeleton of cultured, embryonic chick neurons. The
experiments will provide direct measurements of the tension within axons through
the use of force-calibrated glass needles. The role of the cytoskeleton in
producing or stabilizing the mechanical force will be determined through the
used of anti-cytoskeletal drugs known to halt axonal elongation. The mechanical
forces involved in experimentally induced elongation of axons will be achieved
by towing the axons with an appropriately paced motor. This growth is a model
for the elongation of axons within the expanding displacements of force-
calibrated glass needles. Anti-cytoskeletal drugs will be used to assess the
contribution of various cytoskeletal components. This work is most clearly
relevant to obtaining a better understanding of the cellular and molecular basis
of the development of the nervous system. The study has a broad scientific
relevance because axonal elongation is a special case of the general function of
the cytoskeleton to elaborate and maintain cell shape in eukaryotes. A better
understanding of the relationship of cell shape, mechanical force and the
cytoskeleton is particularly interesting because of recent evidence that cell
shape plays a fundamental role in regulation of cell division, in the
responsiveness of cells to signal molecules such as hormones and growth factors,
and the loss of normal regulation in disease states.