* 8807167
* The Geometry of Numbers and Discrete Production Sets
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Herbert Scarf, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 180,154.00

Much of the nation's production process reflects the application of tools
developed from optimization concepts and related theories from economics. One of
the most useful of these tools is the simplex method for solving linear
programming problems. Linear programming is concerned with the maximization of
output subject to constraints on the availability of factors of production. The
simplex method can be interpreted as a decentralized search for prices which
equilibrate the demand for factors of production with their supply. This project
is concerned with solving maximization problems when the production set involves
indivisibilities. Indivisibilities are introduced into a linear problem by
requiring that some, or all of the activity levels take on integral values,
rather than arbitrary real values. This field of research is called integer
programming. In contrast to the simplex method, which performs remarkably well
on all linear programming problems, existing integer programming algorithms are
capricious, unreliable and none of these algorithms are capable of being
interpreted in any meaningful economic terms. Under his previous grant the
investigator found a new method for solving integer programming problems that
could be a major breakthrough in this extremely difficult line of research. He
proved that a globally intractable integer programming problem can be reduced to
a small number of tractable, local integer programming problems that eventually
converge to the global solution. The sequence of programming problems is a
decision tree in which the number of branches (the number of possible local
linear programs) at each step in the process is a small and declining fraction
of the size of the problem. The project examines methods for determining these
decision trees explicitly, explores their economic interpretation, and studies
how well these algorithms work in practice. Most real world problems in such
fields as operations research, economics and industrial planning involve
indivisibilities, so a new set of powerful mathematical tools to solve these
problems would be extremely valuable.