* 8807523
* Mechanisms for Orbitally-Driven Correlated Electron Magnetism and Giant Magneto-Optical Effects
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Carl Rotter, West Virginia University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1992
* USD 157,940.00

They plan to use the understanding gained of orbitally-driven anisotropic
magnetic phenomena to elucidate and further advance the state of the giant
magneto-optic effects discovered during the past few years in exactly the class
of cerium and light actinide materials that they have been studying. In
addition, they want to extend their present ab initio theory for orbitally-
driven magnetism to uranium, manganese, and possibly some iron, systems. The
extension to uranium, manganese, and iron is both of general interest, and of
specific interest for exploring and exploiting giant magneto-optic effects. By
orbitally-driven magnetism, they mean magnetic behavior where the interionic
coupling is between orbital moments, rather than spin moments, on the
interacting ions; and where this coupling is brought about by hybridization
between moderately delocalized f-electrons and band electrons of non-f atomic
parentage. In such a situation, they anticipate very large magneto-optic effects
because there is no dependence on the spin-orbit coupling to provide a weak
linkage between the optically active and the magnetically active components of
the electronic system. Besides being of great basic scientific interest, the
study of materials with very large magneto-optic effects is technologically of
importance in order to find improved materials for use in large-scale erasable
computer memories. The proposed research includes the theoretical component of a
coordinated theoretical and experimental study of material properties to gain
giant magneto- optic effects, with the experimental work being carried out by
Dr. Mark H. Kryder of Carnegie-Mellon University and his group.