* 8807064
* A Study of the Evolution of the Coastal Front and Related   Mesoscale Structures in the Atmospheric Planetary Boundary  Layer near the Southeast Coast of the United States
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Allen Riordan, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/1991
* USD 201,795.00

The rapid development and intensification of winter cyclones in coastal regions
presents a major weather forecasting problem. Along the East Coast of the United
States, the development of cyclonic storms and frontal systems often occurs
along the coastal region of the Carolinas. These weather systems may lead to
severe weather in the heavily populated Northeast Corridor in the form of
freezing rain, heavy snowfall, blizzards and extensive coastal erosion. A
complex interaction of cold continental air, warm ocean currents, traveling
atmospheric disturbances and local geography all appear to contribute to the
rapid development of these systems; however, the processes are not well
understood and the phenomena are often poorly forecast. In January-March 1986 a
cooperative research project to study winter storms in this region was held by a
consortium of universities and Federal agencies. Entitled GALE (Genesis of
Atlantic Lows Experiment), the project was designed to provide detailed
information on the role of air-sea interaction, planetary boundary-layer
processes and mesoscale meteorological processes. As one of the investigators of
the GALE, the Principal Investigator was instrumental in designing and executing
the experiment. This research will extend initial analyses of data obtained
during the GALE. Preliminary work reveals that the mesoscale structure is
prevalent within the synoptic field and can better explain the observed
precipitation and local weather than can the synoptic field. There is evidence,
however, that mesoscale features occur in predictable patterns governed by the
topography and synoptic-scale flow. The objectives of the research are to
continue to identify and analyze mesoscale features in the atmospheric boundary
layer over the near-shore waters and adjacent coastal plain and to explore the
time- evolution of these features and their interactions with synoptic-scale
systems especially as such interactions affect the precipitation process.