* 8807905
* Capital Controls and Their Impact on Stabilization Policy   and Welfare
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Maurice OBSTFELD, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1992
* USD 134,050.00

This project deals with four aspects of the relationship among government
controls over international capital movements, the effectiveness of
stabilization policy, and world welfare. The first research area is concerned
with current and proposed measures to liberalize capital movements within the
European Monetary System of fixed exchange rates, and asks whether such
liberalization is consistent with the periodic realignments seen so far. The
second area investigates the possibility that public-finance policy can lead to
self-justifying capital flight, in which case a nationalistic argument favoring
capital controls might be made. The third area of work examines the effect of
capital controls on a government's ability to obtain seigniorage revenues from
its economy through use of an inflation tax on money holders. In particular, the
impact of controls on the economy may be of central importance and have a major
bearing on better understanding the causes of inflation. The final topic looks
at empirical measures of the effects of international financial integration and
of the gains from international risk sharing. The underlying theme of this
project is the control of international capital movements. Increasingly, the
integration of national financial markets has raised concerns about economic
stability, policy effectiveness, and the supervision of financial institutions
with offshore operations. Some commentators have recommended a substantial
retreat from the international financial liberalization that has been occurring
since the early 1970's. This project is important because it involves the
development of theoretical models and empirical evidence that would help in
assessing the costs and benefits of adopting various capital controls.