* 8807895
* Potential Energy Surfaces and Internal Dynamics of Weakly   Bound Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1992
* Kenneth Leopold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 10/31/1992
* USD 219,474.00

Dr. Kenneth Leopold is supported by a grant from The Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program to perform studies on the structures and large amplitude
motions of weakly bound van der Waals complexes and metal clusters. Dr. Leopold
will use a new state-of-the-art far infrared technology to study the vibrational
properties of these clusters. This very high resolution spectroscopic
information is not available through any other experimental approach. State-of-
the-art far infrared technology featuring high sensitivity, high resolution, and
complete coverage throughout the far infrared region will be combined with
established methods of supersonic jet expansions to study the low frequency
vibrational spectra of a wide variety of van der Waals species. This work is
distinct from the majority of other studies on van der Waals complexes in that
it involves direct excitation of the soft intermolecular vibrations, and is made
possible by a new technique in which tunable far infrared radiation is generated
from the difference frequency between two carbon dioxide lasers. The results
will be crucial to the testing and development of new theoretical methods for
computing intermolecular potential surfaces and for treating the problem of
large amplitude motion in molecules. In addition, the examination of
rotationally resolved vibrational spectra of metal trimers will provide high
quality information regarding the structure, vibrational frequencies, and
barrier heights to pseudorotation in these species.