* 8807768
* Convective Processes in Climate and Numerical Weather       Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1992
* Leo Donner, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 10/31/1992
* USD 67,757.00

Several problems involving convective processes in climate and numerical
weather prediction can be addressed by developing a cumulus parameterization
incorporating life-cycle effects of cumulus convection and treating the dynamic
as well as the thermodynamic interactions between cumulus convection and the
large-scale flow. Incorporating life-cycle effects changes the vertical
distribution of large-scale forcing. Additional changes in parameterized large-
scale forcing by cumulus convection can be achieved by adding a simple
formulation for the water budget of mesoscale stratiform precipitation to the
parameterization for deep cumulus convection. Large-scale vorticity generation
by cumulus convection can be parameterized on the basis of the evolution of
potential vorticity in the presence of latent heat release, with the vorticity
generation to be recovered after the effect of cumulus convection on the
thermodynamic portion of the potential vorticity has been calculated using a
conventional cumulus parameterization. The resulting parameterizations can be
incorporated into a general circulation model to study their impact on
simulation of large-scale dynamics and climate. Tracer transport by a cumulus
ensemble can be parameterized, if tracer concentrations within the cumulus
elements and sources due to cloud chemical processes are known. The cumulus
parameterization incorporating cumulus life-cycle effects can be extended for
this purpose. An important problem in numerical weather prediction is the "spin-
up" of convective heating. A technique to initialize temperature and humidity
fields consists of inverting a cumulus parameterization such that diagnosed
heating rates will be produced by the parameterization with the initialized
fields. Using such an initialization with a forecast model and studying its
sensitivity to cumulus parameterization will yield important results on
initialization and the role of physical processes in numerical weather
prediction. This research is important because it seeks to develop more
realistic ways to represent sub-grid scale processes in computer models of the
climate system.