* 8807093
* The Nature of Truth in the Realism Debate in Philosophy of  Science
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Paul Horwich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 06/30/1989
* USD 30,000.00

A debate has been raging especially fiercely in the philosophy of science over
a realist or antirealist interpretation of scientific theories. The heart of the
issue consists in questions about the autonomy and accessibility of theoretical
facts. Professor Horwich's aim in this research is to present a theory of truth
which he will show is independent of these matters. He will then defend this
approach against a wide variety of objections, and elaborate its implications
for some long-standing problems in the philosophy of science. The theory of
truth will be highly deflationary, involving little more than claims of the
form, '"Quarks exist" is true if and only if quarks exist,' and implying that
being true is a descriptive property of sentences (such as, for example,
'correspondence with reality' or 'verifiability') -- so that the traditional
search for its underlying nature is a pseudo-problem. This point of view will be
defended against criticisms of four types: (1) that the theory cannot be
adequately formulated given difficulties raised by foreign languages, indexical
expressions, and the 'liar' paradoxes; (2) that the theory is inconsistent with
the uses of truth in semantics and logic; (3) that the explanatory function of
truth in cognitive science implies that truth does have an underlying nature;
and (4) that the role of the notion of truth in the philosophy of science cannot
be accommodated. In the course of responding to these objections the substantial
philosophical import of the theory will be displayed. Professor Horwich's
general strategy is first to argue that many issues traditionally thought to
revolve around the concept of truth do not really do so; and second, to show
that the clarity and simplification gained by this insight is significant enough
to enable solutions finally to be found. The primary application of this
strategy will be to the problem of scientific realism. In particular, he argues
that the main sources of difficulty in resolving questions over scientific
realism have been confusion stemming from a distorted picture of the
relationships between meaning and truth, and between confirmation and truth. A
good account of truth will provide the basis for an accurate view of these
relationships -- which will in turn enable us to achieve a proper understanding
of the autonomy and accessibility of theoretical facts, and thereby to resolve
the central questions in the realism/antirealism debate.