* 8807141
* Mathematical Sciences: The Laplacian in Hyperbolic Space andEntropy in Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Thea Pignataro, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Glazebrook
* 06/30/1991
* USD 39,800.00

Thea Pignataro will carry out research in two areas. The first concerns the
spectral theory of three dimensional manifolds and the second focusses on
estimation of the topological entropy in dynamical systems. The spectral theory
of manifolds centers around the derivation of geometric information from
knowledge of the spectrum of the Laplacian on the manifold. This has its origins
in questions such as "Can you hear the shape of a drum?", since the spectrum of
the Laplacian is closely related to the harmonics of the surface. Her work on
entropy is part of a wide ranging program of many researchers to measure the
chaos in a system. Pignataro has already been involved in important work on the
eigenvalues of the Laplacian on hyperbolic surfaces. The results there show that
the small eigenvalues vary like the lengths of short separating geodesics. The
more complicated the topology the more eigenvalues that can be estimated. She
will now try to extend some of these ideas and results to three dimensional
manifolds. This will involve overcoming quite difficult topological problems. In
particular the ends of these manifolds are more complicated than those of
surfaces and have only recently been understood. Her work on dynamical systems
involves estimation of the topological entropy. This essentially measures the
number of different orbit types of a system. She will investigate the
connections between entropy and the volume growth of certain embedded
submanifolds.