* 8807670
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Advanced Laser        Fluorescence for Interfacial Mass Transfer Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1988,03/31/1990
* Ronald Neuman, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/1990
* USD 43,567.00

In this Research Equipment project, an advanced laser fluorescence apparatus
will be developed to determine the surface or translational diffusion
coefficients of fluorescent-labeled probes in monomolecular films at air/water
and oil/water interfaces. This improved apparatus is based on a simple Moire
technique for measuring surface diffusion using fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching (FRAP) where the film is bleached in a periodic pattern. This
improved FRAP technique will avoid many of the problems associated with the
radiotracer technique for measuring surface diffusion. This new experimental
technique also will permit one to extend the study surface diffusion to
interfacial systems previously inaccessible to study by the radiotracer method.
In addition, one will be able to separate between flow and diffusional transport
processes occurring in monomolecular films. The periodic pattern increases the
spatial resolution relative to the conventional single spot FRAP technique,
resulting in more accurate diffusion constant determinations. This apparatus
will be used to continue previous work on surface diffusion in monomolecular
films, in particular, to determine reliable values of the surface diffusion
coefficient and its surface concentration and temperature dependence within
various monolayer states in order to elucidate the nature of two- dimensional
mass transfer at fluid/fluid interfaces. The laser fluorescence apparatus also
will be used in other research projects including monolayer structure, L-B
films, bilayers, and solid/liquid interfaces.