* 8807707
* Applications of the Chemistry of Organometallic Complexes   of Osmium(VI) and Ruthenium(VI)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Patricia Shapley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John B. Hunt
* 11/30/1990
* USD 154,994.00

The focus of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program is high oxidation state organometallic compounds of osmium,
ruthenium and iron. Of particular interest is the synthesis of organometallic
complexes of osmium(VI) and ruthenium(VI) containing two pi-donor ligands, which
are expected to have greatly enhanced reactivity relative to mono-oxo, imido and
nitrido complexes. The synthesis of organometallic complexes containing high
oxidation states of iron will be explored as well, beginning with attempts to
convert stable oxides of iron(IV) and iron(VI) to oxo-alkyl complexes. The
mechanism of the recently discovered method for selective coupling of organic
halides and Grignard reagents, mediated by nitridoruthenium(VI) complexes, will
be investigated. Following up on the discovery of a heterobimetallic catalyst
for the selective oxidation of primary alcohols to aldehydes, the oxidation of
olefins and alcohols with a variety of osmium and ruthenium chromate complexes
will be explored. The mechanisms of these reactions will be studied and their
applications in organic synthesis will be investigated. Chiral heterobimetallic
complexes will be prepared for use in asymmetric oxidations. This project is
expected to lead to useful new catalysts for facile transformations of organic
compounds.