* 8807879
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Development of Carbon FiberReinforced Cement Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Burtrand Lee, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1992
* USD 23,718.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Burtrand I. Lee, Department of
Ceramic Engineering, Clemson University, to pursue with Dr. Seung Bum Park,
Department of Civil Engineering, Chungnam University, Taejon, Korea, for a
period of 24 months, a program of research on the development of carbon fiber
reinforced cement composites. The objectives of the project are to (1) develop
surface modification techniques for carbon fibers, (2) fabricate carbon fiber
reinforced cement composites, and (3) understand the fiber/matrix interactions
and the effects on mechanical properties of the composites. These objectives
will be met by oxidizing the surface of commercially available carbon fibers in
various degrees and incorporating the fibers in portland cement paste followed
by curing. The cured composites will be characterized for microstructure,
mechanical properties, and physical properties as functions of fiber physical
and surface characteristics, curing, etc. Cement materials are extremely
brittle. Although this brittleness may be modified by fine and coarse aggregate
in mortar and concrete, these materials are still very brittle when compared to
other common construction materials such as steel and wood. The incorporation of
fibers into the cement matrix is the practical solution to the brittleness
problem. Fibers of several types - steel, asbestos, glass, and polypropylene -
are among those that have been used with success in the past. Carbon fibers are
of interest because of the high strength, low specific gravity, and high
stiffness they impart to the cement composites. The collaborators will prepare
carbon fiber/cement composites and study the effect of pretreatment of the
carbon fibers on the properties of the composite. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. The U.S. and
Korean collaborators are highly respected scientists with complementary
expertise in the preparation and study of concrete composites. The cost of
Korean participation in this project will be borne by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF)