* 8808614
* Trade, Innovation and Growth
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Elhanan Helpman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 112,287.00

The most active and exciting area in international economics currently consists
of research like this project that synthesizes international trade theory and
the theory of industrial organizations. This project develops models that allow
consideration of the important dynamic issues that arise in the context of
growth and development in an integrated world economy. A distinctive feature of
the approach to these issues in comparison with earlier studies of international
trade is the focus on the evolution of productivity change. Recent advances in
the economics of research and development and learning-by-doing in markets with
imperfect competition permit the construction of models in which innovation is
endogenous to the model of international trade and not determined by factors
outside the model. Case studies of post-war economic performance provide ample
evidence of a systematic relationship between a country's trade regime and its
long-run performance. For example, trade figures prominently in the Japanese
success story. Yet existing trade theory predicts one-shot static effects of
trade instead of the long-term dynamic regularities observed in the data. This
project develops a dynamic theory that explains the empirical regularities and
provides a basis for assessing competing explanations. This project contributes
to our understanding of the link between trading opportunities, trade strategy,
and economic growth. It also provides new and better explanations of dynamic
processes in world trade identified by empirical researchers. This project
addresses such important questions as: Do outward-looking, export-oriented less
developed economies grow faster than those that concentrate instead on domestic
markets? Does such a prescription hold for all points in time? And is welfare
maximized by a policy of benign neglect or active promotion of exports? For the
case of the industrially advanced countries, should industrial policies be used
to promote domestic firms in their dynamic international competitions? How does
trade policy influence the rate of technological innovation? What scope exists
for international cooperation to maximize overall growth of the global economy?