* 8808420
* Dissertation Research: Perceptual-Motor Response Time and   Its Implications for Information Processing Stages          Underlying Perceptual Prediction.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Julian Hochberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1990
* USD 1,602.00

Artists use static two-dimensional depth cues, such as relative size and linear
perspective, to represent three-dimensional scenes. Researchers have
traditionally considered such cues to be important in understanding how humans
perceive the world as three-dimensional, despite its only projecting a two-
dimensional image onto the back of their eyes. Recent research has downplayed
the importance of these traditional static depth cues, and has emphasized
information present in moving displays. These motion cues are believed to allow
for less ambiguous perceptions than do static displays. This research will study
the interaction between static and motion information about depth. Observers
will see a two- dimensional display in which two square objects are located on a
road flanked by poles; the objects will begin at different distances from the
observer and will approach the latter at different speeds. In one condition,
observers will predict which of the objects will first arrive at the "nearest"
poles, and press a corresponding button immediately. In the second condition,
observers will press the button precisely at the point in time that the chosen
object reaches the "nearest" poles. In both conditions, response times will be
measured for displays which represent scenes viewed from locations near the
ground and from locations well above the ground, and for displays in which there
is either a large or small difference between the heights of the "nearest" and
"farthest" poles. The research will test the expectation that high viewing
locations, and large pole- height differences provide a greater impression of
depth, and will thus result in faster, and more accurate response times. The
research will attempt to quantify the changes in information about depth
provided by the changes in perspective and relative size cues, and compare the
relative contribution to response times of the two classes of depth cues.
Research which demonstrates that specific configurations of depth cues result in
enhanced perceptual-motor performance will permit more effective designs of
graphics-driven systems, such as flight simulators and teleorobots. Results will
also suggest designs of motor vehicles that will optimize reactions to possible
collisions, for example by maximizing the driver's eye height.