* 8808393
* Semiconductor Physics and Photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/30/1988,08/31/1992
* Stephan Koch, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 08/31/1992
* USD 327,800.00

The research effort proposed here consists of three parts: MBE growth of
nonlinear materials, semiconductor physics of those materials, and nonlinear
devices using those materials. Attention will be focused initially on growing
GaAs.based structures and devices such as bulk, single. and
multiple.quantum.well samples, Fabry.Perot etalons with monolithic mirrors, as
well as starting material for nonlinear waveguides and quantum dot structures.
The optical properties of the samples will be studied, with special emphasis on
the linear and nonlinear optical properties in the spectral regions below the
exciton. Studying the absorption tail and its saturation under high excitation
is not only very interesting physics, but also helpful for characterizing the
quality of the grown samples, and essential for optimum device design and
operation. Absorption tail, carrier lifetime, and polarization dependence of the
bandgap nonlinearities will be investigated as functions of quantum well widths,
growth conditions, and device design. Microlithography and anisotropic etching
techniques will be used, to fabricate nonlinear waveguide structures such as
directional couplers and Mach.Zehnder interferometers, as well as arrays of
semiconductor etalons. Methods to manipulate the carrier lifetime and, hence,
the response time of the nonlinear devices will be investigated, and devices
will be designed for both low.power operation at relatively low speed and
forultrafast optical switching.