* 8808150
* DNA/DNA Hybridization Studies of Marsupials
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1988,10/31/1991
* John Kirsch, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1991
* USD 96,610.00

An aim of comparative biology is to identify model organisms that illustrate
general principles of evolution. Mammals are especially useful for this purpose
because they demonstrate the principle of convergent (repetitive) evolution and
can be used to test the proposition that similar ecological demands evoke
parallel evolutionary adaptations. In this context, the marsupials are
particularly important because they evolved in isolation in South America and
Australia, and came to include ecological and anatomical "mimics" of more
familiar (placental, or eutherian) mammals. Moreover, given the fact of
continental drift, relationships among marsupials themselves reflect the
detachment and increasing separation of the continents on which they occur and
there are apparently convergent similarities among geographically separated
marsupials as well as between these and eutherians; for example, some of the
American opossums are almost indistinguishable from Australian marsupials which
lead similar lives. Biologists have long argued whether the resemblances of
certain South American and Australian marsupials are in fact convergent or
represent special relationships, perhaps indicating additional "invasions" of
one continent from the other. To settle that dispute, and to develop marsupials
as a model group, more reliable genealogical trees are needed. The problem in
obtaining such trees is that anatomy can be deceiving, and ideally relationships
should be established using methods which measure internal or chemical
characteristics as well. Over the long run, the genetic material itself (DNA)
seems to change at a roughly constant rate; comparison of the DNAs of related
species can therefore give a direct measure of the time of the species'
separation from a common ancestor. DNA is made up of two strands held together
along their lengths by chemical bonds. In this study, DNA will be extracted and
purified from several species, after which the strands will be separated by
boiling. Single strands of DNA from one species will then be allowed to
hybridize, or pair, with their counterparts from another. The stability of
hybrid DNA molecules is a measure of the genetic similarity between the two
species. If measurements of the thermal stability of hybrids between many pairs
of marsupial species are made, evolutionary relationships among all of them can
be calculated. In this manner, a reliable phylogenetic tree will be constructed
and correlated with the geographic history and other features of marsupial
biology.