* 8808133
* Justification for, and Developments of, Solution Concepts   for Games
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Eddie Dekel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 91,525.00

This project is part of mathematical economics, a crucial body of research that
defines the analytical framework for rigorous economic reasoning. More
specifically, this project extends the investigator's axiomatic
characterizations of the rationality of players in non-cooperative games. The
players' rationality is defined in terms of single person decision theoretic
axioms and players are allowed to have "lexicographic" beliefs. This approach is
extended (1) to a more general single person framework; (2) to incorporate into
the beliefs the notion of forward induction rationality; (3) to allow for non
expected utility preferences in order to examine the applicability and relevance
of such preferences which have recently been developed quite extensively; (4) to
incorporate both "satisficing" and "cautious" behavior within a unified
approach; and (5) to allow for players to signal their intended strategies by
adding a preplay communication device to a game. The overall objective of this
project is to increase our understanding of solution concepts prevalent in the
applications of game theory, and to apply this to see how certain properties can
be incorporated into non-cooperative game theory. This is important because non-
cooperative solution concepts of games, in particular Nash Equilibrium, are
often applied to economic models. By examining the assumptions underlying
several of these solution concepts, this project makes explicit the assumptions
underlying predictions of the economic models which apply these game theoretic
tools. Since for most economic models there are multiple equilibria, examination
of the assumptions underlying the different solutions helps the analyst select
among the equilibria and provides a unified way to make sharper predictions in
many models.