* 8808992
* Endogenous and Temporary Monetary and Fiscal Policy         in Open Economies
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Wilfred Ethier, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* jerry blackmon
* 01/31/1992
* USD 97,122.00

This research examines the effects and relevance of temporary policies, both
when policy is actually temporary, and when temporariness lies in the background
as a credible threat (like a temporary capital levy which may not be observed,
but it is important enough to influence the rate of capital accumulation). The
distinction between temporary and permanent policy is well recognized in modern
macroeconomics but permanent policy is still the dominant paradigm in open-
economy macroeconomics (e.g., the gains-from-trade literature that lies at the
heart of recent structural adjustment programs). The project has two main parts:
Endogenous Policy and Temporary Policy. The first part investigates models in
which the government maximizes social welfare without pre-commitment. In
particular, the role of debt repudiation--direct or through inflation or
devaluation--will be analyzed. The second part-- temporariness--will study
effects of fiscal and monetary policies that are temporary or non-credible.
Special attention will be placed on staggered prices, flexible exchange rates
and uncertainty. Most of the questions examined in this research are relevant
for open economies where international capital mobility has a significant role.
One of the results suggested by the author's earlier work is that the costs of
temporary (e.g. non-credible) policy can be substantial, particularly when
countries have easy access to the international capital market, as during the
1970's. This hypothesis is explored in the context of different relevant
scenarios. At a deeper level, the research attempts to find explanations for the
prevalent phenomenon of temporariness or lack of credibility.