* 8808361
* Long-Term Support for the National Election Studies: 1989-  1993
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1994
* Warren Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1994
* USD 4,753,940.00

This award continues the Foundation's long-term support for the National
Election Studies (NES). NES is an organization dedicated to sustaining and
enhancing the diversified data base that supports basic research on voting,
public opinion, and political participation in the United States. The importance
of NES derives in part from the significance of these topics; voting, public
opinion and participation are fundamental to the promise and performance of
democratic forms of government. The NES represent the largest and most widely
used longitudinal data collections on electoral behavior in the United States.
Over the last two decades, NES has provided the conceptual and empirical
foundation for research that has deepened our understanding of the role that
Americans play in their own governance. At the same time, because processes
surrounding voting, public opinion and participation can be treated as special
cases of more generic aspects of social behavior - - rational choice, coalition
formation, perception, attitude formation and change, and much more - - NES data
have been put to a wide variety of purposes outside political science. In
addition to pre/post election surveys of a national probability sample of the
American electorate as the core data collections in 1990 and 1992, this award
allows for planning, pilot studies, and implementation of research on these two
elections. The award also provides support for the Board of Overseers that
advises the Principal Investigator on the direction of NES, represents the
community of researchers who use NES data, and guarantees the channeling of
fresh insights and ideas into the election studies. The National Election
Studies are an important national resource. They provide the data base for a
large proportion of the research currently being conducted on American
government and politics and will allow future scholars a solid empirical base on
which to chart political trends. Important advances in the theoretical
understanding of democratic processes should result from analyses of these data.