* 8808524
* Studies in the Theory of Competitive Market Allocation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* David Cass, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1991
* USD 79,097.00

General equilibrium analysis of incomplete markets is currently one of the most
active and productive areas of research in economic theory. This line of
research captures important market features assumed away by traditional economic
models. This body of work has proven especially valuable in studying excess
market volatility. The investigator was one of the pioneers in this area and is
responsible for much of the key work. This grant provides renewed support for
the study of two basic kinds of problems in the theory of competitive market
allocation: First, the formulation and analysis of institutional frictions on
financial markets, and second, the introduction and analysis of extrinsic
uncertainty in perfect foresight economic models. The first part consists of
systematically refining the specification of financial instruments or market
restrictions in models of incomplete markets. More broadly, the project looks
into problems of extending general equilibrium models with frictions on
financial markets to incorporate, on the one hand, endogenous provision of the
types of financial instruments, and, on the other, endogenous determination of
the forms of market restrictions. The second part introduces and analyzes
extrinsic uncertainty in perfect foresight economic models. Extrinsic
uncertainty is just uncertainty which only influences allocation through the way
agents perceive the process of market price determination and not through any
direct influence on underlying economic fundamentals, preferences, endowments or
technology. Extrinsic uncertainty theory is called sunspot theory after a famous
example in which the beliefs of economic agents that sunspots influence the
market were shown to cause sunspot equilibria, i.e., market equilibria
determined in part by sunspots. The project provides a comprehensive overview of
the various diverse circumstances under which market economies are not immune to
sunspots. The project shows how incomplete markets are linked to the emergence
of sunspots and how sunspot equilibria differ from nonsunspot equilibria.
Sunspot theory has attracted considerable attention because it offers a rigorous
explanation of market instability and indeterminacy. The results of this project
will help us determine whether or not extrinsic uncertainty can explain the
volatility of financial markets observed in the October, 1987 stock market
crash. By linking specific market institutions to the emergence of sunspot
equilibria, this project could provide new insights into institutional changes
that would improve market performance.