* 8808865
* Research Initiation:  A Bilevel Programming Methodology for Optimizing Control of Chemical Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Peter Clark, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1990
* USD 59,988.00

The objectives of control and operation of industrial processes are set up in a
hierarchial mode. Short-term, random, rapid fluctuations are handled by
regulators which implement some chosen operating policy and are at the bottom of
the control hierarchy. Medium-term transients are the domain of an optimizing
layer in the middle of the hierarchy, which produces setpoints to respond to
changes in operating policy, process performance and feed quality. Long-term
changes are managed by a production planning layer at the top of the hierarchy,
which allocates feeds, assigns production rates and determines the best mix of
products in response to changing market conditions. Thus, the process is
insulated from a failure of a higher layer by the presence of the lower ones,
e.g., if the optimizing computer goes down, operation will still continue under
the direction of the regulator. These control schemes in the past were designed
assuming that the regulator acts much more quickly than the optimizer, so the
optimizer can ignore the dynamics of the regulator. The principal goal of this
research is to develop a novel optimizing control frame work that explicitly
accounts for the interplay between the optimizer and the regulator. Continuing
pressures to operate with reduced inventories have caused feedstocks to be
purchased in smaller quantities, on an "as needed" basis. If a commodity
available from several producers is used as a feed, this introduces a source of
significant variations into a process. This higher frequency of feed changes
demands more frequent action by the optimizer. However, imposing a more rapid
optimizing action on industrial processes with slow dynamics pushes the time
scales of the optimizer and regulator closer, making an optimizer which ignores
the actions of the regulator inadequate. The proposed approach to account for
the interaction between the optimizer and the regulator in such circumstances
uses an optimization formulation known as the bilevel program. The PI proposes
to develop an efficient algorithm for solving this optimization problem.