* 8808853
* Research Initiation:  Influence of Carbon Fibers Surface    Modifications on Mechanical Properties of C-C Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1988,03/31/1991
* Witold Kowbel, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 03/31/1991
* USD 64,049.00

The objectives of this 2 year study of the interfacial and mechanical properties
of Carbon-Carbon Composites are: (1) to find effective surface treatments and
de-treatments which would lower the chemical bonding and increase mechanical
bonding and interfacial coefficient of friction; and (2) to determine the
correlation between surface functional groups and the mechanism of load transfer
from fiber to matrix, interfacial bond strength and fracture toughness. The
fiber surface treatments will include oxygen, argon plasma etching and nitric
acid treatment. The surface characteristic of treated and untreated fibers will
be determined using Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis and Fourier
Transform Infrared Spectroscopy. The C-C composites will be produced using both
treated and untreated fabrics. All the composites will be analyzed using
electron microscopy, destructive and non-destructive mechanical testing. The
resulting mechanical properties will be correlated with the surface properties
of the fabrics. This study will answer the fundamental question related to
synergetic mechanism of the matrix by employing weak chemical bond, mechanical
bond and high coefficient of interfacial friction. In addition, the results of
this research will assist in the optimization of mechanical properties of C-C
composites, increasing their chances for wider technological applications.