* 8808149
* Curation and Facilities Improvement of the Collection of    Large Mammals at the Los Angeles County Museum of Natural   History
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1990
* John Heyning, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 01/31/1990
* USD 51,880.00

The Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County holds the second largest
collection of marine mammal specimens in the United States as well as one of the
largest collections of ungulates (hoofed mammals). These collections have grown
at an exponential rate over the past two decades and are now housed at an off-
site facility. The specimens are of great scientific value; however, previous
funding constraints and limited staffing have prevented them from being properly
documented, prepared, and stored. The research collection of marine mammal
specimens is of particular scientific importance because so little is known
about the general biology of these animals. The majority of marine mammal
specimens have beeen collected from dead, stranded animals, but the collection
also includes animals killed accidentally in fishing operations, and hunted by
aboriginal peoples. These specimens contribute to our knowledge of the
distribution, natural history, anatomy, and evolution of the various specimens.
Data gathered from these specimens also are used to answer many of the questions
regarding the direct and indirect impact of man upon these aquatic mammals. This
project will provide additional staff to continue the process of curating the
backlog of previously collected specimens so they are properly cleaned,
documenting and cross referencing the associated data, and storing both
specimens and data so they are readily available for scientific study. The
project also provides additional equipment to adequately store and move large,
fragile specimens.