* 8808602
* Speech Pattern Recognition Processes with Normal and        Cochlear-Implant Produced Hearing
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1989,05/01/1989
* Vivien Tartter, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 05/01/1989
* USD 574.00

A significant recent advance in medical technology has been the development of
the cochlear implant. This is a device which is surgically attached to the
cochlea, or inner ear, connecting electrodes to cochlear nerves. The wearer
carries a small radio- like device outside the body which translates sounds into
elec- trical impulses transmitted directly to cochlear nerves via the
electrodes, and the impulses are "heard" by the brain in a way which the wearer
is able to interpret. For people with certain kinds of deafness, cochlear
implants have already provided significant enhancements in their ability to
understand speech, most usually in conjunction with lip reading but sometimes
even in the absence of visual cues. The growing success of cochlear implantation
presents interesting challenges to the science of speech perception, since only
a fraction of the information in the acoustical signal is actually translated
into electrical impulses. To the extent that the user is able to interpret the
impoverished signal accurately, this shows that key perceptual information is
included in it, thus affording a new perspective on the fundamental problem of
speech perception: what are the acoustic properties of speech which determine
accurate perception? This research project is a systematic exploration of the
nature of the signal received by cochlear implantees, and their perception of
it. The research will focus on wearers of the newly developed "Australian
nucleus" implant, which is a multi- channel device and carries much more
information than earlier models. The researcher will examine the speech
perception of implantees, the changes in their speech patterns over time, and
the reactions of normal listeners to speech signals distorted in the ways which
the implant device distorts them for its users. The principal research aim of
the project is to identify the components of the distorted signal which enable
correct percep- tion. A successful outcome will be an important contribution to
speech science, as well as offering the possibility of further improvements in
the design of cochlear implants.