* 8808942
* Phospholipids Store Choline for Acetylcholine Synthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Jan Blusztajn, Mallory Pathology Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/29/1992
* USD 173,583.00

These studies are designed to explore a fundamental biochemical property of
cholinergic neurons, nerve cells that synthesize and release acetylcholine as
their neurotransmitter. These neurons are unique among cells since they alone
utilize choline not only as a precursor of phospholipids ?phosphatidylcholine,
sphingomyelin, plasmalogens!, the major structural components of all biological
membranes, but also as a precursor of acetylcholine. This metabolic property of
cholinergic neurons led to a recently verified hypothesis (by studies of a
purely cholinergic population of human neuroblastoma cells, LA-N-2) that choline
stored in membranes as a component of phospholipids is available for
acetylcholine synthesis. The overall goal of this study is to explore the
metabolic mechanisms that regulate the reversible fluxes of choline between the
membrane phosphatidylcholine and acetylcholine in LA-N-2 cells. The predominant
pathway of phosphatidylcholine metabolism and contribution of
phosphatidylcholine in providing choline for acetylcholine synthesis will be
determined. The effects on choline transfer from phosphatidylcholine to
acetylcholine of 1. neuronal firing, and 2. extracellular choline concentration,
will be characterized. Specific "pools" of phosphatidylcholine (defined by
pathway of synthesis, or subcellular localization) that might preferentially be
utilized to provide choline for acetylcholine synthesis will be identified. The
studies will be performed using radiolabeled precursors of phosphatidylcholine
and acetylcholine and tracing the metabolic fate of the labeled precursors by
high performance liquid chromatography. The results of this study will improve
the understanding of the metabolic processes that regulate neurotransmission as
well as those that regulate the structure and functions of biological membranes,
allowing for the formulation of theoretical models of neuronal function and for
medical applications in diseases characterized by impaired cholinergic
neurotransmission.