* 8808596
* Qualitative Modeling and Machine Learning Applied to the    Real-Time Estimation of Chemical Process Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Douglas Cooper, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1990
* USD 59,899.00

The control of dynamically changing processes, for example those operated in a
batch or semi-batch mode, are complex because the mathematical models used to
implement the control strategies do not have analytical solutions. Numerical
solutions such as recursive least-squares (RLS) estimation are sometimes used,
but these are not easy to implement for chemical processing systems which may be
high order, time-varying, non-linear or all three. Modifying RLS incorporating
specific system characteristics has been used successfully resulting in
solutions that have limited applicability. In this work, the PI plans to
generate automatic control algorithms using RLS that are based on classifying
disturbances into one of three categories and planning control action
accordingly. The resulting method is expected to have general applicability.
There are three basic types of disturbances: 1) Slow drift in system state - for
such systems there is an acceptable band of operating conditions which will
permit the use of linearized models, but the process will ultimately move out of
this band (real examples are caused by catalyst decay, fouling and slagging,
etc.). 2) Short periods of steady state operation - this causes linear dynamic
models to be inoperable. 3) Sudden change in setpoint - immediately following
such disturbances linear models will be grossly inaccurate (real examples occur
when feed lots are changed, for example). The PI plans to design his algorithm
so that it will decompose all disturbances into combinations of one or more of
these. The method then involves continuous diagnosis of process behavior to
update control action.