* 8808183
* Sample Introduction for Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic   Emission Spectrometry and Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass   Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Richard Browner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Vickie Lewis
* 12/31/1991
* USD 358,200.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy. The thrust of
this experimental project continues studies initiated under NSF grant
CHE-8503090 that focus on sample introduction for inductively coupled plasma
atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP/AES) and inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry (ICP/MS). A number of physical parameters which describe aerosol
generation, transport, evaporation, and interactions with the plasma will be
measured. These parameters include drop size distributions of aerosols, and mass
transport values for analyte and solvent transport to the plasma. A key aspect
of the work is an investigation of the mechanisms of solvent liquid and vapor
interaction with the plasma, which appear to exert a major effect on important
plasma properties, such as ionization temperature and electron density. As part
of this research, a working model of aerosol generation, using pneumatic and
other means of nebulization will be developed, based on experimental data
obtained by laser Fraunhofer scattering. The use of a monodisperse aerosol
generator (MAGIC) interface as a means of introducing desolvated analyte to both
atmospheric pressure and low pressure radio frequency discharges will be
investigated, and the fundamental aerodynamic, particle dynamic, and transport
aspects of these interfaces will be studied. The low pressure interface will be
coupled to a novel low-pressure ICP for use in both ICP/AES and ICP/MS. This
research, which focusses on the historically weak link (sample introduction) in
ICP-based analyses, opens the door to broader applications of analytically
powerful ICP spectroscopic techniques and should enable the development of new
technologies which could be capitalized upon by private sector instrument
manufacturers.