* 8808332
* Sources of Organizational Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1989
* Pamela Tolbert, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 12/31/1989
* USD 12,000.00

Understanding the ways in which organizations do and do not change over time has
recently come to the fore of the sociological research agenda. Two major
theoretical perspectives have emerged to explain how and whether organizations
adapt to changing environments. In the population ecology perspective,
organizations are seen as adopting structural arrangements suited to the
technological and social constraints of the environment at the time of their
founding. Over time and as organizations grow these arrangements are assumed to
be increasingly difficult to change. This leads to the prediction that
organizations created in the same era will share similar structures, and that
these structural similarities will persist over time. The institutional
perspective, by contrast, emphasizes the importance of social, legal, and
political definitions as determinants of organizational structure. From this
vantage point, as such definitions change, organizations also change, adapting
their structures to conform to prevailing understandings and expectations. Thus
the institutional prediction is that organizations at any given point in time
will exhibit structural similarities regardless of when they were founded. The
present research will test these differing predictions through a cohort analysis
of colleges and universities. Cohort analysis is a demographic technique that
allows the identification of 3 separate sources of population change: cohort
effects, produced by births and deaths of members with generationally defined
characteristics; period effects, produced by births and deaths of members with
generationally defined characteristics; period effects, produced by widespread
adoption of new behaviors or attributes; and age effects, produced by natural
maturation processes. The present award, made under the Research Opportunities
for Women Planning Grant Program, will support the preparation of a data set on
characteristics of all U.S colleges and universities in a form suitable for
cohort analysis. The work is intended to demonstrate the usefulness of cohort
analyis to organizational questions, as well as to advance our understanding of
the determinants of organizational change.