* 8808172
* Ross Sea Data Buoy Project, 1988
* O/D,OPP
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Norbert Untersteiner, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 10/31/1990
* USD 295,814.00

This project is the renewal of a study of antarctic sea ice deformation. It
consists of setting out an array of nine data buoys on the annual sea ice cover
of the Ross Sea in June 1988, in order to determine its movement, rate of
deformation, strain rates, and divergence/production statistics. The buoys will
be dropped from a C-141 aircraft in the course of the McMurdo mid-winter airdrop
mission. Buoy sensors will measure surface air pressure and temperature, and
transmit this data, as well as location data, via satellite approximately every
two hours. The buoys are expected to operate for at least four months, and
possibly up to ten months. The data will be used in the statistical
characterization of the sea ice kinematics, the sea level pressure field, and
the geostrophic wind. The strain rate and divergence data when combined with
passive microwave data, can be used to assess the regional and sub-regional ice
budget. The sea ice movement in response to the mean and fluctuating component
of the wind field may be used to assess the relative importance of forcing by
wind and currents, and of the momentum dissipation by internal ice stresses. The
observations from the 1987 array are now in the process of being analyzed and
are being collated with automatic weather station data. Preliminary studies have
shown that the buoy motions can resolve both synoptic and tidal movements of the
sea ice cover, and indicate general divergence and ice production in the eastern
Ross Sea, and convergence and ridge formation in the western Ross Sea. This is
the first time that a quantified analysis of this kind has ever been undertaken,
and the first time that the differential motions of the Ross Sea ice cover have
ever been observed.