* 8808264
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Network Analyzer for Laser Probe Measurement System (Supplement for Women,       Minority and Handicapped Engineering Research Assistant)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1988,03/31/1991
* William Hunt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 03/31/1991
* USD 31,708.00

This Engineering Research Equipment Grant will support experimental research
focused primarily on the development of Acoustic Charge Transport (ACT) devices,
a relatively new technology. Very briefly, the ACT device was invented at the
University of Illinois by Hoskins and Hunsinger in 1982 and is essentially a
Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) for which the charge packets are transported by the
potential which propagates with a surface acoustic wave (SAW) instead of the
potential imposed by clock pulses applied to surface electrodes. ACT devices
with charge transfer efficiencies of 0.99994 and bandwidths of 200 MHz have been
fabricated and this is well beyond what has been achieved with CCD technology.
ACT is a promising and viable technology which has thus far been used to make
convolvers, correlators, filters, and analog memories. Other potential devices
included A/D converters, array processors, programmable filters and imagers.
Because the acoustic wave transports the charge, tap weight accuracies for
filters and other ACT signal processing devices depend on the ability of the
device designer to describe the acoustic beam profile. As such, acoustics play a
crucial role in the emergence and development of this technology. The network
analyzer requested in this proposal is part of a laser probe measurement system
to be used in studying the details of SAW propagation and generation in
piezoelectric semiconductors and heterostructures of piezoelectric
semiconductors as they pertain to the performance of ACT devices.