* 8808497
* Comparative Marine Chemistries of Rhenium, Platinum Group   Metals and Their Periodic Table Neighbors
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Edward Goldberg, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/1990
* USD 180,348.00

Rhodium and osmium are the only stable elements not yet analyzed in seawater.
This is a consequence of their predictably very low concentrations (pg/l) and of
the diffi- culties of analysis. Their marine chemistries, compared to other
platinum-group metals in the periodic table may remarkably increase our
understanding of complexing and redox reactions in the oceans. Until we have a
broad understanding of their disposition within oxic and anoxic marine sediments
and marine waters, we cannot pursue this matter. Dr. Goldberg proposes to
develop not only analytical techniques for these two metals but their analyses
in seawaters and semiments previously assayed for other platinum group metals
and their periodic table neighbors. Analytical methods for both elements will
utilize graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry. Radioactive yield
tracers, Rh-102 and Os-185, will be prepared from cyclotron bombardments of
Ru-102 and Re-185 and will be used in all analyses. These two metals will be
analyzed in seawaters to depths of 4000m off the coast of California, in
ferromanganese minerals, pelagic sediments, coastal sediments phosphorites and
hydrothermal sulfides. Their redox state (and perhaps speciation) in seawaters
will be sought from their enrichments, or lack thereof, in minerals that form
under oxidizing and reducing conditions.