* 8808201
* Experiments on Equilibrium Selection in Coordination Games  (REU Supplement)
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Douglas DeJong, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1991
* USD 154,451.00

Laboratory experiments, such as the experiments in this project, test and enrich
economic theory. This project uses laboratory experiments to examine questions
of equilibrium selection in coordination games. These games are characterized by
the existence of multiple equilibria which are rankable. In these games,
coordination failures occur when all players are better off in one equilibrium
relative to another yet may be unable to explicitly coordinate their strategies
to achieve the preferred outcome. The project explores whether coordination
failures arise and provides a characterization of the factors which increase the
likelihood of such failures. It examines the ability of different mechanisms,
e.g., communication and pre-play experience, to attenuate these failures. The
project also considers an economic application of a coordination game by
examining a double moral hazard problem in product markets. Economic theory
suggests that coordination failure could be a major factor in macroeconomic
instability and microeconomic market imperfections. This project will provide
some of the first empirical evidence of the existence and significance of
coordination failures in a controlled laboratory environment. This project is
also methodologically important because it tests widely used game-theoretic
concepts such as mechanisms for pre- play communication. Preliminary results
suggest that a plausible pre-play communication mechanism fails laboratory
experimental tests.