* 8808789
* Research Initiation: Transient Heat Transfer and Thermal Stresses in Rapid Annealing of Semiconductors with Incoherent Light
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,07/31/1989
* Shyh-Jye Pien, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tammi Owens
* 07/31/1989
* USD 68,800.00

This research considers the rapid thermal annealing of ion- implanted silicon
wafers with incoherent light. Thermal modeling of the transient heat transfer
and the thermoelastic stresses of the thermally activated annealing processes
will be performed. The analytical modeling considers the two-dimensional
contributions, the moving boundary at the amorphous-crystalline interface due to
the solid phase epitaxy, and the variations of the optical and thermal physical
properties. A finite-difference numerical program will be developed to solve the
mathematical model. The computer-aided analysis will broaden the applications to
more specific and complex systems. An experimental investigation will also
address the annealing process. The data will be useful for the validation and
improvement of analytical and numerical models. Rapid thermal annealing is a new
and promising technology related to IC wafer fabrication the VLSI applications
in the semiconductor industry. The proposed research will provide a systematic
thermal analysis for ion-implanted semiconductors during rapid thermal annealing
processes by incoherent light. The results may improve the understanding of the
heat transfer mechanism and the thermal stresses induced during the thermally
activated processes. The success of this research can lead to high quality
semiconductors produced in an energy efficient method with high reproducibility.