* 8808739
* The Diffusion of New Technologies in the U.S. Factory Made  Clothing  Industry
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Jane Farrell-Beck, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1989
* USD 7,435.00

Textile and garment manufacturing have historically been one of the most
important industries in the United States. Even today, major trade disputes
center upon efforts to protect our domestic textile and garment manufacturers
from foreign competition. Within women's history, garment manufacturing has been
especially important since, next to domestic service, it was the principal
employer of women in the 19th century. Yet we know very little about garment
workers or the development and diffusion of new garment making technologies--
especially in comparison to textile workers and the textile technology. How did
new technologies change this industry? How did it make possible the move from a
cottage industry to a factory industry? How did the new technologies affect the
introduction of new product lines? In order to begin to examine these and other
questions concerning this important industry, Dr. Farrell-Beck has three aims
under this research grant: to document the use of selected sewing machines and
attachments in manufactured U. S. clothing in the second half of the 19th
century; to determine the time lag between patenting of machines and attachments
and their application to factory production of clothing; and to learn how
construction of factory made clothing changed between 1850 and 1899. The project
is designed to bridge the gap between research on sewing machines and studies of
19th century clothing construction by analyzing garments as machine products.
This research will extend knowledge of 19th century industries, complement the
literature on the manufacture of yarn and fabric in the United States, and
reveal differences in manufacturing technology between clothing and other goods.
In order to carry out this research, Dr. Farrell-Beck will examine selected U.
S. patents for sewing machines and attachments, then examine all aspects of the
construction of 150 factory made garments for men, women and children in the
period before 1900. She will carry out this research in three large museum
collections in Minnesota, Michigan, and New York. She will analyze results in
order to determine what trends are apparent in the diffusion of technologies and
techniques in this important industry.