* 8808825
* Monetary Policy, Business Fluctuations, and Economic Growth
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Robert Barro, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 164,880.00

This project is part of a large body of research into the behavior of such
macroeconomic aggregates as inflation, unemployment and economic growth. The
project consists of three parts. The first part continues the development and
empirical testing of a theory of monetary policy in which the central bank
targets nominal interest rates. Preliminary empirical results for the post-World
War II period for the U.S., where interest- rate targeting seems especially to
apply, show the theoretical hypotheses match up well with the behavior of money,
prices, and interest rates. The project extends the theory and tests the model
on pre-World War I data for the U.S., a period when interest-rate targeting did
not apply because the U.S. was on the gold standard. It also applies the model
to a long history of British data stretching from the early 1700s through the
present. The second part deals with the persistence of unemployment, which has
been pronounced in recent years. A time-series approach is used to assess the
extent of this persistence in various countries over various time periods. These
measures of persistence are related to variables that an economic model says
should matter for the economy's speed of adjustment. Preliminary results suggest
some effects from unionization, the form of labor bargaining, and the size of
government. Further research focuses on the empirical side, especially on the
role of restrictions on firing and hiring in the labor market. The third part
concerns extensions of models of endogenous economic growth developed under the
previous grant. The project merges analyses of population growth with recent
theory of technological progress. These models show how long-term growth rates
depend on such variables as government policies, natural resources and rates of
time preferences. These theories are utilized to explain some differences in
growth performances across countries. This ambitious agenda is important from
both a scientific and policy perspective. Scientifically, the project
contributes new theories of monetary policy, unemployment and economic growth.
The theory of economic growth is especially exciting because it synthesizes work
in labor economics, technological change and macroeconomics. This new theory not
only will provide a more powerful and general way of studying overall economic
performance, but it enriches different fields of economic research by drawing
them together. The project also addresses timely policy issues such as the
appropriateness of interest-rate targeting and the effectiveness of different
unemployment policies.