* 8808817
* Research Initiation:  Micromixing Effects in Fast Aluminum  Neutralization-Precipitation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Mark Clark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 05/31/1991
* USD 78,000.00

The objective of this project is to determine whether combining mathematical
models of flow and small scale mixing with kinetic models for the
neutralization-precipitation of aluminum in water treatment processes could
predict the nature of the speciation of aluminum that occurs during fast-base
neutralization in small, batch turbine reactors. While equilibrium chemical
models have advanced the understanding of the chemistry of the aluminum system
and its efficacy as a chemical coagulant for the treatment of potable waters,
current approaches are unable to provide a prediction of the commonly observed
effects of variable mixing and reactant injection techniques on final aluminum
product distribution during treatment of drinking waters with aluminum
coagulants. This project involves a study of the kinetics of aluminum product
transformation in near-homogeneous base neutralization experiments (stopped-flow
technique). Membrane filtration techniques and photon correlation spectroscopy
will be used to monitor the formation of aluminum polymers and precipitate
particles. The kinetic data will be incorporated in trial kinetic expressions
and combined with specification for large and small scale mixing ("micromixing")
of aluminum and base in turbulent reactors. The predictions of this mathematical
model will be compared with experimental results for aluminum product speciation
in larger scale aluminum neutralization studies with variable mixing and
reactant injection techniques. Results of this work are likely to be applied
toward improving the engineering design of water and wastewater treatment
processes and systems.