* 8808709
* Modeling High Viscosity Melt-Phase Polycondensation ReactorsUsing Direct Inclusion of Experimental Mixing Data
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Kendree Sampson, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1991
* USD 61,467.00

Condensation polymerization in a melt-phase process is used to manufacture, for
example, thermoplastic polyesters (polyethylene terephthalate) and polyamides.
These polymers are used in packaging (beverage bottles), fibers, films, and
adhesives. The manufacturing process requires continuous removal of the
condensation product from the reaction mass to drive such reversible reactions
to high conversion. Typical polycondensation reactor configurations include twin
screw and multiple screw extruders, twin shaft paddle mixers, horizontal disc-
ring reactors and stirred tanks with an anchorage agitator. The primary
objective of this research project is to gain a fundamental understanding of the
reaction kinetics, mixing, and mass transfer which occur in the manufacture of
high viscosity condensation polymers using melt-phase processes. Current design
procedures are empirical and inadequate for the increasingly higher viscosity
polymers being manufactured today. Another factor is that present
commercialization pressures involve shorter and shorter product development
times. This research program will consist of three components. Experimental
mixing data will be generated for a disc-ring reactor. This data along with
reaction rate and diffusion parameters will be incorporated into a mathematical
framework which is capable of predicting the overall reaction rate in a
polycondensation reaction system. Finally, the model will be partially validated
by comparing it against experimental devolatilization rate data.