* 8808453
* The Influence of Discourse-Level Information on the         Processing of Upcoming Words
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Paula Schwanenflugel, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1990
* USD 11,952.00

In the past few years, the way in which simple word and sentence contexts
influence the processing of upcoming words during reading has come increasingly
to be understood. However, more needs to be understood about the way in which
these fairly local context effects are interrelated and combined with other
information from paragraphs. This research is designed to elucidate how readers
combine distant paragraph information with local sentence information in reading
upcoming words in text. Specifically, the research will examine potential
changes that may occur in word reading when expectations for particular words
derived on the basis of local sentence information are contradicted by
information embedded more distantly in the paragraph. The research will address
several points: First, it will clarify whether paragraph information is
continuallly combined with local information or whether effects from distant
sources operate independently from local sources in the processing of upcoming
words in text. Second, the research will examine the degree to which the
predictability of local information affects how that distant information is used
in reading words. Last, the research will assess whether this distant
information has its influence at the point at which the upcoming word is
recognized or only later when the meaning of the word is integrated with the
meaning of the text. The information gained from this work will be useful in the
development of guidelines for designing highly readable texts.