* 8808997
* Research Equipment Grant:  Langmuir/Blodgett                Deposition Apparatus
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Pieter Stroeve, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1989
* USD 45,000.00

An alternating layer Langmuir/Blodgett trough and support system equipment will
be used to conduct research on the deposition and characterization of ultrathin
polymeric films. The materials chosen for examination will be polymers with
substituted dyes selected for their nonlinear optical properties. Second order
nonlinear performance, such as second harmonic generation and the linear
electro-optic effect, will be measured for the completed film assemblies. The
assemblies must maintain noncentrosymmetric order throughout if they are to
produce the extraordinary large effects predicted. Thus, the assemblies are
built up in an alternating layer fashion using the active polymer interleaved
with either inert organic layers or with other active species synthesized to
present a net nonsymmetric order for each pair of layers. The development of
novel nonlinear materials is a critical technological issue. Optical fiber
communication systems require the development of switches, modulators, and
dispersion compensation. Organic molecules, such as hemocyanin dyes, possess the
largest second order nonlinear coefficients known. The Langmuir/Blodgett permits
the development of multi-monolayer film architectures which may provide the
performance in the film assembly expected from the molecular behavior. Thus,
research devoted to studying interleaved organic and polymeric materials may
provide key components for optical systems of the future.