* 8808970
* Research Initiation:  Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow in FusionWelding
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Yogendra Joshi, Naval Postgraduate School
* Interagency Agreement
* Tammi Owens
* 08/31/1991
* USD 69,950.00

This research is an experimental and computational investigation of the thermo-
fluid processes associated with fusion welding. The effort is divided into three
smaller, clearly focused investigations. The first of these is an experimental
simulation of fusion welding, employing a low melting point eutectic. Detailed
temperature measurements and surface fluid flow visualizations will be carried
out to study the multidimensional, transient transport processes involving phase
change. This study will provide a starting point for the subsequent temperature
measurements in the gas tungsten arc (GTA) welding process. Thermal histories at
various locations during GTA welding will be measured for lead, aluminum and
steels. To complement the two experimental studies, computations of heat
transfer and fluid flow during fusion welding will also be performed. There are
two primary goals of this research. First, a fundamental understanding of the
heat transfer and fluid flow processes associated with fusion welding is sought.
A number of complex features such as multidimensional convection and conduction
transport, change of phase, surface tension and multiple of physical mechanisms
which have not previously been considered together in detail. These studies will
also provide guidelines to the welding engineer to correlate the thermo-fluid
processes with the post weld mechanical properties. In addition, the possibility
of providing real time corrective action during welding, using heat and fluid
flow measurements will be examined. This will permit real time control of
automated welding operations to improve weld quality.