* 8808015
* Toward Accurate Inference in Nonlinear Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1988,03/31/1992
* A. Ronald Gallant, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/1992
* USD 129,320.00

This award is for continued support for a program of research focusing on
nonlinear, econometric methods. The research is based on the premise that an
econometric specification is an approximation to an underlying data generating
mechanism. In keeping with this perspective, methodologies will be developed
that improve the approximation as more information becomes available and permits
more reliable inference at each intermediate stage of model evolution. The
scientific importance of this research derives from the fact that the goal of
empirical research is to make an inference about an economic proposition per se,
not about an economic proposition entangled with a potentially misspecified or
incorrect model. With standard approaches to specification tests, one cannot be
sure that the estimate associated with an inference is accurate. The objective
of this research can be viewed as the development of a model selection strategy
that guarantees that the final estimate is accurate. This objective is to be
accomplished at a level of generality that encompasses most nonlinear,
econometric inference procedures. The basic idea is to endow a procedure with
nonparametric properties by replacing the structural model with a truncated
series expansion, or the error density with a truncated expansion, or both. By
letting the truncation point grow adaptively with sample size, ultimate
convergence to the underlying data generating mechanism is assured. Applications
to conditionally heterogeneous time-series such as occur in finance and monetary
and macro economics will be undertaken. Bayesian methods will also be
investigated.