* 8808019
* Transition Metal Sulfur and Oxygen Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1993
* George Christou, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 11/30/1993
* USD 379,699.00

The focus of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program is metal-sulfur and metal-oxygen chemistry, with emphasis on
the development of Group 5 metal-sulfur and manganese-oxygen chemistry. One
objective is to explore the structures, physicochemical properties and
reactivities of group 5 metal-sulfur compounds as a function of metal identity
(V, Nb or Ta) and oxidation level. The ligands under study are thiolates and
sulfide. Of especial interest is the synthesis of singly- or multiply-bonded
metal clusters supported solely by sulfur-based ligation. A second objective is
the synthesis of compounds of higher oxidation state (&gt;II) compounds of
manganese containing oxide bridges and with primarily carboxylate ligation. Also
encompassed in this work is a search for higher and higher nuclearity species,
which are expected to possess novel structural and magnetic properties, and be
of relevance both to biological systems containing high nuclearity M/O
aggregates and to the magnetic properties of single-domain magnetic oxide
particles. Some of the new compounds which will be synthesized are expected to
be improved models of such important metalloproteins as those which are involved
in photosynthesis. Studies of the high nuclearity metal-oxygen complexes will
provide a better understanding of the changes in magnetic behavior which
accompany changes in particle size of such metal oxides as magnetite. Magnetic
metal oxides are used in digital data storage.