* 8808204
* Information and Incentives in Dynamic Games
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Drew Fudenberg, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1991
* USD 106,123.00

Mathematical economics provides rigorous models and powerful analytical tools
for studying a wide range of important and fundamental economic issues. This
project emphasizes some of most active areas of research in mathematical
economics, namely work on the roles played by information and incentives in
dynamic bargaining among economic agents. The project consists of three parts.
The first part explores the idea that equilibrium in games might arise as the
result of the players learning from thir previous play. This new approach does
not model the learning process as part of an equilibrium, but rather assumes
that the players use different sorts of "reasonable" behavioal rules. One
question given special attention is the relationship between restrictions on
these behavioral rules and various sorts of euilibrium refinements. The second
part generalizes single player studies of reputation-effects. Previous research
found the reputation effects particularly powerful when only a single player has
an incentive to maintain a reputation. The single player is able to pick out the
equilibrium he most prefers through maintaining a reputation. The third part
studies the nature of the optimal contract between a risk-neutral principal and
a risk-averse agent when the agent's action is subject to moral hazard and the
parties are free to renegotiate the contract after the agent has performed his
duties but before all the effects of the agent's actions have been revealed. The
objective of this part of the project is to learn how the constraint to
renegotiation-proof contracts limits the amount of risk that the agent can be
forced to bear, and the amount of effort that the agent can be induced to
provide. This project makes methodological and substantive contributions to our
understanding of information and incentives in the dynamics of economic games.
Methodologically, the project develops a new approach to dynamic games that
allows the analyst to derive and not just assume the beliefs of the participants
in the games. The traditional approach obtains solutions to dynamic games by
making "plausible" assumptions about the beliefs of players. These assumptions
are called equilibrium refinements. Unfortunately, game-theoretic models usually
can not be tested because there are many different plausible assumptions about
player beliefs, each with a different outcome; hence, this new approach moves us
closer to the goal of a testable dynamic game theory. Substantively, the project
provides new insights into the incentives of economic agents to obtain and
maintain reputations. Contract theory is extended to permit the study of the
optimal contract for settings in which there is a long gap between the time the
agent's actions are undertaken and the time their effects are realized and where
in the interim there is the possibility of renegotiation.