* 8808601
* The Political Economy of Resource Allocation Decisions      in Campaigns
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* James Snyder, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1991
* USD 57,381.00

A fundamental concern to scholars who study American politics centers on how
resources spent in election campaigns influence electoral outcomes. This
question is of interest for at least two reasons. First, it logically precedes
several important issues in democratic theory: Can parties and candidates with
large amounts of money buy their way into powerful political offices? Does the
need for money by those who seek office allow individuals and interest groups
who control large sums of money, and who contribute to election campaigns, to
wield "too much" influence on policy outcomes? Second, it is necessary to
understand the role of money and other resources in election campaigns in order
to predict the likely effects of various campaign finance regulations, such as
campaign spending limits, contribution limits, and publicly subsidized
elections. This project focuses on the resource allocation problems faced by
political parties that are involved in a number of simultaneous but distinct
electoral contests. Specifically, how should a party allocate its campaign
resources across the various contests in order to maximize its objectives? Such
problems arise naturally in legislative elections with single-member districts
and first-past-the-post electoral rules, such as Canada, Great Britain, India,
New Zealand and the U.S., and in U.S. presidential elections under the electoral
college with the "unit- rule." The Principal Investigator treats campaign
spending as a form of advertising, which increases the probability that a
candidate wins the office he or she is seeking. Since only one of the candidates
competing for an office can win, spending by a candidates' opponents also
affects his or her probability of winning. The researcher employs a game-
theoretic framework to capture this interaction. The project involves
theoretical and empirical components. In the theoretical work, the researcher
will analyze several different models of campaign resource allocation. The
models vary in 1) the number of competing parties, 2) the objective functions of
the various parties, 3) certain details of the "electoral production function"
(i.e., how campaign resources are translated into votes), such as the
differences between incumbents and challengers, and 4) whether the world is
treated in a rather static fashion, with a single election (or, alternatively,
parties are extremely "myopic," concerned only with the current election), or in
a more dynamic fashion, with a sequence of elections in which the outcome of one
election may affect the outcomes of future elections. In the empirical work, the
researcher tests the various models on data for the Canadian general elections
of 1979, 1980, and 1984. Then, using the best of these models, he estimates the
effects of campaign spending, incumbency, and so on, on the election outcomes,
using the appropriate formulas. Besides adding to the stock of knowledge about
specific issues in elections and campaign finance, this research is novel in
that it uses game-theory to guide very closely the specification of empirical
tests. In fact, there have been very few attempts to test game-theoretic models
empirically, and to treat carefully the econometric problems involved in
identifying and estimating these models.