* 8808897
* Research Initiation:  Analysis of Kinetics and Application  of Enzymes in Organic Solvents
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Jonathan Dordick, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1991
* USD 69,617.00

The objectives of this research are to evaluate and directly compare the
intrinsic, non-diffusion limited kinetics of enzymatic catalysis in organic
media to mechanistically identical reactions in aqueous solutions. This study
should extend the practical utilization of enzymes as effective catalysts in
organic media by elucidating the variables which control enzymatic activity in
novel environments. This should eliminate the continued dependence of enzymatic
catalysis in organic media to phenomenological investigations and enable
quantitative evaluations of enzymatic activity to be performed. In particular,
horseradish peroxidase-catalyzed oxidation of p-anisidine will be used as a
model reaction to quantitatively evaluate the effect of organic solvents on
enzymic catalytic efficiency. Diffusional limitations will be eliminated by
immobilization of the enzyme to solid supports and by vigorous agitation in a
monophasic organic solvent. Horseradish peroxidase - catalyzed polymerization of
phenols in organic media may represent a viable alternative to conventional
phenol-formaldehyde resins. The enzymatic approach offers the attractive
alternatives of high reaction selectivity and the absence of formaldehyde. In
the long term, peroxidase-produced phenolic polymers may find use both as
general movolak or resole resins and for more specific uses such as supports for
chromatography, molecular weight standards, semiconductor plastics, polymeric
dyes, and developer resins.