* 8808123
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  A High Pressure      Thermogravimetric System for Various Equilibrium, Transport and Reaction Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Raymond Flumerfelt, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1990
* USD 37,750.00

The equipment provided in this grant is a special thermogravimetric system
consisting of a Cahn Model C-1100 Pressure Balance plus associated
pressurization, temperature control, and data acquisition equipment.
Measurements will be possible at 700 degrees Celsius and 140 atmospheres, which
represent conditions significantly beyond those capable with conventional
thermogravimetric methods. With this unique capability, characteristic diffusion
and gas solubility data will be possible for high temperature fluoropolymers and
advanced thermoplastics. Currently, such data are nonexistent and these
properties can be estimated only through extrapolation of low pressure data
which is expected to produce significant errors. The ability to obtain such
data, coupled with bubble nucleation and growth studies, should result in
improved polymer foam processes and products with controlled open and closed
cellular structures. In the case of costly foamed fluoropolymer insulation for
data transmission cable, small improvements in void fraction would result in
significant material cost savings and superior products. Also, studies of gas-
polymer interactions arising with SF6, Freon 123, and Freon 134 gases with
various polymers should provide a basis for evaluating these gases as
substitutes for the chlorine-containing freons which are currently used in
polymer foam processes. The latter gases have been shown to have deleterious
effects on the upper atmosphere ozone layer, and it is important that
satisfactory substitutes be identified.