* 8808161
* Synthesis and Reactivity of New Transition Metal Complexes  of Silicon Ligands
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Donald Berry, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 01/31/1991
* USD 132,538.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program is in
the area of organosilicon chemistry. In addition to advancing knowledge of
metal-mediated reactions of organosilicon compounds, the results of the project
are expected to be useful in the synthesis of new silicon-containing advanced
materials. New classes of transition metal complexes of organosilicon ligands
will be synthesized by a variety of methods, emphasizing compounds which will
serve as models of postulated catalytic intermediates, or which should exhibit
new reaction chemistry. New synthetic routes to silicon-substituted metal-silyls
and -disilyls will be developed which employ silylene transfer reactions from
hexamethysilacyclopropane, cyclo-Si6Me12, and cyclo-Si3R6. Synthetic
transformations involving metal-initiated silylene transfer as well as free
silylenes will be explored. The conversion of substituted silyls and disilyls to
silene, disilene, and metallacyclic complexes will then be studied. Structural
and spectroscopic techniques will be used to determine the extent of pi-bonding
in the silaolefin complexes. Insertion and ring-expansion reactions of silene
and disilene complexes will be examined, and the photolytic dissociation of free
silaolefins from the complexes will be attempted. Silylidene or silylenoid
intermediates, generated from substituted silyls or free silylenes, will be
trapped as silametallacycles with olefins and alkynes. Finally, mechanistic
studies of silylene insertion reactions will focus on (1) silylene extrusion
(independent of metal substrates), (2) the role of Lewis bases on silylene
generation and reactivity, (3) the interactions of dimethylsilylene with metal
substrates.