* 8808021
* Modulation of Endothelial Cell Proliferation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1993
* Portia Gordon, Montefiore Hospital and Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/28/1993
* USD 278,860.00

The aim of this proposal is to define the molecular mechanism involved in the
control of endothelial cell growth, with specific emphasis on the role of
growth-inhibitory extracellular matrix (ECM) heparan sulfate proteoglycans.
Acidic fibroblast growth factor (aFGF) modulates synthesis of ECM components
which can modulate the cell's proliferative response to aFGF. Heparan sulfate
proteoglycans (HSPG) have been isolated from ECM which inhibit aFGF-stimulated
proliferation of endothelial cells. The internalization of this inhibitory HSPG
is enhanced by aFGF. The aims of this proposal are to characterize the
structures, interactions, and functions of inhibitory HSPG. The regulation of
incorporation of inhibitory HSPG into ECM by aFGF will be investigated. The long
term objective is to elucidate the molecular mechanism of regulation of
endothelial cell growth control. The idea to be explored in this study is that
cellular proliferation or quiescence is regulated by complex interactions
involving various cellular products, including microenvironmental ECM components
and soluble growth factors, all of which are manufactured either by the cell
itself or its neighbors. The results will be of great interest to all scientists
studying cellular growth control or the interaction of cells with their ECM
environment.