* 8808754
* Incorporating and Selling Legal Services Plans:  The Declineof Solo Practice
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Carroll Seron, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 12/31/1989
* USD 11,996.00

Solo and small-firm lawyers face increasing competition today from the for-
profit and not-for-profit law firm. The marketing strategies of these "new
providers" of legal services are varied but each has met with considerable
success. The impact of this tier of the legal profession on the practice of law,
however,has not yet been systematically examined. This is the task of the
present pilot or planning study. Four new modes of private legal services have
been identified: (1) "clinical" law firms with a walk-in practice, (2) "mass"
market law firms which offer walk-in service and legal insurance programs, (3)
"traditional" law firms which receive insurance referrals, and (4) non-profit
law firms attached to labor unions. The pilot project will include open-ended
interviews with new providers of legal services as well as on site observation
of each of these work settings. Because they appear to be replacing attorneys in
solo practice, the latter also are in included in this typology to develop a
control group for comparison. The success of for-profit new providers rests on
the incorporation of a business model into the delivery of a professional
service. But each of the requirements of the new model undermines traditional
notions of professional work. Marketing a legal commodity contradicts the
passive, service orientation of traditional law practice. Standardization
challenges the tradition of individualized treatment. And comparing the output
and productivity of lawyers throws into question the professional's control and
autonomy of work. While the not-for-profit firm does not operate in a
competitive market environment, attorneys are treated as "employees", with
analogous erosion of the old professionalism. These ongoing changes in the
delivery of private legal services raise descriptive and analytic questions that
are germane to socio-legal research, organizational theory, and the sociology of
the professions. The project investigates how attorneys have responded to these
changes in the fabric of their practice and addresses the implications of these
developments for understanding the nature of professional work in the late
twentieth century.