* 8808063
* The Archaeology of Honduras (REU Supplement)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Rosemary Joyce, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 11/30/1989
* USD 10,615.00

Dr. Joyce and her associates will conduct archaeological research in the Oloman
and Cataguana Valleys located in northeast Honduras. Previous work has indicated
the presence of materials which date to the Late Formative and Classic periods
but no detailed work has been conducted. Dr. Joyce and her team will use areal
photographs to locate probable sites. During a first field trip they will make
necessary government and scientific contacts in Honduras, find a location for a
field headquarters and establish a logistic system. Finally, during a second
field season they will survey promising areas identified from the photographs
and surface collect ceramics and other cultural materials. On this basis they
will then plan a full scale project. Northeast Honduras appears to mark the
boundary of the prehistoric Mayan empire. Mayanist archaeologists who wish to
trace the rise and decline of this entity want to know where boundaries were
established and how they changed over time. Dr. Joyce's project will help to
answer this question. It will also address the dynamics of so-called "marginal"
regions. Some archaeologists think these can best be understood in terms of
relations with core areas, while others argue that such regions are best viewed
in their own terms. Dr.Joyce's work will also address this issue.