* 8808143
* RUI: Resonant Raman Scattering as a Tool for Studying       Point Defects in III-V Semiconductors (Materials Research)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Robert Berg, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1991
* USD 104,500.00

They plan on conducting a series of experiments that use Raman scattering to
provide microscopic information concerning defects in III-V semiconductors.
Several of the experiments involve using resonant Raman scattering (RRS). This
has two main benefits: 1) There will be an enhancement of the Raman signal
strength thus increasing the sensitivity of the technique to lower defect
concentrations and 2) RRS allows a connection to be made between specific
electronic levels associated with defects and the observed local vibrational
modes. This work is important because it will look at problems that are
currently of great importance from both a fundamental and an applications point
of view (e.g. investigation of the resonant donor state associated with the DX
center in gallium arsenide and aluminum gallium arsenide.) The proposed work
will also help develop and extend the technique of RRS for studying defects in
semiconductors. They also plan to use Raman scattering to study the influence of
point defect on the interdiffusion of gallium and aluminum across the gallium
arsenide/aluminum gallium arsenide interface. This is work that is important
both because of the light it promises to shed on the physics of the
interdiffusion process in general and because interdiffusion at this interface
is of great practical importance for making quantum well devices in which the
carriers are confined in more than one dimension.