* 8808857
* Research Initiation:  Design and Simulation of Optically    Interconnected Processing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Phillip Christie, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Maguire
* 05/31/1991
* USD 63,764.00

New models on optical interconnections that accurately reflect the limitations
imposed on high-speed systems are being studied. Emphasis is placed on the
excitation response of the interconnection network, rather than on the dynamics
of the active devices. This greatly simplifies the analysis and avoids excessive
computational effort. VLSI systems are represented by a hierarchical model that
satisfies the observed power law relationship between circuit complexity and
interconnection count. Closed form expressions that model the behavior of
optical interconnections are being developed. These expressions allow a
comparison between the operational performance of new interconnect strategies
and that of their electrical counterparts. The transfer of information in a
multicomputer system is a major bottleneck. The realization and study of optical
communication technologies is very important and has high payoff. A careful
analysis of interconnect delays as a function of system hierarchy must be made
in order for this emerging technology to be successfully deployed in real
systems. The principal investigator is a new Ph.D. who already has significant
progress in his research. The research focuses on important and timely topics.
Support is highly recommended.