* 8808139
* Travel Grant for Workshop on Molecular &amp; Developmental      Biology of Drosophila, August 28-September 4, 1988,         Kolymbari, Crete, Greece
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1988,07/31/1989
* William Gelbart, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1989
* USD 7,000.00

The principal theme of this workshop is the molecular and developmental biology
of Drosophila. The various advantages of the fruit fly as an experimental system
have made the analysis of Drosophila gene function during development one of the
fastest growing fields in biology. One reason for this explosion is the fact
that Drosophila offers a singular advantage, namely, the opportunity to approach
particular questions using a combination of genetics, embryology, cellular and
molecular biology. If we are to gain insight into the rules underlying metazoan
development, a multidisciplinary experimental approach has obvious advantages.
Yet, such an approach also poses the problem that it is not often the case that
a researcher masters completely all those disciplines, or is aware of all the
latest advances. Considering these facts, therefore, regular meetings of a
diverse group of leading Drosophila workers are crucial. It is the intention of
this EMBO workshop, entitled "The Molecular and Developmental Biology of
Drosophila", to provide a forum for the free exchange of information and for the
establishment of numerous collaborations between representatives of many of the
major Drosophila laboratories from around the world. The modest funds provided
will provide partial travel costs for approximately ten young American
scientists to attend and actively participate in this highly regarded EMBO
Workshop. The workshop itself is well-structured to effectively promote
interdisciplinary exchange and to foster desirable collaboration. The
participation of young U.S. scientists is highly desirable.