* 8808326
* Causes and Consequences of the Employer's Decision to Operate During Strikes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1990
* Cynthia Gramm, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1990
* USD 7,000.00

The struck employer faces a choice between halting operations or continuing
operations by subcontracting the bargaining units' work, assigning the striking
employees' work to other employees, hiring replacements for the striking
workers, or some combination of these three strategies. Although there is a
considerable body of research investigating the causes and consequences of
economic strikes, there has been little empirical research examining either the
determinants or the consequences of the firm's decision to operate during
strikes. Dr. Gramm plans to explore the feasibility of conducting a project to
analyze the determinants of the struck employer's choice to operate during a
strike and to evaluate the consequences of the choice. Her study includes the
development of theoretical and econometric frameworks within which to examine
the reactions of company management to economic strikes and the effects of
choices such as subcontracting, closing down, hiring new workers, and
reassigning work. Also, a pilot study of 100 strikes is planned involving
content analyses of archival data sources and the administration of
questionnaires. Finally, the preparation of a proposal for a larger scale study
is contemplated. It is timely to prepare a plan to conduct empirical research on
the determinants and consequences of the firm's decision to operate during
strikes because there has recently been an increase in management's exercise of
its right to operate during strikes, and new strike strategies have been
developed. The project has potential to illuminate our understanding of the
interaction between labor and management in a dispute situation and also of
enhancing our knowledge more generally of bargaining behavior.