* 8808362
* Noncooperative Game Theory Assuming Bounded Rationality
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Robert Rosenthal, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 86,253.00

Game theory has become an indispensable tool for research activities in many
branches of economics in recent years. In applied micro fields especially, where
the behavior of the individual is often the focus of study, models of
noncooperative games have become the primary models, most particularly when
imperfect competition is an important element of the situation under study. The
fact is, however, that the standard models of noncooperative game theory do not
describe real-world behavior very well. The goal of this project is to build
game models which more accurately describe and predict the behavior of real-
world participants in economic activities. The models developed by this project
include: (1) Evolutionary Modelling; (2) Models of Bounded Rationality for Game
Situations: and (3) New Models that incorporate observed behavior such as a
stick-with-winners philosophy associated with much trial-and-error or avoidance
of situations in which unsuccessful outcomes have come about in the past. In the
standard approaches to game-theoretic modelling, players are assumed to be
completely rational and assumed to assume that their fellow players are
completely rational. For applied purposes, these assumptions seem dubious,
especially given the experimental evidence compiled over the years on both one-
player and many-player games. This research project aims at constructing and
developing game-theoretic models in which players are not assumed to behave in
such completely-rational ways, with the goal being more realistic descriptive
and normative tools for use in applications, especially economic applications.
There is already a literature on the subject of modelling games with players of
incomplete rationality, but the subject seems to be resistant to breakthroughs
so far. The research pursues several approaches that could lead to
breakthroughs. One is to continue the line of research in which strategy
selection comes about as the result of evolutionary forces acting so as to favor
those strategies which do relatively well in large populations. Another
direction is to continue work on models in which players are assumed to act in
particular nonoptimal ways. In both of these classes of models, behavior can be
generated which, in certain examples, is both intuitively plausible and
qualitatively different from the standard game- theoretic solutions prescribed.