* 8808031
* Cognition and Collective Conservatism:  A Choice-Theoretic  Approach
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Timur Kuran, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1991
* USD 44,108.00

The overall objective of this project is to explore systematically the link
between individual cognition and the evolution of social policies and
institutions. Important as it is, this link has received little attention,
although many influential thinkers have called attention to it. The framework of
analysis will be a collective choice model developed in earlier work, a key
feature of which is a distinction between the individual's privately held and
publicly declared preferences. This framework will be extended and refined
through the incorporation of some major findings of psychology. These include
the individual's proclivity to separate interrelated issues; his inability to
identify the status quo; his resistance to changing his beliefs; and his
readiness to reduce his cognitive dissonance. The focus will be on the role of
these cognitive phenomena in blocking social change. Among the particular issues
addressed are preference and belief polarization; cultural persistence; the
persistence of inconsistencies among collective decisions; the long-term social
benefits of controversy; and finally, feedback from collective decisions to the
belief systems that underlie individual choices. Another related goal of this
project is to reconcile the observation that societies cling to the status quo
with the seemingly contradictory fact that they are capable of immense change.
One explanation rests on the idea that changes in people's preferences
concerning a collective issue might remain hidden from view because of
preference falsification - until, that is, a relatively small shock puts in
motion a bandwagon process that generates a massive shift in the distribution of
public preferences. This is a very ambitious and important research agenda. The
project could produce a new school of thought based on a synthesis of economics,
cognitive psychology, history, sociology and political science. At the very
least it provides new insights into the dynamics of social and economic change.
For example, a theory of cognitive limitations could explain why social change
is often undesigned, unwanted, and unannounced.