* 8808132
* Research Initiation:  Object-Oriented Representation and    Knowledge-Based Processing of Design Standards for Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* James Garrett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/28/1991
* USD 69,998.00

The aspects of design are increasingly being supported by computer-aided
engineering (CAE) systems. Most design activity is subject to the satisfaction
of at least one design standard. CAE systems are most commonly developed by
interpreting and reforming the provisions of standard into assignment statements
and then hard-coding them into the system. Such systems are inflexible (valid
for one standard only), frequently invalidated by changes in the standard, and
subject to misinterpretation errors. If, instead, the standard is declaratively
represented, and then presented to the CAE system to be manipulated (using tools
provided by a knowledge-based standards processing system), invalidation and
misinterpretation would be lessened. The design system would also be more
flexible, in that it could be made valid for another design standard by
supplying the system with the representation of that standard. A prototype of
such a standards processor was developed in previous research by this principal
investigator. This prototype proved that standards could be separated from their
usage, but it still requires much more research and development to be usable in
computer-aided engineering system development. The objectives of this research
are to completely recast the declarative representation of design standards as
an object-oriented model, and to expand and modify the knowledge- based
standards processor to address insufficiencies in the prototype.