* 8808477
* Research Initiation:  Numerical Solution of Hazardous Waste Containment and Consolidation via Artificial Ground Freezing
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* John Sullivan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tammi Owens
* 11/30/1990
* USD 60,000.00

This research investigates the use of artificial ground freezing as a means of
containing and consolidating hazardous waste. A two dimensional finite element
simulation of soil solidification is proposed. The numerical strategy utilizes
innovative techniques for representing dendrite curvature, finite element grid
deployment and numerical heat and mass conservation. The solidification model is
based on the coupled, transient heat and mass equations in both frozen and
unfrozen phases. Boundary conditions account for the interfacial energy,
kinetics and solute rejection effects. The adaptive finite element mesh
continually tracks the phase front such that boundary conditions are applied
directly on the interface. An automatic rediscretization routine is employed
which requires no user intervention during the simulation. The numerical
simulations will be compared to existing, large-scale experimental data for
situations involving the solidification of soils with and without sodium
chloride and soils spiked with hazardous wastes (chloroform, benzene, toluene
and tetrachloroethylene). Artificial ground freezing has been in practice for
over a century in civil engineering applications. Its ability to form
impermeable barriers, dewater sludge, and consolidate solids has been
demonstrated. However, predicting or controlling the location of the frozen
barrier as a function of time for arbitrary geometries is unsolved. Inherent in
the coupled heat and mass transfer system lie instabilities associated with the
growth of dendrites due to undercooling and constitutional supercooling. The
coupled transport system dealing with solidification of the soil is unamendable
to analytical solutions beyond one dimensional situations. Consequently, this
proposal research holds great promise if illuminating the solution to the
control of ground freezing.