* 8808429
* Acoustic Communication by Temporal Codes:  Evolution and    Neurobiology
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1988,04/30/1992
* H. Carl Gerhardt, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 04/30/1992
* USD 195,156.00

The goal of Dr. Gerhardt's research is to gain knowledge about mechanisms and
evolution of acoustic communication in vertebrate animals. In particular, the
research will focus on temporal codes, that is, information encoded in the
timing of repeated elements in natural communication sounds. Dr. Gerhardt will
carry out behavioral studies of signal (sound) structure and the discrimination
of these sounds, with both wild-type and hybrid animals, and he will also
perform neurophysiological studies of the responses of auditory neurons to time
patterns in sounds of biological relevance. Two species of North American gray
treefrogs (Hyla chrysoscelis and H. versicolor) will be studied. These frogs are
particularly suitable as a model system for vertebrate sound communication
because males of each species produce a small set of very stereotyped
communication signals. Females reliably respond to natural and synthetic
(computer-generated) signals by approaching a loudspeaker, just as they approach
a calling male in nature. The timing properties of the male's sounds are not
learned, but develop normally when the frogs are raised in acoustic isolation.
The two species will be cross-mated artificially to produce viable hybrids, thus
affording the opportunity to study genetic mechanisms of both calling and
selective approach to sounds. There are extensive areas where just one species
occurs, and other areas where both species breed in the same ponds at the same
time, at the risk of producing sterile hybrids if they make an error of
identification. Thus, the selectivity of females from areas of overlap will be
compared with that of frogs from areas where only one species occurs. The
auditory system of treefrogs has been well studied, so that a great deal of
basic information is already available as a foundation for the
neurophysiological studies of time coding that will be done in these two
species. In this research the results of the behavioral experiments will guide
and complement the neurophysiological work. The results of this research should
provide insights into fundamental properties of all acoustic communication
systems in vertebrates. The treefrog system is especially powerful in that a
combination of genetic and neurophysiological techniques can be used in ways
that would be impossible in higher animals.