* 8808446
* Coordination Chemistry and Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Jack Halpern, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 11/30/1991
* USD 692,460.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is directed at elucidating the reactivity patterns of coordination and
organometallic compounds. Of particular interest are the kinetics and mechanisms
of reactions of such compounds which are pertinent to catalytic applications.
Specific themes include: (1) The mechanisms of asymmetric catalytic
hydrogenation and related reactions and the origin of enantioselectivity in such
reactions. (2) Determination of transition-metal alkyl bond dissociation
energies and of the thermodynamics of organometallic reactions. (3) Mechanism
and catalysis of CO migratory insertion reactions and the utilization of such
catalysis to increase the rates and selectivities of CO-utilizing homologation
reactions. (4) Coordination chemistry and catalytic properties of transition
metal polyhydride complexes, especially those with phosphine ligands, with
emphasis on the utilization of such compounds as catalysts for the hydrogenation
of ketones, esters and arenes, and for the activation of C-H bonds. The methods
employed in these studies include kinetic measurements (including techniques for
measurement of the rates of fast reactions) and the use of NMR, FTIR and other
spectroscopic methods to characterize intermediates in catalytic cycles. This
project is expected to provide a better understanding of the operation of some
important industrial catalysts and to contribute to the rational design of new
catalysts.