* 8808828
* Exchange Rate Dynamics: Evidence from Intra-Daily Data and  Survey Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Takatoshi Ito, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 07/31/1991
* USD 68,974.00

This study investigates two aspects of exchange rate dynamics. First, the intra-
daily exchange rate changes will be analyzed, and second, various hypotheses on
exchange rate expectations formation among investors will be tested using survey
data. This type of fundamental evidence is necessary to develop better theories
to explain international macroeconomics. The focus on intra-daily exchange rate
changes will make it possible to determine which country had the most impact on
exchange rate changes. The exchange rate market is unique in that the same
commodity (currency) is being traded almost 24 hours a day due to the time
differences among the major financial centers of the world, i.e., Tokyo, London
and New York. By making the observational frequency finer, and thanks to these
time differences, it will be possible to narrow down the factors that most
affected changes in the exchange rate. The intra-daily analysis will be applied
to the exchange rates among yen, dollars, pounds, and DM in the 1980's; and
among yen, dollars, and pound rates in 1931-33. The ARCH model of volatility of
intra-daily exchange rate changes in the 1980's will be modeled and estimated.
It is well known that an investor's expectations are very important in
determining the actual path of the exchange rate. If enough investors expect the
dollar to fall and sell the dollar, then the dollar actually falls. Therefore,
to understand exchange rate dynamics, it is essential to investigate how the
investor's expectation is formed. Hypotheses on expectation formation will be
tested with a new survey data set collected by the Japan Center for
International Finance (JCIF). There are two advantages of the JCIF survey in
Tokyo over the often-used MMS or Economist survey. First, respondents to the
survey include not only dealers in financial institutions but also in the export
and import industries. Heterogeneous investors may have different expectation
formations. Second, the JCIF will provide individual responses, so that the
rationality and efficient market hypothesis will be tested on an individual
basis, not on the survey mean or median. It is widely believed that in the
short- run, expectation formation is of the bandwagon type, while in the long-
run it is of a regressive type. The study will test econometrically whether the
short- and long-run expectations are mutually consistent.