* 8808787
* Research Initiation: Steric Stabilization and Crosslinking   of Metal Oxide Powders for Ceramic Forming
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Burtrand Lee, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* George F. Keyser
* 06/30/1991
* USD 74,593.00

The objectives of this project are to disperse and stabilize ceramic powders by
way of monolayer adsorption of a polymer for improved properties and reduction
of processing cost. After the stabilization, the particles are bonded by
crosslinkings of the adsorbed polymer for forming. Amorphous silica and alumina
will be used and dispersed in a nonaqueous solvent and will be stabilized by
adsorbed polymers. Candidate polymers will have anchor groups for stronger
adsorption and will have crosslinkable groups for setting of the powder after
being dispersed and stabilized. The dispersion stability will be determined by
measuring sedimentation volume, viscosity, turbidity, etc. Dispersion stability
is one of the most important parameters in ceramic powder processing because it
is directly related to the mechanical properties of the ceramic part. Binding of
the ceramic powders will be carried out by adding a few weight percent of
catalyst to the powder/polymer mix or by thermally inducing inter- particulate
bonding via crosslinking of the adsorbed polymers. The green bodies formed from
the process will be characterized in terms of density, flexibility,
microstructure, homogeneity, etc. The novelty of this research is the use of
much smaller amounts of organic additives and increased solid loading in ceramic
forming processes. This would result in increased homogeneity, better control
over the flexibility of ceramic tapes, lower shrinkage, and shorter binder burn-
out time which would lead to the reduction of processing cost.