* 8809483
* Research Initiation:  Analysis and Computer-Aided Design of Multi-rate Digital Control Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1990
* David Meyer, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/1990
* USD 36,386.00

The objective of this project is to construct a comprehensive computer-aided
design methodology for multi-rate digital control systems that differs from
existing schemes in one or more of five points: 1) Effectiveness - It will be
guaranteed to find a controller that meets the desired specifications if one
exists. 2) Naturalness - The use of an intelligent control specification
language compiler will allow designers to refer directly to transfer functions,
signal peaks, noises powers, step responses, etc. 3) Flexibility - The designer
will be allowed to express constraints or optimize on signal peaks, noise
powers, frequency domain behavior of transfer functions, time domain behavior of
pulse responses, settling times, overshoots, and more. 4) Generality - It will
handle asynchronous systems, rigorously. 5) Tractability - Design of large
systems will be possible with available computing power. Designed controllers
will be of reasonable order for implementation. This will be accomplished by
extending ordinary, single-rate "Q-Design" to multi-rate control systems,
developing and coding analytical, rigorous methods for approximating
asynchronous systems with synchronous ones and methods for model reduction of
multi-rate controllers. The widespread industrial and military use of multi-rate
digital control systems and the shortcomings of current design methodologies
means this research should have significant impact in the practicing control
community.