* 8809475
* Controls on the Biosynthesis of Superoxide Dismutases in E. coli: An Inactive Precursor
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Irwin Fridovich, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/1992
* USD 180,000.00

Escherichia coli can produce two types of superoxide dismutases. One of these,
the iron enzyme is found in both aerobic and anaerobic cultures; while the
second, a manganese enzyme, is ordinarily present only in aerobic cultures and
can be strongly induced by hyperoxia, or by viologens and quinones which mediate
intracellular production of O2-. The manner in which the cell controls the
biosynthesis of the manganese enzyme has been under study but is not yet
understood. This lab has reported that addition of an electron sink, such as
paraquat plus nitrate, to an anaerobic culture causes production of the
manganese enzyme in a form which is not active but which can be activated by
addition of Mn(II) under mildly denaturing conditions; followed by removal of
the denaturing stress. This is referred to as the pro-enzyme. It has also been
shown that anaerobic cells contain another protein which is recognized by an
antibody specific for the manganese enzyme, but which cannot be activated as can
the pro-enzyme. This protein is referred to this as the prepro-enzyme.
Experiments are being conducted to isolate, characterize and study the
interconversions of these forms of the manganese-containing superoxide dismutase
of E. coli.%%% Superoxide dismutases (SODs) are enzymes that provide defenses
against the toxicity of molecular oxygen in living cells. It also protects
against other stresses, e.g., ultra- violet radiation and sulfur dioxide
exposure. How these enzymes are made is incompletely understood but important.
The biosynthesis is probably regulated by environmental factors. This project
will elucidate the pathway of enzyme synthesis and activation.***//