* 8809527
* Learned Helplessness and Stressor Controllability:          Behavioral and Neurochemical Consequences and Determinants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Steven Maier, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1991
* USD 238,400.00

One of the most important factors in determining an individual's reaction to a
stressful event is the expectation about that event: Does the individual have
control over the stressor, or does he not? When humans or animals are exposed to
stressful events over which they have no control, they experience a number of
behavioral and physiological disturbances which do not occur if they DO have
control, even if the stressors are physically identical. Such disturbances, and
the theoretical entities thought to produce them, are widely believed to be
important (and alterable) causes of depression, anxiety, urban stress, etc. It
is therefore important to understand the mechanisms by which the controllability
vs. uncontrollability of stressors alters both behavior and physiological
functioning. Using a variety of experimental approaches, Dr. Maier has already
produced an extensive behavioral groundwork for the current studies. He is now
pursuing several major lines of research, all directed at answering this
fundamental question: What determines the expectation of controllability, and
its attendant consequences? Dr. Maier is carrying out four related sets of
studies: 1) The role of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine in controllability;
2) the relationship between stressor controllability and spinal cord processes
that regulate pain perception; 3) the role of stressor controllability in
altering daily activity patterns, and the sensitivity of these activity patterns
to pharmacological manipulation (e.g., with antidepressants); and 4) the nature
of the cognitive changes produced by stressors, and the role of fear and anxiety
in mediating these cognitive changes. Recent research by Dr. Maier and others
has made it clear that the stress response is not simply the result of exposure
to a particular physical stimulus or condition, but rather is the result of a
complex interaction between the event itself and the organism's expectations,
about that event. The results of the current studies will broaden our
understanding of the role of "stressor controllability" in the development of
"coping" behaviors, and in the ability of stressed individuals to adapt to their
environment.