* 8809381
* A Methodology for Knowledge-Based Debugging of Real-Time    Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Jeffrey Tsai, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Janet L. Gatton
* 06/30/1991
* USD 57,877.00

A significant amount of effort and time is devoted to debugging in all phases of
software development cycle. In fact, debugging is one of the sources for the
software crisis the computer industry is facing today. To diagnose and fix an
error, it is necessary to reproduce the error. Generally, reproduction of an
error is not possible in real-time software systems because of the timing
constraints involved and their non-deterministic characters. The unpredictable
sequence in which the inputs arrive at a certain point in time will not exhibit
the same behavior of the system upon repeated execution of the program. This
project will develop a methodology for knowledge-based debugging of real-time
software systems. A program execution monitoring method is first used to record
a system execution history in a non-interfering manner--that is without
corrupting the critical timing requirements of the target system. The traces,
thus collected are analyzed to isolate the bug in an off-line mode. The
examination of voluminous traces is a laborious and boring task that requires a
high degree of expertise. This expertise is encapsulated into a knowledge-based
system and the examination process automated to at least localize the fault and
answer questions about its reasoning. Such an approach will definitely shorten
the overall debugging time and contribute towards software productivity and
reliability.