* 8809129
* Value Focused Thinking:  The Role of Values in Forming      Decision Options
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Ralph Keeney, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1991
* USD 38,206.00

With any decision problem, the intent is to select the best alternative among
those available or to create alternatives better than those readily apparent.
The concepts of best and better are based upon preferences or values. It is the
existence of values for the consequences of the decision which is the basis for
an interest in that decision problem. If a decision problem is complex, almost
all analysts argue that a model will lend insight to understanding complexity
and to making better decisions. To gain the insight available from such a model,
it is necessary to focus on the basis for the complexity in the problem.
Conflicting and intertwined values are often a basis for such complexity. The
traditional rational decision making model is primarily concerned with the
problem of choice among a known fixed set of alternatives. It has rarely
considered the process by which alternatives or options are developed or the
interaction of values in this process. This proposal investigates basic problems
in developing and using models of values. Specifically, it focuses on
identifying and structuring values, developing constructed value indices, and
creating value driven alternatives. The research will be conducted within the
context of four major national decision problems. It should result in a new
approach in the development of normative decision theory as well as in the
development of new operational decision support procedures for difficult complex
decisions.