* 8809786
* Research Initiation: Combined Thermal-Magnetic Model for    Design of High-Frequency Power Transformers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Douglas Nelson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tammi Owens
* 11/30/1990
* USD 69,581.00

Switching frequencies in the megahertz range are being used in the development
of power supplied for the next-generation computers and other applications. The
internal heat generation in a transformer core is proportional to frequency,
local magnetic field strength and material properties. The minimum core volume
required for a high- frequency design is limited by core loss and thermal
considerations, yet no method for design optimization currently exists. This
project considers the mechanisms of thermal-magnetic coupling and enhanced heat
transfer for transformer design. A generic finite-element model of a power
transformer that accounts for coupling between the temperature field, magnetic
field, geometry and material properties will be developed. The model will be
validated by an electrical energy balance to determine core and winding losses,
and by infrared thermal imaging to map the surface temperatures of prototype
high- frequency power transformers. The proposed research will improve the
design tools available for high-frequency magnetics. This work is expected to
show for the first time the impact of coupling between the magnetic and thermal
fields on design optimization. This work will also demonstrate the performance
gains obtainable through improved heat transfer away from the transformer and
the resulting decrease in temperature level. Previous work has neglected heat
transfer enhancement altogether. The results of this research will allow
industry to further advance power electronics technology.