* 8809797
* Econometric Studies of Dynamic Asset Pricing Relations
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Kenneth Singleton, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 189,693.00

There is a large and growing body of literature on the behavior of financial
markets because of the economic importance of financial institutions and because
studies of these markets can provide basic insights into economic behavior. This
project explores in more depth the nature of the volatility in asset prices and
the links between this volatility, systematic movements in asset prices, and
business cycle variables. This is accomplished by pursuing two distinct and
complementary issues. The first issue is the pricing of options in economic
environments with fairly general specifications of the stochastic process
governing the time series behavior of the underlying stocks. The primary goal of
this research is to develop and implement econometric methods for estimating
more plausible parameterizations of stock processes and for calculating the
values of the associated options. The second issue addressed is the behavior of
stock prices in environments with heterogeneously informed traders and imperfect
information about the state of the economy. The research explores a particular
source of volatility in asset prices and a mechanism by which the links between
stock prices and business cycle variables are obscured. The project undertakes
an econometric analysis of this model in order to shed new light on the role
played by heterogeneity of information in the determination of the time series
properties of asset prices. The research contributes rigorous and powerful new
econometric methods for studying the behavior of financial assets. This work
should help resolve some extremely difficult and important puzzles in financial
economics such as the failure of basic economic models to explain periods of
extreme volatility in stock market prices.