* 8809281
* Immigration to the United States: 1940-1980
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1988,07/01/1990
* George Borjas, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 07/01/1990
* USD 45,527.00

Rapidly increasing immigration into the United States has spawned much public
debate and also legislation to regulate the inflow. This phenomenon has also
stimulated a growing literature on the economics of immigration which has
focused on trying to better understand the causes and consequences immigration.
The purpose of this research is to extend and deepen our understanding of
immigration in two directions. One part of the study will examine the economic
success of immigrants over an extended period from 1940 through 1980. The other
part will extend a theoretical model of migration to account for return
migration. The first part of the study will involve jointly analyzing the
performance of immigrants in the U.S. labor market in the five Census from 1940
through 1980. This approach allows for a clearer interpretation of the role
played by the 1965 Amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act, as well as
avoids some of the biases that have affected other studies. The second part will
generalize an economic model of immigration to allow for the possibility that
incoming migrants change their minds, and thus return migration flows are
generated. This model will be tested using the Census Public Use Files,
published Immigration and Naturalization Service data, and the Aliens Legally
Admitted for Permanent Residence micro data.