* 8809006
* The Ecology of Organizational Size Distribution
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Michael Hannan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 01/31/1991
* USD 76,678.00

Population ecology of organizations is a recent research perspective on how
ecological dynamics interact with organizational growth in the evolution of
organizational populations. This approach focuses on the relationships between
changes in social structures and changes in populations of organizations. Thus
it is especially well-suited for developing connections between theory and
research on organizations and broad macrosociological concerns. The full
dynamics of populations of organizations involve vital rates (of founding and
mortality) as well as growth and decline of individual organizations. However,
in the interest of analyzing data on diverse populations over long periods,
recent research in organizational ecology has emphasized vital rates and has
slighted issues of growth and contraction at the organizational level. The
present research seeks to redress the balance by building models of
organizational ecologies in which individual organizations grow and contract.
That is, it explores the implications of adding growth at the organizational
level to models of organizational ecology. Incorporating growth into existing
population-ecology models encounters two kinds of complications. The first
concerns the absence of appropriate data. Existing data sets do not provide
time-paths of fluctuations in sizes of organizations in complete populations,
which are needed to estimate growth models. Efforts to estimate models of growth
using only data for large organizations, for which records on size can often be
found, face serious problems of sample-selection bias. The second difficulty
concerns the complexity of models that incorporate microdynamics into ecological
models. Given the present state of knowledge, there is no serious prospect for
analytic characterizations of the dynamics of organizational populations.
Although we have begun to understand various aspects of the dynamics, we do not
yet know how to integrate these aspects analytically. Given the paucity of
appropriate empirical data and the analytic complexity of the problem, this
research will rely on a combination of microsimulation and empirical analyis.
Microsimulation will be the main tool for learning about the effects of various
growth mechanisms and ecological constraints for the evolution of organizational
populations. The proposed empirical analyses use sequences of size distributions
on selected populations in order to learn whether the models developed in the
simulations fit empirical situations. In particular, these analyses will explore
whether the models can explain observed change over time in sequences of
empirical cross-sectional distributions. The findings of the research will (1)
demonstrate whether ecological processes are sensitive to assumptions about
processes of growth and decline at the organizational level, and (2) show how
size distributions affect processes of competition and legitimation within
organizational populations.