* 8809538
* Molecular Mechanisms Underlying Neural Responses to Damage, Indo-US Workshop, Bangalore, India, February 5-9, 1989,     Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Stephen Bondy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1989
* USD 27,720.00

Description: This project supports participation by eight U.S. scientists in a
binational conference on molecular mechanisms underlying neural response to
damage. The meeting is to be held at the National Institute of Mental Health and
Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS) in Bangalore, India. It is co-organized by Dr. B.S.
Sridhara Rama Rao, Head, Neurochemistry Department, Dr. G.N. Narayana Reddy,
Director of NIMHANS, and Dr. Stephen Bondy of the University of California,
Irvine. The focus will be on the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying
adaptive and regenerative events within the nervous system following physical or
chemical damage. Effort will be made to integrate the specific presentations, by
means of discussions and workshops, to make a synthesis of recent advances, to
enhance the focus of definition of the molecular and cellular basis of neural
repair mechanisms and to pinpoint precise areas for future research and
especially joint research. Scope: This is the third in a series of Indo-U.S.
neuroscience meetings held over the last five years, aimed at exchanges of
information and discussions on recent advances in fundamental, mechanistic
neurobiology. The theme of this meeting was recommended by the advisory panel of
the previous meeting held in April 1987 in New Delhi. The U.S. and Indian
organizers are very well suited to handle such a joint meeting. It is expected
that significant exchanges of information will take place and that potentially
good research collaboration would result.