* 8809098
* Data Base Development
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Ronald Inglehart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1991
* USD 242,423.00

In 1974, the Commission of the European Communities launched the Euro-Barometer
surveys, a survey research program designed to provide regular monitoring of the
social and political attitudes of representative national samples of the public
of the nine- member nations, France, West Germany, Great Britain, Italy, The
Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark, Ireland and Luxembourg. The number of countries
surveyed increased to ten in October, 1980, with the entry of Greece; and the
number increased to twelve, with the addition of Spain and Portugal in October,
1985. Carried out in the Spring and Fall of each year, a total of 28 Euro-
Barometer surveys had been completed by the end of 1987. In addition to
obtaining regular readings on support for European integration, national goals
and political issues, political party preferences, ideological orientations and
subjective well-being, given Euro-Barometers have explored a variety of special
topics such as attitudes toward poverty and unemployment, gender roles,
interpersonal trust, energy and environmental problems, attitudes toward work
and attitudes toward science and technology. The Commission of the European
Communities sponsors these surveys in order to obtain feedback about the current
state of public opinion in the member countries; it does not finance social
science research per se. Accordingly, the Commission provides no funds for
cleaning or archiving the data. Immediately after fieldwork, a set of
tabulations is run to provide the basis for a twice-yearly report to the
Commission. The data are then turned over to this project's principal
investigator in a condition that the average user would find difficult to
utilize. The data have not been cleaned, and their coding and format vary from
country to country and from one survey to the next. Moreover, there is no
codebook and little documentation of any kind beyond the questionnaires in the
various languages used in the respective countries. This project makes available
to social scientists the body of cross-national surveys carried out each Spring
and Fall in each of the 12 European Community countries. The principal
investigator will acquire the data, clean them, recode them in cross-nationally
standardized form, prepare machine-readable codebooks for each survey and
distribute them through the Inter- university Consortium for Political and
Social Research survey data archive at the University of Michigan. One indicator
of the value these data have for the social science community is the widespread
demand for the surveys that have been released to date. The European Community
surveys have become the third most widely-requested datasets handled by the
Consortium, ranking immediately after the National Election Studies and the
National Opinion Research Center General Social Surveys. In the field of
Comparative Politics, nothing approaches their level of use. The datasets have
been furnished to well over 200 different institutions, several of which are
foreign survey data archives that service entire nations. The data are utilized
in scores of publications each year, in the fields of political science, social
psychology, sociology and economics.