* 8809422
* Research Initiation and Industry/University Cooperative     Research Activity:  Fluid-Phase Equilibria for Biocompound- Water Elevated Temperatures and Pressures
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Mark Thies, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 11/30/1990
* USD 67,188.00

The fluid-phase equilibria for mixtures of water with biochemical compounds of
low volatility, such as sterols and fatty acids, at elevated temperatures and
pressures are obtained. An equilibrium flow apparatus which incorporates a view
cell with sapphire windows will be used to measure liquid-liquid equilibrium
compositions and mixture critical curves. Preliminary results for the oleic
acid-water system indicate that oleic acid and water are completely miscible at
approximately 310 Degrees Celsius and 125 bar, and thermal decomposition and
polymerization reactions at these conditions are minimal. The use of water to
separate biocompounds or other compounds of low volatility has not been proposed
and no solubility measurements for such compounds with water at elevated
temperatures and pressures are known. The recovery of biochemical compounds from
naturally occurring oils is of interest to the health care, biotechnology, and
specialty chemical industries. The long term purpose of this work is to
determine the feasibility of a high-pressure extraction process which would use
liquid water at elevated temperatures as a solvent for separating mixtures of
biocompounds which naturally occur in resins and oils. If successful, this
process would 1) suppress the undesirable sterol-acid reaction which results in
product losses, 2) increase the purity of the existing acid products, and 3)
allow one to recover beta- sitosterol as a new, high-value product. A successful
process would result in a significant new supply of biochemical compounds with
many potential uses and would also give the U.S. tall oil industry the ability
to handle a diverse source of trees for their raw materials.