* 8809773
* The Establishment of Organic Chemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Frederic Holmes, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 06/30/1992
* USD 39,000.00

For a new specialty area in science to be established, it must be in some sense
be "institutionalized." The new specialty must be taught to new students who
will perpetuate it; it must have facilities to carry out the scientific studies
which advance the research frontier; it must have support to finance this
research; it must have journals which will publish the research emanating from
the labs; and it must have academic recognition and status in order that it's
adherents will have positions to hold. The accrual of these institutional
characteristics of a specialty are essential if a specialty is to survive and
thrive. These characteristics, however, do not automatically come to promising
new ideas in science. The history of science is replete with potential new
specialty areas which failed to survive because insufficient or ineffective
attention was paid to the institutionalization of the specialty. Professor
Holmes is examining the process of institutionalization of a new specialty in
the context of one of the most important and productive areas of science in the
19th century: Justus Liebig's "Giessen School" of organic chemistry. Professor
Holmes' study will make substantial new contributions to our understanding of
the organization of science and the formation of research schools, the symbiotic
connections between pedagogy and research, the formation of scientific
specialties, debates about the social construction of scientific knowledge, and
other issues centering on experimental practice in science. Justus Liebig is one
of the most celebrated 19th century scientists. His influence on the development
of organic chemistry, agricultural chemistry, and animal chemistry are more than
matched by his fame as founder of the first large-scale teaching-research
laboratory, the "Giessen School." Professor Holmes, under this grant will
examine and integrate the three dimensions of Liebig's career as a chemical
investigator, teacher and leader in the formation of the discipline of organic
chemistry. Although the study will be centered upon the role of Liebig in the
establishment of the new specialty, he will give ample attention to the roles
played in this process by Jacob Berzelius, Joseph Gay-Lussac, Jean-Baptiste
Dumas, Frederich Wohler and others who played less prominent parts. The sources
for this study are contained in the research articles of the specialized
journals of the period, in textbooks and published lectures, and private papers,
correspondence, and diaries in various archives in Germany.