* 8809923
* Transition Metal Complexes Containing Quinone and           Hydroxyquinone Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Cortlandt Pierpont, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 12/31/1991
* USD 290,040.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is in the area of transition metal chemistry. The focus of the project is
transition metal complexes of quinone ligands. Catecholate and o-semiquinone
ligands have electronic levels which are close in energy to metal levels, but
which remain discrete in the electronic structure of the complex. Quinone
complexes often show intense, low-energy charge transfer transitions
corresponding to transfer of electrons between ligand and metal orbitals.
Effects which influence the relative energy of metal and quinone have been
investigated in the interest of defining parameters which may be used to tune
the energy separations, and it has been shown that the factors which determine
the charge distribution between metal and quinone ligands include metal orbital
energy, the identities of the other ligands and the overall charge of the
complex. These studies will be extended to planar quinone complexes which show
strong intermolecular interactions between metals and between quinone ligands.
The photomechanical and conductive properties of these complexes will be
investigated, with a focus on their application as discotic mesophase liquid
crystals. Destabilization of oxo ligands of oxometal cathecholate complexes by
irradiation of the cathecholate-to-metal CT band will be studied in systems
which exhibit oxygen atom transfer reactions, olefin epoxidation and
photochemical water oxidation. Learning how to tune the properties of metal
atoms by changing the molecules to which they are bound is critical to
controlling their function in catalysts and in coming to a better understanding
of their function in biological systems.