* 8809038
* Research Initiation:  3-D Response of Reinforced Concrete   Beam-Column-Slab Connections
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1992
* George Voyiadjis, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 11/30/1992
* USD 69,971.00

Recently the inelastic behavior of beam to column connections interacting with
monolithically cast floor slabs has received a considerable attention. In
multistory reinforced concrete (RC) frame buildings the poor performance of such
connections caused by excessive damage during building deformations can
adversely affect the stiffness and strength of the entire structure. A number of
beam-column-slab connections have been tested as isolated specimens as well as
within the RC test buildings. The objective of the proposed research is to
complement such studies by analyzing a number of tested connections using the
finite element method. For this purpose a 3-D material response model for
simulating concrete behavior in the pre-cracked phase will be implemented. This
will be augmented by a macroscopic (smeared) post-cracking constitutive model
for concrete which will simulate the cracked material behavior including the
strain softening phenomenon as well as the interaction between reinforcement and
concrete. A number of parametric and sensitivity studies will be performed. Such
analysis will be carried out with the aim of broadening the understanding of the
internal load-resisting mechanisms and ultimate capacities in RC beam-column-
slab connections. The results of this investigation may also produce valuable
information for future development of simplified models capable of simulating
the dominant behavior characteristics while retaining simplicity and
computational efficiency.