* 8809822
* Axiomatic Study of Solutions
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* William Thomson, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 112,130.00

This project is part of an ambitious effort by mathematical economists to
identify and rigorously study fundamental principles of individual and
collective choice. These principles, when applied to specific problems, take the
form of axioms and have proved extremely powerful in providing new insights into
the solutions to economic problems and in unifying the varied areas of economic
theory. This project studies and characterizes solutions satisfying the
augmentation principle an its "dual", the consistency principle. Consistency is
the property that whatever outcome of any subproblem where subproblem roughly
means a problem derived from the original by considering separately a subset of
the agents, and their resources, from the original problem. Augmentation works
in reverse: any solution to a problem should be consistent with the solution to
a larger problem of which the given problem is a subproblem. The principles are
applied to the following classes of economic problems: bargaining, bankruptcy
and taxation, cost allocation, resource allocation in economies with public
godds. This line of basic research is important because it helps us understand
the boundary between which combinations of social objectives are feasible and
which are not. For example, the project determines when the Lindahl
correspondence, one of the main theoretical tools for allocation in public good
economies, satisfies fundamental principles of social choice and develops
precise tools for quantifying the extent to which a given correspondence fails
to meet a given requirement.