* 8809615
* Center for Research on Parallel Computation
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1994
* Ken Kennedy, William Marsh Rice University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bruce H. Barnes
* 01/31/1994
* USD 13,431,320.00

This proposal from Rice University, in collaboration with the California
Institute of Technology (Caltech), Argonne National Laboratory, and Los Alamos
National Laboratory requests funds to establish a Science and Technology Center
for Research on Parallel Computation. The Director of the Center will be
Professor Ken Kennedy of Rice University. The principal goal of the Center will
be to make parallel computing systems easier to use. To achieve this goal, the
Center will attack this problem on many levels by taking advantage of the unique
skills of individuals from each of the participating institutions. The
complementary areas that will be brought to bear on all aspects of
use/application of parallel systems are computer architecture, programming
systems, computational mathematics, and scientific applications. In particular,
the Center will attack the problem of parallel programming at all levels:
application, algorithm, compiler, and machine. Experience must be gained in
parallel programming by designing and building new application programs that
solve important scientific and engineering problems on parallel machines. New,
inherently parallel algorithms must be developed for the fundamental problems of
computational mathematics. Programming systems must be developed that permit the
computer user to solve problems at a high level of abstraction without
compromising efficiency by involvement of the scientist in the architectural
details of the system. Finally the technological base in parallel architectures
must be continued by engineering shrewd compromises between designs that make
use of the underlying components, designs that simplify the task of generating
efficient code, and the algorithms that are incorporated within them. This
effort will involve researchers and scientists from many different areas
resulting in the cross- fertilization of all involved in this truly
multidisciplinary Center.