* 8809528
* The Computation of Direction Selectivity in the Retina
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Norberto Grzywacz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1991
* USD 97,900.00

Visual detection of motion occurs via neurons that selectively respond to the
direction of movement in the visual field. Cells in the retinal ganglia give
ON/OFF responses when moving objects cross their receptive fields in appropriate
directions. This implies that there are neural circuits that inhibit the
responses of these cells, and it is those circuits that are the object of
investigation in this project. The study addresses four major questions: 1. Are
these cells essential to direction selectivity or do they simply function in
determining velocity and orientation? 2. How does the inhibition interact with
excitation in the retina? 3. How does the inhibition relate to the cells' tuning
to velocity and direction selectivity? 4. How dependent is the inhibition on the
contrast of the object whose motion is being perceived? The methods employed
include electrophysiology, pharmacology and immunohistochemistry, with
computational theoretical analysis of the data. The work is significant for a
number of reasons. It includes analysis of general mechanisms that are probably
fundamental to the function of the brain. It will also demonstrate the
limitations of early motion measurements, perhaps setting constraints on what
may be expected of motion perception. Finally, it includes the development of
new experimental as well as theoretical tools that will be applicable to studies
of motion perception mechanisms in higher centers of the brain. *** //