* 8809490
* Role of Caudal Auditory Brainstem in Processing of Complex  Sounds
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1988,09/30/1992
* Albert Feng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 09/30/1992
* USD 265,880.00

Auditory communication often involves sounds that have complex frequencies, or
spectra, and complex timing relations, or temporal pattern. Some analysis of the
spectral and temporal components is known to occur low in the brainstem, which
contains groups of nerve cells called the auditory nuclei. These neurons send
projections to higher centers in the brain for further analysis. Frogs have
provided particuluarly useful models for study, since they are well-studied,
their mating calls are relatively simple and stereotyped, and the brainstem has
somewhat simpler structure than in mammals. This project will use the frog model
to examine how behaviorally meaningful features of complex sounds are processed
in the brain. Two particular nuclei in the brain stem will be studied by
electrophysiological recording of single cell responses to a wide range of
artificial and natural acoustic signals. Building on past work on recognition in
the frequency domain, this project will aim primarily to determine the selective
importance of certain features of amplitude modulation and temporal pattern, and
the neural codes of response patterns that may be used to discriminate among
different signals. Results will be relevant to studies of communication
behavior, of complex sound analysis, and important to the general sensory
problem of signal processing.