* 8809289
* Prestige Scores for all Occupations: Replication and        Extension
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1992
* Judith Treas, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1992
* USD 104,373.00

The objectives of this study are to develop, assess and disseminate measures of
occupational prestige, replicating the prestige scores generated for occupations
in the United States in the 1960s. The scales developed at that time are widely
used but out of date. The proposed study will include (1) formal replication --
with selected improvements -- of the original 1960 prestige study, but with more
occupations, more respondents, and titles generated for and from the 1980 Census
classification system, and (2) begin some preliminary investigations of trends
in occupational prestige over time. These objectives will be accomplished by
adding a supplementary set of questions to an on-going national survey of a
representative sample of adults, the General Social Survey. The goal is to
develop a prestige index that is both improved and up-to-date, reflecting
current public consensus as to the ranking of occupations. "Prestige" is a
theoretical concept that has generated studies of upward (and downward) social
mobility both within and across generations. The rationale for recalibrating the
prestige scales rests on (a) the need for new estimates, given the dramatic
changes in 1980 Census classification system relative to prior versions; (b) the
need to generate estimates for many new titles, not in existence in the 1960s;
and (c) substantive interest in the question of stability and change in prestige
evaluations, a core feature of the American value system. This project will
produce a valuable prestige index for use by the social science community at
large.