* 8809912
* Production Based Asset Pricing
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,06/30/1991
* John Cochrane, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 06/30/1991
* USD 60,630.00

Researchers in the area of finance have recently documented predictable
movements in stock prices and in risk premiums (rates of return above risk-free
interest rates) on stocks and bonds, and found that these predictable movements
correlate strongly with business cycles. However, a number of important
questions remain unanswered including: What causes these predictable movements?
Why are they correlated with business cycles? What do these facts tell us about
the behavior of stock markets and about business cycles? The theoretical
framework in which these questions are currently addressed stresses the link
between stock returns and consumption. Basically, it pays people to defer
consumption purchases and invest in the market when stock returns are expected
to be high. However, consumption barely changes over the business cycle. The
significant changes occur with respect to employment, investment, inventories,
and production. The purpose of this project is to exploit the theoretical link
between stock and bond returns and producers, and develop a model which links
stock and bond returns to the important business cycle variables mentioned
above. The recently documented, predictable movements in stock returns have
already been used to argue that the stock market is "inefficient" or that it
overreacts to small events and rumors, and that, hence, regulatory changes are
needed. But, at this point we do not know what kind of predictable movements in
stock prices actually do make sense within the context of a well functioning
market and, thus, it is impossible to assess the validity of this argument. This
project is important because it will shed some light on this issue.