* 8809805
* Empirical Studies in Public Finance and Financial Economics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* James Poterba, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 12/31/1990
* USD 96,850.00

This study involves two projects. The first is to investigate the effects of
state budgeting procedures on capital and operating expenditures. The object is
to examine the issue of whether the level of public spending on capital projects
such as highways, schools, etc. is influenced by capital budgeting procedures
used by some state governments. Expenditure data by state will be analyzed
statistically to determine the effect of capital budgeting on the level and type
of public capital investments. The other project is in the area of financial
economics and is aimed at discovering what factors may account for the variation
of stock prices. Traditional theory and models do not adequately explain why the
stock market seems to be becoming more volatile as evidenced by the recent stock
market crash. Vector autoregression techniques will be used to analyze price
volatility. Particular attention will be paid to the role that news, such
announced changes in interest rates or the reporting of trade or budget
deficits, may play in affecting market volatility. Whether or not the federal
government should adopt the use of a capital budget has been a long standing
issue in public finance, which in recent years has come to the forefront because
of concerns over deteriorating infrastructure and over the federal budget
deficit. It is not clear at all whether the adoption of a dual budget system
would affect the level or pattern of federal spending. This project should shed
some light on that issue. The research on stock price volatility may identify
new sources of that volatility and suggest ways the market may be made less
volatile and more efficient for raising investment capital.