* 8809446
* A Network Analysis of Unequal Exchange in International     Trade
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,10/31/1990
* David Smith, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 10/31/1990
* USD 76,000.00

This study involves a network analysis of the world economy, looking
specifically at the international system of trade among nations. The topic of
the world system -- the structure of the world-economy and how it changes or
remains stable -- is a central theoretical concept for those doing research at
the international level. Another important theoretical construct is that of
"unequal exchange" of commodities. This project uses the technical advances of
network methodology to examine the network of exchanges within the world system,
focusing specifically on the unequal exchange in trade among nations, the
direction and nature of these exchanges, and how these change over time. By
combining time-series data on international trade reaching back as far as 1938
with innovations in network methodology, the study will be able to evaluate
hypotheses about changes in both the overall structure of the world system and
the specific roles which particular nations play in it. The implications of
these patterns of trade for various measures of economic growth, political
stability and social development within countries will also be assessed. Two
principal data sources will be used: the Commodity Trade Statistics, and the
United Nation's Direction of International Trade. Trade between nations is a
topic that can only be addressed at a global, world-system level. To understand
the commodity exchanges between any two nations requires information about their
patterns of exchange with other trading partners. Hence the importance of
network analysis, which enables the researcher to take into account all of the
trade linkages among nations. Knowledge of this structure of international
trade, and the roles certain nations play in commodity exchanges at various
points in time, is crucial to arrive at an understanding of a wide array of
social, political, and economic changes within particular societies and across
nations.