* 8809588
* Biosynthetic/Biomimetic Studies in Insects
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1988,03/31/1992
* Scott Sieburth, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 03/31/1992
* USD 262,897.00

This research is on characterizing the key intermediates in the functioning of
juvenile hormones (JH) in insect development and will be supported by the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program. This research will lead to the
elucidation of JH action which will provide insights into alternative methods of
insect control. Unknown endogenous juvenoids and anti-juvenoids in insects will
be isolated and characterized by the use of receptor binding assays to guide
fractionation, purification, and authenication. These invertebrate compounds may
be morphogens or anti-morphogens involved in receptor protein-mediated
transcription of chromosomal DNA. 1. Endogenous Juvenoids. Juvenile hormone (JH)
action can be mimicked in vivo by over five thousand synthetic juvenoids, many
unrelated to JH itself. Tritium and I-125 labeled JH mimics developed at SUNY,
Stony Brook were used to discover the existence of unique juvenoid binding sites
in target cell nuclei of the tobacco hornworm. These sites do not recognize JH
homologs. Thus it is predicted that endogenous small molecules are present in
immature insects which are natural ligands for these juvenoid receptors. Using
the binding of tritium-methoprene or tritium-S-31183 (or their photolabile
analogs), the competitive binding materials will be purified from early instar
Manduca (tobacco hornworm) larvae to establish the existence and structure of
these natural morphogens. 2. Inhibitors of Termite Caste Differentiation.
Soldier termites produce abundant defense secretions in their head; in addition,
it has now been found that other substances are present, which can inhibit the
methoprene-induced molting of workers into presoldiers. Termite workers and
larvae of the Eastern subterranean termite Reticulitermes flavipes are an
abundant resource for isolation of methoprene receptor involved in stimulating
caste differentiation, while soldiers and nymphs contain inhibitory pheromones
which block this action of methoprene in vivo. An in vitro biochemical assay has
been developed by which changes in hemolymph JH binding proteins induced by
methoprene are detected by photoaffinity labeling.