* 8809061
* Studies of the Mesoscale and Microscale Structures and      Organization of Clouds and Precipitation in East Coast      Winter Storms (GALE)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Peter Hobbs, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/1992
* USD 638,614.00

The rapid development and intensification of winter cyclones in coastal regions
presents a major weather forecasting problem. Along the East Coast of the United
States, the development of cyclonic storms and frontal systems often occurs
along the coastal region of the Carolinas. These weather systems may lead to
severe weather in the heavily populated Northeast Corridor in the form of
freezing rain, heavy snowfall, blizzards and extensive coastal erosion. A
complex interaction of cold continental air, warm ocean currents, traveling
atmospheric disturbances and local geography all appear to contribute to the
rapid development of these systems; however, the processes are not well
understood and the phenomena are often poorly forecast. In January-March 1986 a
cooperative research project to study winter storms in this region was held by a
consortium of universities and Federal agencies. Entitled GALE (Genesis of
Atlantic Lows Experiment), the project was designed to provide detailed
information on the role of air-sea interaction, planetary boundary-layer
processes and mesoscale meteorological processes. As one of the core
investigators of the GALE, the Principal Investigator was instrumental in
designing and executing the experiment. Using the specialized data sets
collected during the GALE, the Principal Investigator will carry out a number of
studies. The major goals of the research are to describe the mesoscale structure
and precipitation producing mechanisms in frontal systems and to investigate the
mechanisms responsible for organized mesoscale precipitation features. Included
in this research will be unique applications of Doppler radar data and
information from numerical models in the diagnosis of mesoscale rainbands.