* 8809559
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Automatic Light      Scattering Goniometer and Photon Correlator for Colloidal   Polymer Biochemical and Pharmaceutical Research
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Jacques Zakin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 01/31/1990
* USD 40,000.00

This engineering equipment project provides a quasi-elastic light scattering
(QELS) device needed for five on-going research projects conducted by four
faculty members in the areas of colloidal, polymer, biochemical and
pharmaceutical research. The first (supported by DOE), deals with drag reduction
in surfactant systems for use in district heating and district cooling systems.
The second (supported by NSF through the Engineering Research Center at Ohio
State and private industries) deals with microstructure formation in
inhomogeneous crosslinking polymerizations. The third (supported by the State of
Ohio Thomas Edison Program and private industries) deals with diffusion-
controlled polymerizations in reactive processing. The fourth (which is
currently being supported internally by Ohio State) deals with the formation of
bioploymers and bioparticles in fermentation. The fifth (supported by private
industries) deals with various drug delivery systems. The behavior of these
systems strongly depends on molecular weight, particle size and particle shape
in the submicron range. QELS measurements would provide this information
accurately and efficiently, leading to more fundamental analyses of the
underlying phenomena. The QELS apparatus allows the measurement of micellar size
and shape and, therefore, the development of criteria of micelle size and shape
needed for effective drag reduction along with criteria for surfactant chemical
structures and solvent environments which provide these micellar structures.
This will permit the selection of new, useful, drag reducing surfactant
additives for both low temperature (40-55 degrees Fahrenheit) district cooling
and high temperature (80 degrees Celsius and above) district heating systems.
These systems conserve energy, reduce investment in small inefficient heating or
cooling units, reduce pollution and reduce peak electricity loads on hot summer
days. Microstructural materials, advanced polymers, composites, etc., are
reshaping our society and are contributing to an improved standard of living.
Understanding how microstructures are formed in materials and learning how to
control the processes involved in their formation will make important
contributions to materials design and manufacturing. Unsaturated polyester
resins have shown remarkable growth in the automotive, housing, marine and
electric/electronics industries and are the most widely used thermosets. The
technology developed in this study could also be applied to other
microstructures materials.