* 8809640
* STC Center in Microbial Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1994
* Hans Grethlein, Michigan State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* James L. Edwards
* 01/31/1994
* USD 4,228,724.00

This proposal from Michigan State University (MSU) requests funds to establish
a Science and Technology Center in Microbial Ecology. The Director of the Center
will be Professor James M. Tiedje. To achieve the goal of the Center the
research has been organized around three key areas of knowledge: the genetic
features of organisms, the physiological capacity of these organisms, and the
effect of the environment on these organisms. The Center is intended to make the
greatest impact on the unanswered questions important to understanding the
success and function of organisms in their habitat. The research program will be
organized under selected component projects that contribute to the three key
areas. The projects will be gene pool accessibility, population diversity,
community diversity, novel organisms, substrate availability, environmental
control, adhesion, natural toxins, chemical analysis, and DNA probe methodology.
Each of these has a well defined research scope consisting of short term goals
(3-5 years) and longer range objectives (10-11 years). The individual projects
interact in many ways to advance understanding of broader issues. An example of
the project interaction is the problem of developing new processes to biodegrade
hazardous wastes. This requires information on novel dechlorinating organisms
and their isolation from nature (Novel Organisms), and on whether critical genes
can be amplified or transferred in these unusual organisms, or requires novel
vector development (Gene Pool Accessibility). The exploitation of these
organisms may require that they be retained (Adhesion), and that the process be
sequenced to degrade byproducts (Environmental Control). In all of its research
the Center will build on basic principles, drawing together the relevant
disciplinary resources to solve particular problems. Funding from industry as
well as other Federal agencies will then translate these principles into highly
useful technology.