* 8809937
* Workshop on "Biological Collection Resources for the 1990's"Washington, DC; October 1988
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1989
* W. Donald Duckworth, Association of Systematics Collections
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 06/30/1989
* USD 66,979.00

This project will allow the systematic community to assess the status and the
future of biological collections resources as we enter the 1990's. A workshop
will be held in early October, 1988, focussing on institutional needs, specific
new problems associated with data management and networking of collections, and
the demands on systematics resources. Participants will include museum
professionals, representatives from several societies of systematic biologists,
data management professionals, and other users of systematic collections. As a
foundation for the workshop, data will be gathered on the current status and
needs of systematic collections of all sizes and types. These data will be
analyzed before the workshop and presented, along with the results of the
workshop deliberations, in a comprehensive summary report and series of
recommendations to the National Science Foundation. This is the first national-
level workshop to integrate the imperatives of information management, as
considered by data management professionals, into the planning of broader
institutional needs for systematic collections. The workshop is unique in
representing the perspectives of those doing research as well as museum
administrators. It will also integrate data from earlier symposia sponsored by
the Association of Systematic Collections on living and culture collections and
on orphaned collections.