* 8809263
* Strategic Choice in Mediation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Peter Carnevale, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 01/31/1992
* USD 177,164.00

Mediation, which involves a third party who attempts to facilitate voluntary
agreements between two or more disputing parties, is an important component of
industrial, international, and organizational disputes. Past research has
provided little systematic information about mediation, and virtually no theory.
This research is designed to develop a better understanding of the antecedents
and consequences of mediation, and to evaluate its effectiveness. The
investigators have developed a theory of mediation that proposes that mediator
incentives and mediator beliefs about the likelihood of agreement interact to
predict mediator strategy and negotiator responses to mediation. The results of
preliminary experiments support the theory, and thirteen laboratory experiments
have been designed to test additional hypothses derived from the theory and
related propositions. The hypotheses concern the impact of mediator expertise
and accountability on mediator perceptions and mediator choice of strategy; the
behavior of biased mediators; the impact of expected mediator strategy,
incentives, and two forms of mediator bias on negotiator receptivity to
mediation; the effect of recommendations from expert and powerful mediators; and
the impact of negotiator-mediator continuity on the effectiveness of mediation.
In the experiments, subjects interact in simulated mediation and negotiation
sessions. A record of their interaction is extensively coded. Outcome measures
include negotiation and mediation tactics, negotiator offers, mediation
recommendations, and the quality of agreements. The results of this research
will be important for understanding how mediators function in different types of
disputes where performance is dependent on optimal conditions, effective
diagnosis of disputes, and the use of appropriate strategies. The results will
suggest whether training and evaluation programs for mediators should stress
contingencies in mediation, the idea being that certain mediator behaviors are
effective in some circumstances and not in others. And the results will indicate
possible important directions for future theory and research to evaluate and
understand these contingencies.