* 8809391
* Robust Random Field Models for Images with Long and Short   Term Dependencies
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1988,10/25/1989
* Kie-Bum Eom, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce
* 10/25/1989
* USD 27,282.00

The objectives of this project are: to develop a random-field model which can
represent both long- and short-correlation structures of an image; to
investigate robust estimators in the long- and short-memroy random-field models;
and to develop segmentation and restoration algorithms using theoretical models
found in this project. The long-memory model will be generalized by adding the
short- memory structure of autoregressive moving-average (ARMA)-class models. At
least two approaches will be used: the input process of the long-memory model
will be represented by ARMA models; and the fractional differencing term in the
long-memory model will be modified by a fractionally-differenced autoregressive
process. Robust M-estimators will be derived for the estimation of parameters in
generalized long-memroy models; the objective function will be derived by
metricaly Winsorizing either a likelihood function or a least-squares criterion.
Issues involved with M-estimators, such as scale variance, efficiency at assumed
distribution, asymptotic properties, convergence, etc., will be investigated.
Two-dimensional robust Kalman filters for image restoration, and maximum-
likelihood decision rules for segmentation, will be developed. The performance
of model-based vision algorithms is directly related to the modeling power of
the algorithm, and will be greatly aided by these long- and short-memory models.