* 8809508
* The Environmental Control of Ingestion:  The Roles of       Associations and Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Michael Best, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1991
* USD 39,370.00

When a disinctively flavored food or drink is followed by gastrointestinal
distress, similarly flavored edibles are subsequently avoided. This phenomenon
is generally known as taste-aversion learning. Taste-aversion learning occurs in
a variety of species, including humans, nonhuman primates, rodents, and birds.
Such learning is distinguished by its strength. For example, one pairing of a
taste with illness is often sufficient to condition a lasting aversion to the
taste, and substantial aversions usually can be conditioned when the taste and
illness are separated by minutes or even hours. Dr. Best's experiments
investigate how taste-aversion learning is related to the environmental context
in which it occurs. He has found, for example, that rats will not drink familiar
fluids-- fluids they would readily consume in other contexts--in an environment
in which taste-aversion conditioning has occurred. This indicates that
environments as well as distinctive flavors become associated with illness. In
addition, Dr. Best has found that an environmental context can provide
information about where a distinctive taste should be avoided without the
context itself being associated with illness. That is, edibles tested in one
environment correlated with illness but also consumed in another "safe"
environment will be avoided only in the "dangerous" context. Moreover, in this
procedure the only taste avoided in the dangerous context is the one paired with
illness there. This indicates that, depending on the circumstances, environments
can be associated with the aversive consequences of ingestion or simply signal
the location in which a taste should be avoided. The primary focus of Dr. Best's
new experiments is to determine the factors distinguishing these two phenomena.
Both of these phenomena, as well as the processes producing them, have
significant implications for human health. Understanding the role of the basic
conditioning processes underlying each should provide insight into some side
effects of chemo- and radio-therapy in cancer patients. Many of these people
become nauseous from such therapy regimens and subsequently develop aversions to
the environments in which the treatments took place. Dr. Best's research can
both elucidate the processes underlying these environmental aversions and
provide alternatives for reducing their occurrence.