* 8809800
* Prospects for Exchange Rate Stabilization
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Paul Krugman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 98,710.00

This project is part of an effort to rigorously model and empirically study the
performance of the global economy. The project examines three subjects: (1) the
likely behavior of exchange rates under a system of reference rates and target
zones; (2) the long-term effects of large exchange rate movements on trade
flows; and (3) the possible existence of sustained secular trends in equilibrium
real exchange rates. Some aspects of movements in exchange rates during the
eighties puzzle policy makers and challenge the large body of theory on
international finance and trade. Why were there wild fluctations in the value of
the dollar during this period? More generally, why were exchange rates so
volatile under a regime of floating exchange rates? Why have trade flows been so
slow to respond to exchange rate movements? Specifically, why has the sharp
decline in the dollar from 1985 to the present not had more of an impact on U.S.
trade flows? Finally, why do the terms of trade of the U.S. towards Japan keep
deteriorating year after year? This project takes international economics in new
directions that could answer these questions and suggest new policy tools for
dealing with U.S. problems in international trade and finance. Exchange rate
volatility is explained by modelling the way changes in the beliefs of market
participants can increase the volatility of international financial markets. The
project develops and extends theoretically a framework in which the belief by
market participants that authorities may intervene to prevent the exchange rate
from drifting outside a target zone exerts a strong stabilizing influence on
exchange rates within the band. This framework is the basis for an examination
of the experience with the European Monetary System (EMS), the nearest thing to
a target zone system. Preliminary work suggests that the EMS has been
unexpectedly successful at stabilizing European exchange rates. An "hysterisis"
model, a model in which short-run shocks cause long-run effects, is used to
explain why the U.S. economy did not rebound as rapidly as predicted when the
dollar started to decline in 1985. The U.S. economy is not as competitive as
expected now because of quasi-permanent damage suffered when the dollar was
overvalued in the early eighties. Finally, supply side differences in the
industrial structures among countries could explain apparent strong secular
trends in the terms-of- trade.