* 8809200
* Empirical and Theoretical Studies of Wages, Mobility, and   Bargaining
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Robert Gibbons, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 111,807.00

A pervasive feature of modern industrial economies is the existence of large and
persistent wage differentials among seemingly similar workers. Industries such
as durable-goods manufacturing, mining, transportation, and utilities appear to
pay wages on the order of 15 to 30 percent higher than those paid by the retail
trade and many service industries to observationally equivalent workers. The
pattern of industry wage differentials is remarkably stable over time and
similar across countries with distinct labor-market institutions. These facts
suggest that the differentials are neither largely transitory disequilibrium
phenomena nor the artifacts of particular collective bargaining institutions or
government interventions in the labor market. This project develops theoretical
models that can account for the stylized facts concerning the observed pattern
of these differentials across industries and establishments and implements
empirical tests of the new predictions of the models. This is important because
the competing explanations of industry wage differences produce very different
positive and normative implications in analyses of several much-debated policy
issues. For example, one set of theories is consistent with involuntary
unemployment and labor-market segmentation. The others are not. In addition to
seeking to explain certain kinds of wage differentials, the project
theoretically and empirically examines the effects their existence has on labor-
market decisions such as the mobility decisions of employed workers, the
recruiting and retention policies of employers, and the job-search behavior of
unemployed workers. The research emphasizes the roles of matching, learning, and
asymmetric information in the labor market.