* 8809776
* Anthropological and Paleontological Research in the Fayum
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Elwyn Simons, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 02/29/1992
* USD 359,505.00

Dr. Simons and his colleagues will, over the course of three seasons of field
research, collect primate and associated vertebrate and plant fossils from
sediments of Oligocene age located in the Fayum region of Egypt. The field party
members will seek, quarry, and sift rocks and sands to find fossils. The many
kinds of fossil primates occurring in the Fayum include species thought to be
the oldest known common ancestors of monkeys, apes, and humans. Recovery of
postcranial elements, skulls, and new kinds of primates during these three
seasons should significantly advance knowledge of the extent and nature of early
higher primates. This research will help solve the question of which earlier
primate family gave rise to the group that includes humans, monkeys, and apes.
Since the fossil primates come from several quite different levels in the Fayum
and are only inferentially dated from an overlying basalt, more accurate dating
by magnetic reversal stratigraphy will be attempted. Because knowledge of the
environmental context of each of the primate species helps in understanding its
evolution, geological floral and faunal information will be collected at each
primate site. This research is important because it increases our understanding
of both the history and the forces which led to the emergence of the human
lineage. Dr. Simons and his team have worked in the Fayum for many years and in
each season have discovered significant new fossils. The Fayum is unique because
it is the only site in the Old World which contains such fossil remains of
Oligocene age.