* 8809299
* Coping with Risk: The Role of Insurance, Compensation and   Protective Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1992
* Colin Camerer, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 08/31/1992
* USD 1,028,683.00

Many decisions made by individuals, firms, consumers, citizens' groups,
governments, regulatory bodies and courts involve dealing with potential
misfortunes or catastrophes before they occur-- through insurance, risk
avoidance behavior, or compensation for risk bearing-- or after they occur--
through private or government compensation. These decisions often appear to be
inconsistant, inequitable or irrational. Insurers, uncertain about future
awards, refuse to offer policies against certain risks because they base their
decisions on worst-case scenarios. Individuals react to risks inconsistently,
treating small risks as though they were nonexistent (failing to wear seatbelts
or to take precautions against AIDS) or so large as to overwhelm all other
considerations (opposition to genetic recombination). Governmental attempts to
respond to such concerns are often ad- hoc, such as the Delaney amendment,
resulting in unanticipated contradictory outcomes. This collaborative
interdisciplinary research program examines these puzzling features of behavior
within a multi-disciplinary tradition of research on biases and fallacies in
decision making. It investigates the question of whether these biases distort
the functioning of institutions, markets and societal allocation of resources.
The research will develop and evaluate several approaches designed to correct
decision biases or protect individuals from their effects, including education,
novel ways of presenting information, and mixed strategies coupling incentives
and regulations with insurance and compensation. The research plan organizes
biases into four categories: reference-point effects, in which preferences for
outcomes depend on what they are compared to; contingent weighting, in which
choice depends on the way in which a decision is expressed; decision rules, in
which absolute priority is given to one attribute (e.g. saving money, avoiding
catastrophic consequences); and threshold effects, in which small risks or costs
(e.g. the risk of one cigarette or the extra cost of low- deductible insurance)
are totally ignored even if they are repeated. The research will examine whether
such biases affect decisions about offering or purchasing insurance, setting
premiums, compensating victims of misfortune, compensating people for the risk
of misfortune beforehand, and engaging in protective behavior. Multiple methods
will be used, including questionnaires, laboratory studies, experimental
markets, process-tracing, field studies, and microeconomic analysis. The results
will bear on theoretical controversies within psychology, economics and decision
theory about the relevance of biases to real decision making, on the question of
whether market competition reduces the effects of bias, and on questions about
the nature of bias itself.