* 8809087
* Research Initiation:  Adsorption Kinetics of Organic        Compounds at a Metal/Electrolyte Interface
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Jan Talbot, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 06/30/1991
* USD 60,000.00

This is a study of the copper-thiourea system. Both electrodeposition and
electrodissolution of copper are influenced by the addition of thiourea. This
investigation uses standard electrochemical techniques such as voltammetry in
addition to exploring the use of alternating- current impedance as a
quantitative method to measure the adsorption kinetics of thiourea on copper. A
rotating disk electrode is used in all experiments to distinguish between
kinetic and mass-transfer effects. Fourier-transform infrared reflection
spectroscopy provides an in situ characterization of species at the electrode-
solution interphase. Mathematical analysis of the application of AC impedance to
adsorption kinetics and complicated electrochemical processes involving
adsorption is done concurrently with the experimental studies. Many
electrochemical processes depend on the ability of organic molecules to adsorb
on the electrode surface. This is a study of adsorption kinetics designed to
improve understanding of adsorption mechanisms and the effects of adsorption on
industrially important electrochemical processes. Thiourea is chosen as the
model compound because it is used both to inhibit corrosion of copper and to
enhance electroplating of copper.