* 8809795
* Particulate Matter Airborne Sampling Inlet Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Barry Huebert, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 06/30/1991
* USD 157,320.00

In many respect, scientist understand the behavior of atmospheric gases much
better than that of aerosols. Homogeneous gas-phase chemistry is inherently
simpler than that which involves more than one phase. Yet the heterogeneous
chemistry of aerosols is central to understanding several of the important
problems in atmospheric chemistry. Some of man's activities may have an impact
on climate because they create aerosols which alter the Earth's albedo. These
aerosols may also affect the tendency of water vapor to condense in clouds,
altering their droplet size-distribution, spatial extent, tendency to
precipitate, and optical properties. Natural cloudiness may be controlled in
part by the availability of aerosols in clean regions. One of the factors which
limits our understanding of aerosol chemistry is the difficulty of sampling them
from airborne platforms. Although many airborne experiments have measured
aerosol species in the atmospheric, there are potential sampling problems with
the inlets used to bring air samples into collection systems. Inertial and
electrophoretic processes in sampling inlets have the potential to remove some
aerosols upstream of a filter, for instance. Losses can exceed 50% in some
cases. In the Particulate matter Airborne Sampling INlet experiment aerosols
will be sampled simultaneously with a variety of intake systems aboard NCAR's
Electra, to determine which parameters (flow Reynolds number, Stokes number,
redius of curvature, surface coating, aerosol diameter, etc.) control these
losses. The ultimate goal is the development of the most artifact-free sampling
system possible for collecting aerosols from aircraft.