* 8809854
* Science and Technology Research Center for High Temperature Superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1994
* Miles Klein, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1994
* USD 14,052,000.00

This award to the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana, in cooperation
with the University of Chicago, Northwestern University and Argonne National
Laboratory, is to establish a Science and Technology Center for
Superconductivity. The director of the Center is Professor Miles V. Klein of the
University of Illinois. The intellectual efforts of the Center are directed into
six interconnected research areas. Studies in the theory of superconductivity
involve collaboration between those exert in electronic structure calculations,
many-body theory, and many- body simulations respectively. Thin films prepared
by a variety of chemical and physical methods are compared and used for both
studies in fundamental physics and device fabrication. Studies of microstructure
address the substructure of superconducting materials, contacts and interfaces
and their response to various treatments. The processing group has the goals of
producing high temperature superconductors that support high current densities
and are environmentally and thermally stable. The synthesis effort undertakes
the sample preparation requirements for all Center participants as well as
searching for new superconductors and developing novel methods for controlling
purity, stoichiometry, and microstructure. Education and outreach programs
involve cooperative research with other institutions, workshops, conferences,
and extensive educational outreach through the program now in place at Argonne
National Laboratory. Contacts with industry include direct collaboration and a
technology transfer program.