* 8809167
* Research Initiation: Thermomechanical Treatment of Moving   Metal Strips in Rolling Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Jim Chen, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 12/31/1991
* USD 70,373.00

A combined experimental and numerical research program is proposed to study the
thermo-mechanical treatment (TMT) of moving metal strips in rolling processes.
TMT using controlled cooling has been adopted to improve product quality and to
reduce production cost. However, very little information is available on the
heat transfer behavior of the cooling process. Therefore, this research is
initiated to study the thermal behavior of strip rolling. Particular emphasis is
placed on the measurement of the local convective heat transfer coefficients for
jet boiling on moving strips. Three cooling systems will be investigated and
compared: spray cooling, laminar jets, and water curtains. Surface thermocouples
and thin film heat flux gages with fast response times (on the order of
microseconds) will be used to measure the instantaneous surface temperatures and
heat fluxes. Finite difference methods will be developed using Eulerian and
Lagrangian approaches to analyze data and to predict strip temperatures in
rolling conditions. The effect of strip material, strip temperature, and moving
speed as well as the jet velocity and jet configuration on the local heat
transfer coefficients will be investigated. Controlled cooling technology has
recently been developed to perform on-line thermo-mechanical treatment (TMT) of
the strips on the run out tables of hot-strip-mills. The result is a continuous
process for producing high quality products in the as- rolled conditions. At
present, however, the cooling system design is primarily based on a trial-and-
error approach because the heat transfer behavior is not well understood. A
better understanding of thermal and mechanical behavior of the strip cooling
processes as described in the proposed research is needed.