* 8809648
* Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer    Science
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1989,10/31/1994
* Daniel Gorenstein, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bruce H. Barnes
* 10/31/1994
* USD 5,884,590.00

This proposal from Rutgers University, in cooperation with Princeton
University, AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories (Bell Labs), and Bell Communications
Research (Bellcore), requests funds to establish a Science and Technology Center
for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science. The Director of the
Center will be Professor Daniel Gorenstein of Rutgers University. The Center in
Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science will strengthen the
development of these two overlapping areas by focussing research activity in a
continuing series of year-long research programs, workshops and conferences.
Approximately seventy researchers from the four collaborating institutions
provide the background coherence and direction for this activity. The core of
the research activity will be carried out by a vigorous program of visitors
(both senior and junior) from other institutions (academic, industrial,
government laboratory). Postdoctoral fellows and graduate students will be
affiliated with the Center for varying lengths of time. Each year the Center
will designate specific areas for special attention, inviting leading experts in
the designated fields to organize a research program in those areas of
concentration. These areas will be chosen to take advantage of the expertise of
the participating personnel from the collaborating institutions while addressing
questions of demonstrable interest to researchers in both the discrete
mathematics and theoretical computer science communities. Within these general
guidelines, there are several avenues of potential emphasis that involve both
serious theoretical inquiry and relevant application. For example, our modern
"information society" depends on clear, efficiently designed and reliable
telecommunications and communications systems. These are easily described by
network theory and can be modeled using linear programming techniques.
Transportation problems require similar techniques; and optimization and linear
programming, possibly enhanced by parallel computations, are critical in VLSI
design and manufacture. Discrete and computational geometry are foundational
disciplines for computer graphics and robotics. As the geometries required for
the applications become increasingly more complex, research in computational
geometry becomes ever more important. Yet there are fundamental questions in
discrete and computational geometry that must be addressed before the
applications can be realized.