* 8809803
* Transmitter Release at the Skate Electric Organ
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1993
* Mahlon Kriebel, SUNY, Upstate Medical University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1993
* USD 75,000.00

Electrical signals that begin in the brain and reach nerve terminals cannot
directly stimulate muscle fibers to generate action potentials which
subsequently initiate contraction. However, action potentials arriving in the
nerve terminals stimulate the release of a chemical transmitter that diffuses
across the space between the nerve terminals and muscle fiber and reacts with
the membrane of the muscle fiber which in turn initiates the electrical response
in the muscle fiber. In the neuromuscular junction this chemical is
acetylcholine (AcH). Quanta are released spontaneously with little influence; in
response to the action potential in the presynaptic terminal, about 100 quanta
are released, and these initiate the action potential in the muscle fiber. The
electric organ of the skate is similar to muscle and has the advantage of
providing large amounts of nerve terminals. Consequently, the electric organ
provides the ideal tissue to study the biochemical, physiological, as well as,
anatomical properties of transmitter release. The nerve terminals are readily
separated from the other cells so that the calcium channels (located in the
membranes) can be electrophysiologically studied and biochemically isolated. In
recent years, Kriebel and co-workers have shown that the quantum of transmitter
release is composed of 10 subunits. This finding has been confirmed in mammals,
amphibians, and electric fish. An important question is the morphological and/or
molecular basis of the the subunit. The subunit could represent the release of
transmitter from one vesicle or each vesicle or each vesicle could contain 10
subunits. The mammalian and amphibian neuromuscular junctions have been well-
suited for electrophysiological studies but are not suited for biochemical
studies because of the relatively small amount (less than 0.01%) of nerve
terminals available. On the other hand, the Torpedo electric organ (an electric
fish) has been the standard preparation for biochemical studies of transmitter
release because of its rich supply of nerve terminals (3% of the tissue).
However, the Torpedo preparation has been difficult to use for
electrophysiological studies. The new skate electric organ preparations are
ideal because this tissue is rich in nerve terminals and isolated terminals and
electric cells (which have been derived embryologically from muscle cells) can
be separated with enzymatic treatment. Electrophysiological studies on the skate
have shown that subunits of the quantum appear just after hatching and that
several days are required for the subunits to be combined into quanta for
release. The purpose of the proposed research involving the skate electric organ
is to study the molecular basis of the subunit composing the quantum, the
excitation-secretion process and the calcium channels in the presynatic
terminals. The skate electric organ provides a unique preparation for basic
studies of transmitter release common to vertebrates.