* 8809823
* Physiological Studies of Identified Cortical Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/1988,10/31/1992
* Jeanne Nerbonne, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 10/31/1992
* USD 217,840.00

Neurons are the cells of the brain that are the units for information
processing. Understanding the properties of their cell membranes, including
excitability and neurotransmission between neurons, is crucial to an
understanding of brain function. In complex mammalian brains it has been
technically difficult to study membrane properties of identifiable cells,
particularly in the cerebral cortex. Conversely, the isolation of single cells
in a dish ("in vitro") for membrane recordings makes it difficult to identify
the type of neurons these cells were in the normal brain. This project will
provide a new approach to try to establish reliable methods to culture and
identify cell types or classes isolated from the cortex, and characterize the
physiological and pharmacological responses of those neurons. Cells that project
across the brain hemispheres, called callosal neurons, can be distinctly
labelled by their uptake of non-toxic microscopic fluorescent beads. These cells
will then be studied in vitro, either as cultured dissociated cells after
removal from newborn rats, or in a thin-slice preparation taken from whole
brain. Microelectrodes will be used to test the response of these cells to
electrical stimuli across their membranes, to examine the nature of the currents
of charged ionic particles that drive the excitable properties of the cells.
These studies will compare changes in the cell properties with time since
isolation or with time since birth, and will look for possible functional
differ- ences among cells that appear morphologically similar. This approach to
classify cortical cell types on the basis of membrane properties is technically
very demanding, but success will be a breakthrough offering a powerful new way
for electrophysiologists to study cortical processing.