* 8809175
* Research Initiation: Experimental Investigation and         Constitutive Modeling of Cohesionless Soil Under Cyclic     Loading
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Panos Dakoulas, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* MEHMET T. TUMAY
* 06/30/1991
* USD 64,761.00

Perhaps the most common problem in engineering design involving soils, is the
problem of calculating the movements that result from application of general
states of stress to the soils. Until the last ten to twenty years, it was
feasible to calculate either the very small movements that resulted from small
loads (compared to the load that causes collapse), or to calculate collapse
loads and assume that movements were so large that it became unnecess- ary to
calculate them. For common cases in which neither extreme was valid, it was
necessary to apply "engineering judgement." With the advent of modern digital
computers, researchers are engaged in a two-pronged attack on this class of
problem. One mode involves attempts to measure generalized soil properties
(complete state of strain in response to a generalized state of applied stress)
and development of models to describe the soil response. The second mode
involves development of numerical methods so the resulting soil properties can
be used to predict mass movements in the field. This proposal involves the first
mode. The goal of this research is to perform reliable measurements of the
response of samples of clean sands to complex states of stress, and then to fit
appropriate models to allow analytic description of the resulting properties.
The socalled hollow-cylinder device will be used to measure properties. A
variety of constitutive models will be tried. Both monotonic loading (load
directly to failure) and cyclic loading (repeated application of stresses less
than the failure stresses) will be used.