* 8809298
* ROW Research Initiation:  Space Charge Phenomena in High    Resistivity Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Nancy Haegel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 12/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

The objective of this investigation is to study the relaxation behavior of the
space charge near injecting electrical contacts on high resistivity
semiconductors. The transport of charge carriers in the regime dominated by
dielectric relaxation of space charge is not well understood. The materials
being investigated are high purity silicon and germanium at low temperatures and
gallium arsenide at room temperature, where they are semi-insulating. The
transition from low resistivity to high resistivity will be studied using
current-voltage and capacitance-voltage techniques to observe the transition in
the material from lifetime-dominated to relaxation=dominated conduction. High-
resistivity semiconductors become more important as electronic circuits become
more highly integrated (increasing the density of devices on a single chip or
conversely decreasing the distance between neighboring electronic elements),
which increases the necessity to insulate neighboring electronic elements from
each other. Use of insulating or semi-insulating materials to store charge also
increases the need to understand the dielectric relaxation effects in these
materials. The transport physics of these materials is poorly understood,
partially ignored, and controversial at the present time. This research aims to
provide accurate and realistic data on the transport in semi-insulating
materials.