* 8809504
* Effects of Applied Electric Fields on Abnormal Electric     Neuronal Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Dominique Durand, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 01/31/1992
* USD 279,413.00

Electrical stimulation has been used effectively to excite nerves, muscles and
brain nerve cells. A more difficult problem is to inhibit the firing of neurons
using electrical stimulation. A method for blocking neuronal firing would be
extremely important any time abnormal neuronal firing interferes with the normal
physiological functions such as in spasticity and in epilepsy. Electrical fields
have been used to block neuronal firing in axons. Moreover, electrical fields
applied in several parts of the brain have been shown to modify the excitability
of neurons. This research project proposes that these electrical field
techniques be studied for the purpose of controlling abnormal neuronal firing in
neural tissue. Preliminary experiments have shown that neuronal firing can be
blocked when low-intensity, long current pulses are applied with electrodes.
Neural recording techniques as well as computer modeling methods will be used to
understand the mechanisms. The in vitro brain slice preparation will be used for
this project, since it is possible to directly position the electrodes in the
tissue to ensure a proper orientation of the electrical field. The short-term
impact of this project is to provide an understanding of the role of electrical
fields in controlling abnormal neuronal activity. The long-term impact of this
project is to generate the background knowledge for the design of the method for
controlling and blocking abnormal epileptic activity.***//