* 8809022
* RIA:Complexity Analysis and Optimal Algorithms for NonlinearProblems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Terrance Boult, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 11/30/1990
* USD 57,059.00

This proposal involves complexity analysis and the development of optimal
algorithms for the solution of nonlinear problems. Unlike most current research
in complexity which is discrete in nature, the problems considered in this
proposal are (piecewise) continuous functions of one or more real variables. The
tools for complexity analysis of these problems thus differ from traditional
complexity analysis and are based on the ideas of information-based complexity.
The development of an upper bound on problem complexity is similar to classical
numerical analysis (and may in fact borrow from previous work therein). The
derivation of lower bounds on a problem's complexity is one of the novel aspects
of this research, and can be roughly described as follows: Using mathematical
techniques, one develops a set of functions with different solutions to the
problem but which are indistinguishable using a given amount of information.
Unless this set of functions is a singleton no algorithm can solve the problem.
This provides lower bounds on the amount of information required to solve the
problems, which in turn bounds the problem complexity from below. While the
concepts are simple, the derivation of a particular bound is generally quite
difficult, and often provides insight useful for achieving better upper bounds.
The nonlinear problems addressed in this research will include both worst-case
and "average"-case analysis of the computation of topological degree in one or
more dimensions, root-finding for Lipschitz function in one two and three
dimensions, and segmentation/reconstruction of overlapping functions from
function values (with restrictions from computer vision). These problems have
both theoretical and practical importance, and the techniques developed for
their analysis should be useful elsewhere.