* 8809462
* Subcellular Localization of Opioid Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Carmine Coscia, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 02/29/1992
* USD 248,910.00

The objective of this research is to investigate the life cycle and mechanism
of action of opioid receptors in cultured neuroblastoma hybrid cells. The
questions that will be addressed include: 1) What are the sites of receptor
synthesis and processing within the cell? 2) How are they transported to the
cell surface (which is the locus for most of the binding sites and their major
site of action in signal transduction)? 3) How are they transported back into
the cell? 4) Are they internalized for functional reasons as well as for
degradation? The rodent neuroblastoma cells to be studied have been demonstrated
to contain large amounts of a single class of opioid receptor. They are far
simpler than brain in the types of receptor present, and they are more
manipulatable. Opioid receptors from the cell surface will be separated from
those found in various organelles within the cells by subcellular fractionation
techniques. Changes in receptor concentration, ligand binding properties, and
molecular weight will be assessed in the different cellular compartments as a
function of time after treatment of the cells with agents that either inhibit
the processing of the receptor or enhance their synthesis. Once suitably large
populations of intracellular receptors are identified as being either newly
synthesized enroute to the cell surface or sites being internalized, their
properties will be compared. Kinetic and steady state binding studies will be
performed on the receptor populations to provide information on their mechanism
of signal transduction. Knowledge of receptor synthesis, action and turnover
will contribute to the ultimate elucidation of the molecular mechanisms of drug
dependence and tolerance. Since morphine, heroin and other related drugs of
abuse act at opioid receptors of the central and peripheral nervous system, such
knowledge will have an impact on rational approaches to the treatment of drug
dependence.