* 8809710
* Center for the Development of an Integrated Protein and     Nucleic Acid Biotechnology
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1994
* Leroy Hood, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gerald Selzer
* 01/31/1994
* USD 13,480,000.00

This proposal from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), in
cooperation with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), requests funds to
establish a Science and Technology Center for the Development of An Integrated
Protein and Nucleic Acid Biotechnology. The Director of the Center will be
Professor Leroy Hood. The Center will implement an analytical approach to the
computer- assisted analysis of patterns of protein expression using two-
dimensional (2-D) gel electrophoresis, and will characterize the molecular
structure of the observed proteins by developing methods for sequence analysis
of the proteins obtained directly from the 2-D gels. The qualitative and
quantitative information from the 2-D gel patterns along with the molecular
sequence data will be combined in a new form of protein data base. This will
allow the rigorous comparison of results obtained in one laboratory with those
obtained in any other. The Center will also extend the techniques available for
rapid cloning and sequence analysis of the corresponding genes, and will develop
novel algorithms and state-of-the-art hardware for thorough comparison of the
resulting data with extant data in protein and DNA sequence data bases. One of
the key problems in molecular biology is understanding how individual genes are
turned on and off in appropriate tissues at the correct developmental stage, and
how the coordinated expression of particular batteries of genes in individual
cells gives these cells their unique characteristics. Hence, one of the
fundamental problems in developmental biology relates to following the
qualitative and quantitative changes that occur in the expression of hundreds of
proteins. This translates into the need for rapid identification, cloning, and
sequencing of the individual genes and gene batteries responsible for directing
this complex pattern. The development and implementation of the integrated
technologies and new instrumentation for the characterization of proteins and
nucleic acids, as described above, will change the course of modern biological
research on these and other fundamental biological problems.