* 8809193
* ROW: (Research Initiation) Modeling and Simulation of ChargeTransport in InP-Lattice Matched Materials and Device       Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Christine Maziar, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur R. Bergen
* 12/31/1991
* USD 69,914.00

Non-stationary and transient transport effects are expected to play crucial
roles in determining the performance of ultra-small electronic devices. This is
especially true for structures fabricated of III-V compound and alloy materials.
The nature of carrier transport in such structures demands the use of
sophisticated modeling and simulation techniques in order to describe and
predict experimental observations and device performance. We will address these
modeling challenges by developing a moment-equation simulation tool as well as
making enhancements in our existing Monte Carlo code. A prime objective and
contribution of this research will be the development of an efficient coupling
technique for the two simulation approaches. Details of the nature of suitable
and compatible boundary conditions will be explored. We will also make a
detailed assessment of the validity and utility of the moment-equation approach
for ultra-small device simulation. Our target material systems will be
In(x)Ga(1-x)As, In(x)Al(l-x)As, and InP, chosen because of the increased
technological importance of these materials in opto-electronic communication
systems. In order to fully exercise these simulation tools, we will focus our
attention on a device characterized by both small geometries and large, rapidly
varying fields, the heterojunction bipolar transistor or HBT. Our work will lead
to an improved understanding of HBT device physics and new device designs
exhibiting higher cut-off frequencies. These designs will exploit the transport
phenomena studied with the new simulation tools. The coordinated implementation
of the Monte Carlo and moment-equation tools and the assessment of the moment-
equation approach in a device content will hasten the development of useful and
efficient simulation tools suitable for device design. This simulation effort
will also provide the necessary background for our future experimental
investigations of carrier transport in HBT-related structures.