* 8809342
* Implications of Dark Matter for Galaxy Formation and        Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Penny Sackett, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 08/31/1990
* USD 21,600.00

Observational evidence for dark matter on several astronomical scales has been
accumulating over the last fifty years, beginning with F. Zwicky's analysis of
the dynamics of the Coma Cluster ıZwicky 1933.!. Since then, however,
interpretation of this body of evidence has fueled controversy over the amount,
distribution, and nature of dark matter. The implications of a large portion of
astronomical mass being non-luminous are profound and far-reaching: dark matter
would affect solar system dynamics, galaxy formation and evolution, and, indeed,
the history and fate of the Universe itself. The research will focus on
expanding and interpreting the body of observational evidence for dark matter on
galactic scales and studying its consequences for galaxy dynamics. High velocity
dispersions, flat rotation curves at large radii and the dynamics of galaxy
clusters indicate that dark matter may be present in all types of galaxies. The
broadest goals of the research are three-fold: 1) To survey and analyze the
rotation curves of a large number of galaxies of varying morphological type to
determine the amount and distribution of any dark matter present. 2) To discover
any relationships which may exist between the optical characteristics of a
galaxy and its dark matter content. 3) To study, through numerical simulation,
how initial conditions during formation may influence the relationships
mentioned above and how, in turn, dark matter distribution may influence further
galaxy evolution and interaction. The research will be carried out during a one
year's stay at the University of Groningen, The Netherlands. The Westerbork
Synthesis Radio Telescope will be used to make the observations.