* 8809569
* Research Initiation:  Relational Databases in a             Hierarchical Design Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Marianne Winslett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/1991
* USD 47,500.00

As a way of managing the growing complexity of engineering designs, the design
automation community is moving towards the use of hierarchical design tools:
tools that operate on multi- layer representations of the complex structures
being designed, so that lower, more detailed aspects of a design are not visible
until the user specifically requests to see those aspects. This research will
investigate the impact of a hierarchical, highly interactive design environment
on the performance requirements for a database management system storing design
information. Work completed by others shows that extended relational databases
can exhibit satisfactory data retrieval performance in a design environment with
(1) heavy use of main-memory caching, (2) a non-relational implementation, and
(3) hierarchical design tools. The goal of this research is to develop a finer-
grained examination of the data retrieval and update performance requirements of
hierarchical design tools, and to test whether satisfactory update performance
can be obtained using an extended relational database. To this end, the
principal investigator will instrument Magic, a hierarchical VLSI layout editor;
collect protocols of Magic's use by expert designers; and analyze these
protocols against appropriate models of database access costs. This project will
include support for one undergraduate student.