* 8810997
* Measures of Subjective Variables in Visual Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Mary Peterson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1991
* USD 85,000.00

When people are asked to do a number of cognitive tasks involving vision, such
as imaging an object or searching for a particular object in a large visual
array, it is well known that certain physically measurable, "objective" aspects
of the display, such as its complexity, influence how people do the tasks. In
addition, subjective aspects, ones that cannot be measured physically, such as
familiarity or meaning, also influence people's performance. Few experiments
have separated objective from subjective variables sufficiently that one can
tell conclusively which ones underly particular experimental effects. The
experiments in this research project will isolate subjective variables from
objective variables and will examine the role of subjective variables in a
series of visually-based cognitive tasks, including imagery tasks, search tasks,
and perceptual reversal tasks. These tasks are all potentially influenced by the
viewer's knowledge regarding the structure of the shape to be imagined or
manipulated. The research flows from the notion that subjective effects in
visual cognition are mediated by the viewer's structural knowledge regarding the
particular components from which a shape is constructed and the relative
locations of these components; the greater the structural knowledge, the faster
images can be manipulated, searched, and scanned, and hence, the more efficient
the viewer's performance. The experiments will test this notion and, in the
process, will attempt to separate the construct of structural knowledge from
that of wholistic processing and to examine the interaction between spatial
attention and structural knowledge. Finally, the research will develop a
functional taxonomy of tasks to identify the types of processing that yield
subjective effects. The hypothesis is that these effects will occur when tasks
permit the mental manipulation of categorizable, basic- level shapes rather than
requiring manipulation of detailed particular shapes. This taxonomy of tasks,
together with the construct of structural knowledge, may be useful in
identifying the "functional vocabulary" of visual cognition that is employed in
real-world tasks requiring speed and accuracy.