* 8810962
* REU:  Phytoplankton Flux and the Sediment Record of         Paleoproductivity in the Northern California Current and    Central Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Constance Sancetta, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 10/31/1991
* USD 217,435.00

This project involves a study of preservable phytoplankton in sediment traps and
cores from a transect across the northern California Current and Central Pacific
Gyre. Diatoms, silicoflagellates, dinoflagellates, and calcareous nannofossils
will be quantified at the species or generic level in monthly and semi-monthly
trap samples over a two year period. The study will examine the spatial and
temporal variability of production and flux from the highly productive and
seasonally variable coastal zone to the oligotrophic gyre, and compare the
seasonal input from the water column with the multi-year accumulation in the
surface sediments. Multivariate statistics will be used to describe the mixture
of seasonal trap samples which best reflects the sediment assemblage; artificial
changes in the trap data, such as increasing or removing certain taxa, can
simulate the effects of dissolution, El Nino-like conditions, and other
processes not actually recorded in the traps. The results of this comparison
will permit a better understanding of the degree of information bias in the
sediment record. Once this question is resolved, the fossil record for the last
glacial/interglacial cycle will be studied in cores from each site, thus
extending the analysis of temporal variation in production to the geologic
scale. %%% The preservation of silicieous microfossils preserved in sediment
trap samples and in cores underneath the California Current and Central Pacific
Gyre will be examined. The temporal and spatial variability of flux of the
siliceous components in the trap samples will be used to interpret the
sedimentary record so that the effect of changes in climate on the oceanographic
conditions in the region can be understood. This study will be done in
conjunction with other researchers looking at many other variables in the trap
and sediment samples. These results will provide the most detailed picture of
the controls on preservation of geologic material used to reconstruct
paleoclimate that has been done in this region.