* 8810178
* Research Initiation:  Development of the l1 - Based Design  Methodology for Systems with Uncertainties
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Munther Dahleh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/1991
* USD 60,000.00

This project is concerned with the development of multivariable feedback control
systems design in the presence of disturbances, noise, and plant uncertainty. In
particular, we will consider the l1 -based design methodology recently developed
to optimally reject arbitrary, but bounded and persistent disturbances or noise.
The objective is to develop the theory further to achieve performance
robustness: stability and good performance in the presence of plant
uncertainties. Better representation of disturbances will be achieved by
introducing time-varying pre-filters, and hence the theory will be generalized
for such problems. We will develop the theory to handle infinite dimensional
systems (e.g. systems with delays). This will make the design methodology
applicable to a larger class of problems such as systems governed by partial
differential equations. Software based on numerically robust algorithms and
state-space computations will be developed, and then the theory will be applied
on some practical examples. This project will have a significant impact on the
general design philosophy and the understanding of uncertain systems. The
results will be readily applicable to many problems such as space applications,
robotics, process control and others. Also, it will have an impact on related
fields such as adaptive control.