* 8810318
* Research Initiation:  Eigenvalue Inclusion Regions to Study Model Approximations for Distributed Parameter Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Ahmet Palazoglu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1991
* USD 60,000.00

Heat, mass or momentum transfer equations often contain gradients in many
spatial directions and perhaps accumulation terms to bring about dependence on
time. Modeling such systems involves the solution of a series of partial
differential equations (PDEs) which accurately represent reality but complicate
the analysis procedures since they seldom have analytical solutions. This
necessitates the use of numerical techniques to obtain an approximation to the
exact solution. The relationship between the approximate and exact solution
leads to the problem of "robustness" when such approximations constitute
elements in feedback control loops. Such process controllers function with
limited process information since their design is based on the aproximate models
resulting in the loss of system performance and sometimes, stability. This work
is geared towards the development of appropriate mathematical tools to
investigate the model approximations for distributed parameter systems in an
effort to guide dynamics and control studies. The PI is proposing to exploit the
eigenstructure of the approximate and the rigorous models in order to gain some
insight towards the variation of system eigenvalues, the dominant system modes,
the degree of model aproximation and most importantly the characterization of
the neglected system modes to judge the capability of process controllers to
maintain smooth and effective operation. The PI has been growing dislocation
free single crystals of GaAs using a modified Bridgman type furnace and is
setting up a pilot scale furnace assembly to verify the results. The modeling
and the control of such a system is critical to ensure the development of
optimal temperature profiles in the crystal and the melt and this in turn
requires a sound assessment of the relationship between the rigorous model and
its numerical approximation. This system represents a typical problem facing the
process control engineer and is an ideal candidate to test the results of this
project.