* 8810399
* The Role of Concepts in Mathematical Knowledge
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Kenneth Manders, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1990
* USD 18,000.00

A cursory look at the history of mathematics shows that significant progress
frequently consists in relocating a set of problems in a novel conceptual
setting in which they may be better understood. Based on this observation, Dr.
Manders is developing a novel philosophical view of mathematical knowledge: that
genuine long-range intellectual accomplishments in mathematics consists
primarily in making things clear by appropriate use of concepts. Thus, the
primary epistemological norms should concern clarity, and the theory must
ultimately explain what it is to "make clear by appropriate use of concepts."
Under this grant, Dr. Manders will extend case studies testing explanations of
how conceptual changes affect mathematical understanding. The studies concern
(a) algebraic reasoning in Cartesian geometry vs. traditional geometrical
reasoning; and (b) the metamathematical notion of "model completion" as a
schematic paradigm for the historical development of the number concept to
include real and complex numbers, and for the movement from affine to projective
viewpoint in geometry. In the new theory, we may attribute distinct forms of
organization to a subject-matter area. This may be reflected in the cognitive
interface of a subject, its presentation. For example, making algebraic concepts
applicable to geometric questions affects the organization of geometry;
algebraic presentation makes this novel organization ("algebraic structure")
cognitively accessible and so relevant. Algebraic structure promotes clarity in
geometry, notably by allowing cognitively effective disregard of geometric
information irrelevant to questions considered.