* 8810062
* Translational Control of T4 Phage Gene Expression
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,11/01/1991
* Jim Karam, Medical University of South Carolina
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/01/1991
* USD 233,200.00

The overall objective of this project is to elucidate the biological roles and
mechanism of action of a translational repressor protein that is encoded by the
regA gene of bacteriophage T4 in infected Escherichia coli host. The regA
protein selectively inhibits translation of a subset of phage-induced mRNAs
including its own message (autogenous translational repression). In previous
years we cloned the regA gene, overproduced its protein product, purified the
protein, purified the protein, and characterized some of its activities in vivo
and in vitro. Some of our main results include: precise transcriptional mapping
of the regA gene, localization of the target for autogenous control to the
translation initiation region of the mRNA, localization of regA-protein-binding
sites on several regA-regulated mRNAs, discovery of a role for regA protein in
transcription termination downstream of the regA gene, and discovery of an mRNA
structure that enhances translation. In the work proposed here we will
investigate the roles of nucleotide sequences in the leader segment of the mRNA
for regA protein in control of synthesis of the protein. Several mRNA target
sites for regA protein binding (including the autogenous target) are being
mapped precisely by the use of in vitro manipulations by which nucleotide
replacements are made in specific sequences within the ribosome-binding domains
of the regA regulated mRNAs. The effects of these in vitro- generated mutations
on sensitivity to regA protein are being assessed by in vivo and in vitro
translation/repression assays. In addition we are examining the role of regA
protein in transcription termination at "CUUCGG" hairpin structures in
intercistronic regions and attempting to identify the breakdown products of the
mRNAs that the regA protein represses. A pilot study is underway aimed at
identifying proteins, nucleoproteins, and RNA species that interact with regA
protein and influence its activity in vivo. The work in this proposal should
provide us with deeper insights into the as yet poorly understood processes by
which a cell controls and coordinates its overall rates of DNA, RNA, and protein
synthesis.