* 8810578
* Research Initiation:  Coprime Fractional Representations of Nonlinear and Time-Varying Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Madanpal Verma, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/1990
* USD 71,986.00

The objective of this project is to develop a theory of coprime fractional
representations for nonlinear and time-varying systems which is analogous to the
theory of such representations available for finite-dimensional linear time-
invariant systems. The basis for developing such a theory for nonlinear and
time-varying systems is viewed to be input-output representations of these
systems. For nonlinear input-output maps defined on some appropriate spaces, the
concepts of domain, range, and graph of the mapping are identified and are
viewed to be a basis for defining right coprime fractional representations of
the mapping. A right fractional representation of a possibly unstable mapping as
a ratio of two stable mappings is said to be right coprime if it characterizes
the graph of the mapping. A method of constructing right coprime fractional
representations of nonlinear systems based on this concept is proposed. The
method is based on finding a stabilizing state-feedback for a state-variable
representation of the input-output map. The concept of left coprime fractional
representation is also discussed. Finally, the application of this theory to
analysis and synthesis of nonlinear feedback systems is proposed. The
significance of the proposed research is in developing a design theory for
nonlinear and time-varying systems which takes advantage of many important
results which have been obtained in the context of linear systems by using
coprime fractional representation methods.