* 8810200
* Ultrastructural Modifications of Egg Coats at Fertilization
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Douglas Chandler, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1992
* USD 238,400.00

Animal eggs of many species including those of echinoderms, amphibia, and
mammals, have extracellular coats that play an important role in fertilization.
Each coat represents a cell surface-anchored extracellular matrix which is
elaborated during oocyte maturation, which is directly involved in cell-cell
recognition between the egg and the sperm, and which is structurally modified at
fertilization in an organized, and apparently stepwise manner, to form a
physical barrier to polyspermy. Structural modifications are accomplished by
enzymes and structural proteins released by cortical granule exocytosis just
after fertilization. In this proposal Dr. Chandler aims to study the structure
of the vitelline layer in the sea urchin egg, of the vitelline envelope in the
Xenopus laevis egg, and their conversion the fertilization envelopes. To
accomplish this he will prepare high resolution platinum replicas of eggs that
have been deep-etched. His aims in sea urchin eggs are: 1) to visualize the
intermediate stages that occur during transformation of the vitelline layer into
the fertilization envelope, 2) to localize the envelope crosslinking enzyme
ovoperoxidase, and its binding protein proteoliasin, by immunogold labelling,
and 3) to study the mechanism of paracrystalline protein coating during
fertilization envelope assembly. His aims in Xenopus laevis eggs are: 1) to
visualize formation of the vitelline envelope (VE) during oocyte growth and
meiotic maturation, 2) to view modifications of the VE just after fertilization
resulting from interactions of cortical granule secretions with the envelope, 3)
to identify by immunogold labelling the 69kD and 64kD components of the
vitelline envelope which undergo hydrolytic processing at fertilization, and 4)
to study the structure and developmental role of the "M" layer, a newly
discovered component of the Xenopus fertilization envelope. %%% These studies
are the beginning of a longer term goal which is a comparative study of
structure-function relationships in the extracellular matrices of the eggs of
several species (echinoderms, amphibians, and mammals). These extracellular
matrices are important to fertilization in all these species.