* 8810746
* Perception of the Electric Organ Discharge of Conspecifics  by a Weakly Electric Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Harold Zakon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 01/31/1991
* USD 90,099.00

Scientists have long been interested in understanding the neural processes
underlying perception. In humans, these processes and the sensory stimuli
themselves are often so complicated that a complete understanding of the
perceptual process is elusive. Much progress has been made, however, with
simpler animal models in which (1) the sensory stimulus in question is easily
quantifiable and can be manipulated, (2) there is a way to tell if the animal
can detect the stimulus, and (3) the response properties of the neurons
responsible for the perception can be measured directly. Electric fish provide
such a model system. Dr. Zakon's research involves a species of fish that
continuously produces a weak electric field from an organ in its tail. This
field (the electric organ discharge, or EOD) surrounds the fish's body. The
animal is able to navigate and localize objects in dark, murky water by
detecting distortions in the electric field with specialized electroreceptors on
the body surface. The EOD is also used extensively in communication between
fish. The EOD voltage varies in a nearly sinusoidal fashion. The EOD frequency
of each individual is unique, and that of males and females differs by roughly
an octave. The electroreceptors are tuned to the fish's own EOD frequency and
are much less sensitive to other frequencies. How, then, does the fish perceive
the EODs produced by members of the opposite sex? When two electric fish are
close to each other, each fish's electroreceptors are stimulated by a signal
that is the sum of the two EODs. This interaction of EOD signals probably allows
the fish to detect each other's EODs. Using behavioral training and
neurophysiological recording techniques, Dr. Zakon is studying how these summed
EOD signals are perceived and how information about the presence of another fish
is extracted from this signal. Dr. Zakon's research is elucidating the
perception and analysis of a biologically relevant stimulus. This understanding
can be gained because electric fish often rely on electrical signals for the
detection of other members of the species and because electrical signals are
easy to measure and manipulate. The underlying processes of signal analysis
elucidated should be useful in understanding perceptual systems in other
vertebrates.