* 8810024
* Center for Photoinduced Charge Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1994
* David Whitten, University of Rochester
* Cooperative Agreement
* Karolyn K. Eisenstein
* 01/31/1994
* USD 5,344,114.00

This proposal from the University of Rochester, in association with the Eastman
Kodak Company and the Xerox Corporation requests funds to establish a Science
and Technology Center for Photoinduced Charge Transfer. The Director of the
Center will be Professor David G. Whitten. The goal of the research is to
achieve a molecular level understanding of the four major events of photoinduced
charge transfer processes (i.e., activation processes; initial charge transfer;
charge separation, transport and trapping; chemical reactions of charged
species). Thus, the research will focus on the fundamentals of electron transfer
processes themselves. The Center will involve studies of photoexcitation and
field-assisted charge separation and transport in diverse media (including
solids, organized, and amorphous media), in semiconductor particles, across
interfaces, and in fluid media. These studies will naturally lead into the
spectrum of photobiological processes, where electron transfer plays a key role.
Parallel efforts will be directed towards applications of electron transfer
processes. One example of this type of study will be the exploration of chemical
bond activation by single electron transfer. The breadth of the research
expertise at the three sites is most appropriate for the proposed research
activities, ranging from solid state physics, materials science, to
electrochemistry and preparative chemistry, new laser technology, and colloid
and surface science.