* 8810972
* ROW:  Analysis of Alluvial Architecture and Paleosols Using Remote Sensing
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1990
* Mary Kraus, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1990
* USD 52,670.00

ROW: ANALYSIS OF ALLUVIA ARCHITECTURE AND PALEOSOLS USING REMOTE SENSING The
developmental history of sedimentary basins is best reconstructed using a
multidisciplinary research program that includes not only more traditional
studies such as structural geology and sedimentology, but also techniques that
are still experimental, such as remote sensing. Remote sensing can enhance basin
analysis by providing large quantities of data more efficiently and more easily
than can be accomplished through field research alone. In addition, the regional
perspective shown in satellite images can stimulate new questions and insights
into a geologic problem and reveal features that are not readily visible on the
ground. This research is an expansion of ongoing field research of alluvial
deposits in the Bighorn Basin, Wyoming from a local to a regional scale by using
spectral data from satellite images and digital image processing techniques. The
major objective is to improve understanding of the sedimentologic and tectonic
processes which produced the alluvial architecture of the lower Eocene Willwood
Formation. The second goal is to test and refine concepts of large-scale
paleosol cycles determined during the past several years of research on the
Willwood Formation. This project is designed to broaden the Principal
Investigator's scientific expertise and research capabilities by providing
experience with modern remote sensing techniques and data processing. It offers
a rare opportunity to explore innovative techniques that can be used not only in
studying the developmental history of the Bighorn Basin but also in future
research projects.