* 8810430
* Center for Quantized Electronic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1994
* James Merz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* W. Lance Haworth
* 01/31/1994
* USD 6,812,362.00

This proposal from the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB), requests
funds to establish a Science and Technology Center for Quantized Electronic
Structures. The Director of the Center will be Professor James L. Merz. The
Center for Quantized Electronic Structures will focus on new physical phenomena
which can be realized in microstructures exhibiting quantum effects in one, two,
or three dimensions. The actual fabrication of these structures is the
complementary portion of the Center's research. These two areas will lead to a
study of the technological impact of this new science; the novel devices made
possible by the Center's investigations. The work at the Center will address the
unusual physical phenomena, both electronic and optical, arising in quantized
structures. Electron transport chosen for study include mobility in specially
shaped potential wells, resonant and indirect tunnelling, and phase and
interference effects. Optical phenomena include effects due to bound and free
carriers and the question of spin-polarized electron beams. The Center will
address not only the properties of individual quantum wires, boxes, and rings,
but also the properties of new synthetic materials made by producing periodic
arrays of these quantum structures. Various possibilities of forming low
dimensional quantum structures will be considered either during the epitaxial
growth process itself or using novel fabrication techniques to delineate the
structures. Many of the processing techniques will make use of beam-induced
changes in the material and will require a new understanding of beam/solid
interactions from a fundamental molecular-chemistry point of view. Thus, a whole
new science of crystal growth and processing is being created where much new
basic understanding is required before progress can be made. The research
performed at this Center is at a more fundamental level than either of the
Engineering Research Centers in related areas at the University of Illinois or
the University of Colorado/Colorado State University. Both of these Centers are
focussed on more applied use of microelectronic technology: Colorado in the
design of special purpose computers, and Illinois in the application of such
devices for computer communications. The Science and Technology Center at UCSB
will create the basic scientific understanding of the electronic materials used
at the ERCs, in addition to totally new quantum structures for applications use.
The MRL and the Nanofabrication Facility at Cornell University and the MRL at
the University of Illinois are also engaged in some quantum phenomena research,
but it does not overlap that of the Center at UCSB where the emphasis is on the
smallest scales attainable. Means for cooperation between Centers involved in
electronic materials research and application will be developed as appropriate.