* 8810610
* Expectational Models of U.S.-Soviet Rivalry
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1991
* Michael McGinnis, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/1991
* USD 106,377.00

The relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union is of crucial importance
for world affairs. Despite changing political climates and technological
capabilities, the overall tenor of this relationship has remained remarkably
stable. Periods of harsh rhetoric and intense crises have alternated with
periods of improving relations, but direct war between the superpowers has been
avoided while efforts to establish sustained cooperation have not, thus far,
been successful. Similarly, the arms race has proceeded at different speeds at
different times, but the overall level of effort devoted to the military by each
state has remained within a fairly narrow range. In this project the
investigators use mathematical models and time series data in an effort to
understand the underlying sources of this long term stability. Previous
quantitative research on U.S.-Soviet relations has focused on arms race models
first developed by Lewis Frye Richardson after World War I. Surprisingly,
statistical tests have not revealed much hard evidence of the existence of
reaction between the superpowers, and this puzzle has generated several lines of
research. Some have offered more detailed models of the political processes of
budgeting or procurement or more differentiated measures of military effort, but
in this project the researchers develop a more general model meant to capture,
at the aggregate level, the overall structure of superpower relations. The
researchers argue that this "rivalry system" is stable essentially because of
the "sophisticated reactions" occurring within each state. That is, important
political actors in both states put forth great efforts to obtain information
about the likely future behavior of the other state, and they use this
information to inform and justify their policy proposals. Since policy makers
are also concerned about the detrimental economic consequences of the arms race,
each state's foreign and security policies are determined by competition between
actors with different expectations of the level of threat and economic costs. It
is this explicit focus on the expectational basis of rivalry that is most
distinctive about the models to be examined in this proposed research. To
estimate and analyze these models the investigators use data on such aggregate
level characteristics as military budgets, weapons stocks, overall diplomatic
relations, military interventions and other uses of force, economic conditions,
and public and elite opinion. The researchers compile a vast amount of data on
these topics and, since most previous policy analyses have focused on short term
changes, they convert short data series from different sources (or from the same
source at different times) into consistent long term data series. Once these
data are collected and the properties of the various models compared, the
investigators examine the rivalry system's likely response to hypothetical
policy changes. The investigation should provide a more objective assessment of
the natural dynamics of superpower rivalry.