* 8810557
* Dynamical Resonances in Chemical Reactions and Chemical     Bonding
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,02/19/1991
* James Valentini, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence L. Lohr, Jr.
* 02/19/1991
* USD 371,877.00

Dr. Valentini is supported by a grant fom The Physical Chemistry Program to
study the structure and dynamics of transition states in gas phase chemical
reactions. Valentini has developed a spectroscopic technique which permits the
indirect observation of the short-lived intermediates (transition states) which
have long been theoretically predicted but never observed in chemical reactions.
Dr. Valentini's research involves the studies of so-called Feshbach resonances
in rotational excitation cross sections which are observed for chemical
reactions in the gas phase. The direct observations involve state-to-state
dynamics in which the vibrational and rotational quantum states (v,j) of the
reactants are prepared by free-jet expansion cooling and probed by stimulated
Raman excitation. The collision energy of the reactants is selected, varied, and
precisely specified through laser photolysis of a diatomic precursor to generate
the reactant atom. Vibrational and rotational (v',j') analysis of the reaction
products under single collision conditions are effected using resonance-enhanced
multiphoton ionizaiton. Dr. Valentini's research program is motivated by his
recent discovery of Feschbach resonances in the ortho-, para-hydrogen exchange
reaction. This observation permitted him to infer the vibrational energy states
of the linear triatomic transition state which occurs in this reaction. Further
studies in this area will involve the hydrogen deuterium exchange reaction, the
reaction of chlorine with hydrogen chloride, and the reaction of iodine and
bromine with their corresponding hydrogen halides. Coherent Raman spectra of
these species will be obtained to elucidate the nature of the theoretically
predicted vibrational bonding.