* 8810382
* Adrenergic Regulation of Pineal NAT Gene Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Cheryl Craft, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1990
* USD 20,000.00

The major goal of this project is to isolate a piece of genetic material
(complementary DNA) for the retinal/pineal gene coding for N-acetyltransferase
(NAT). After verifying the structure of this enzyme, NAT gene expression will be
examined during neurochemical transduction in the light:dark cycle.
Neurochemical transduction in the pineal involves the conversion of one signal,
the release of norepinephrine at the surface of the pinealocyte, into a second
signal, the release of melatonin from within the pinealocyte. The cyclic rhythm
of retinal and pineal melatonin is dependent on the enzyme, NAT. NAT is
synchronized by the light:dark cycle of the environment. The pineal melatonin
functions as a synchronizer that entrains physiology to the appropriate season
of the year. The retinal melatonin, which has similar controlling elements and
light:dark responses as the pineal, may also be responsible for this
environmental synchronization. In addition, retinal melatonin affects various
retinal functions: photoreceptor outer-disc shedding, pigment granule
aggregation, cellular levels of second messengers, and release of transmitters.
Alteration of melatonin synthesis may alter the ability of the eye to perceive
light as a cue for rhythm synchronization. Even though the physiological
significance of melatonin is still not known, this project will clearly extend
basic knowledge of this indoleamine in the visual and signal transduction
process. Practical applications of the research would include using the probe in
mapping the human genome and as a genetic marker. The experiments described will
employ recombinant DNA tools to begin examining the influence of environmental
cues on the genes expressed in the pineal and retina. The pineal has been
studied extensively by physiological, pharmacological and biochemical
approaches. These studies will extend the knowledge of the normal structure of
genes expressed in the individual and may lead to understanding the involvement
of other synthesizing enzymes in regulating normal physiological functions.