* 8810455
* Bird Song: Perception, Learning and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Michael Beecher, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 12/31/1991
* USD 201,955.00

Dr. Beecher's research examines bird song as a model communication system. Bird
song is of considerable general scientific interest because it has proved to be
the single best model system, involving a naturally-occurring complex behavior,
for the study of learning and for the study of brain-behavior relationships. In
addition, there are many surprising parallels between bird song and human
language, including developmental and neurological similarities. Dr. Beecher's
approach is unique in considering the song communication system from a
perceptual point of view. Previous research has focussed on the signals, and has
generally ignored the transformations performed on these signals by the animal's
sensory-perceptual system. Methods have been developed in recent years that
allow researchers to characterize the perceptual dimensions of a set of stimuli
for an animal by training it to indicate the perceived similarity between a pair
of stimuli for all possible pairs in the set. Dr. Beecher will use these and
related methods to map the perceptual dimensions of the song system of the song
sparrow, a species with a particularly complex and varied song. To examine the
role of experience in the development of normal song, Dr. Beecher will compare
birds raised with and birds raised without hearing normal species song. The
latter birds sing abnormal song as adults, and Dr. Beecher expects to show that
their song perception is abnormal as well. He will also examine song perception
as it relates to the use of song in natural contexts, such as in the recognition
of neighbors. He is particularly interested in song perception by females, since
virtually nothing is known about song learning in females as they do not sing as
adults. Dr. Beecher's general goal is to advance our understanding and increase
the utility of this model system by providing information on the heretofore
neglected perceptual side of song learning.