* 8810902
* Molecular Genetics of Amino Acid Biosynthesis in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1988,04/30/1994
* Gerald Fink, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 04/30/1994
* USD 766,200.00

The goal of our studies is to determine the features of amino acid biosynthesis
unique to plants using Arabidopsis thaliana. We propose a molecular genetic
approach to the dissection of the tryptophan pathway by isolating tryptophan-
requiring mutants. This pathway is of particular importance in plants because of
its role in the biosynthesis of auxin, flavanoids, lignin precursor and other
phenolic compounds. The fluorescence of one of the mutants we have already
isolated will be used as a genetic marker to obtain more Trp mutants and to
understand the relationship of tryptophan biosynthesis to the production of the
hormone IAA. As a complementary approach, we will clone the genes encoding the
tryptophan biosynthetic enzymes. The complete sequence of one of these genes,
the tryptophan synthetase, which has already been cloned will be determined. The
cloned genes used as probes will reveal mechanisms of regulation, hormonal
control, and intracellular localization. Our analysis of the glutamate synthase
(GOGAT) should provide key information about the relationship between amino acid
metabolism and photosynthesis. Our analysis of the HMG CoA reductase should also
provide important insights concerning the aspects of steroid biosynthesis that
are novel to plants. With the cloned reductase gene as a probe we will able to
determine the effects of hormones (gibberilins and abcissic acid) on the
regulation of this enzyme. The isolation of a tryptophan auxotroph of
Arabidopsis thaliana was of the first demonstrations of amino acid auxotrophy in
plants. Such a breakthrough opens up an area of inquiry into plant gene
regulation and metabolism which has not been previously possible.