* 8810164
* Characterization of Lectin-Binding Glycolipids
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* David Smith, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

Lectin affinity chromatography has proven to be a powerful method to separate
oligosaccharides based on their stereochemical structure. Since glycolipids form
micelles in aqueous solutions, studying their interactions with lectins is not
amenable to methods used to study water soluble glycopeptides has been
developed. In addition to an immunoautoradiographic method to detect lectin-
binding glycolipids on thin layer chromatograms. A lectin affinity
chromatographic method for the purification of intact glycolipids has been
developed. This method is based on the ability of Helix pomatia lectin colums to
bind its oligosaccharide ligands in aqueous solutions of tetrahydrafuran, which
inhibit glycolipid miccelle formation and permit the separation of
nonspecifically bound glycolipids. The general application of this method to
other lectins will provide a novel approach to the purification of glycolipids.
The ability to purify human blood group A-active glycolipds from a total lipid
extract in a single chromatographic step on a column of Helix pomatia lectin
will be exploited to structurally characterize metabolically labeled blood group
A active glycolipids and glycopeptides form a huam epidermoid cell line A-431.
This metabolically active cell line will provide an excellent system to
investigate the biosynthetic pathway of an oligosaccharide antigen synthesized
by a single group of glycosyltransferases acting on different glyoconjugate
precursors. Lectins are proteins which have a specific affinity for certain
carbohydrates. The lectins can be attached to inert supports and placed in glass
columns which can then be used to separate substances on the basis of their
affinity for the lectins. This technique has been very useful in the separation
of glyko proteins and carbohydrates, but not for lipids (fatty substances)
because the latter are not soluble in water. The P.I. has now developed a method
for using these columns in organic solvents in which the lipids are soluble.
This technique is of great promise in furthering our understanding of the
metabolism of these lipids and how they function in cell membranes.