* 8810228
* Preparation and Archiving of Roll Call Data; 1789-1985
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Howard Rosenthal, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1989
* USD 33,807.00

Students of political science have long been interested in evaluating the
dynamics of legislative behavior. A primary data source for these investigations
has been the roll call votes of legislators in the U.S. Congress. This project
involves the preparation of cleaned versions of the Inter-university Consortium
for Political and Social Research's (ICPSR, University of Michigan) roll call
data files for both Houses of Congress from 1789 to 1985. In a prior research
project the investigators discovered numerous errors in the coding of
legislators' party codes, state codes, identification numbers, etc. Further
evaluation of these data indicates that the data set is replete with additional
data errors. The investigators will prepare a version of the tapes for public
use in which the errors have been corrected. In addition, the tapes will be
reformatted in a form that makes the data more accessible to use on personal
computers. The ICPSR tapes are ordered by roll call. Frequently, however,
scholars are interested in identifying the voting record for a given individual.
The investigators will use the supercomputers at the Princeton Supercomputer
Center to transpose the entire data set (consisting of some 15,000,000 vote
choices). The researchers will produce data tapes on which the vote choices are
arranged by individual legislator. These cleaned data tapes will be made
available to the ICPSR for use by scholars interested in legislative behavior.