* 8810624
* Neural Stimulus Representations and Computational Learning Models
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1993
* Andrew Barto, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* name not available
* 06/30/1993
* USD 223,500.00

BARTO Learning in animals involves complex brain processes that integrate
sensory information into a coordinated set of actions: It is something that
animals do very well, but man-made thinking machines (computers) do rather
poorly by comparison. In order to improve computer performance, many scientists
and engineers have turned to the brain for theoretical insights into the
processes of learning. These insights, when applied to computer technology, have
become increasingly important in applications ranging from industrial robotics
to process control. Studies of animal behavior, dating from the early years of
this century, have provided a rich scientific literature for evaluating theories
of learning. These are normally expressed in terms of mathematical relationships
between environmental events (stimuli) and actions (responses). State-of-the-art
learning theories are known as "real-time computational learning models" because
they can readily be translated into computer programs for application to
technology. Drs. Moore and Barto are using a well-characterized associative
learning paradigm (that is, learning that one event preceeds another event),
classical conditioning of the nictitating membrane response in the intact
rabbit. This preparation serves them as a laboratory benchmark for evaluating
their recently proposed mathematical learning model, and holds much promise both
for clafifying brain processes underlying learning, and for enhancing and
advancing computer technology. The ultimate goal of this research is to discover
how information is processed so efficiently by the brain. These investigators
will incorporate this knowledge into a mathematical model, in a way that best
describes the relationship between a specific behavior and the brain mechanisms
underlying that behavior. This new information can then be applied directly to
information acquisition by the latest generation of computer systems.