* 8810549
* Comparative Regulation of Genes Involved in Plant Disease   Resistance and Pigment Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Mona Mehdy, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1992
* USD 247,400.00

In plants, specific branch pathways diverge from the central phenylpropanoid
pathway which leads to the synthesis of lignins, UV-absorbing flavonoids, as
well as isoflavonoid and coumarin antibiotics. Environmental stresses such as UV
light and pathogens induce the selective synthesis of protective compounds by
particular branches. While coordinate changes in gene regulation in the central
pathway have been demonstrated to underlie these physiological responses, the
mechanisms controlling differential activation of branch pathways is unknown. As
a model for understanding the coordinate and selective controls regulating
synthesis within these pathways, this research focuses on the comparative
regulation of genes encoding enzymes in the central and branch pathways for
synthesis of flavonoids and isoflavonoid antibiotics. Chalcone isomerase, a
possible regulatory enzyme, will be studied as a representative of the central
pathway. The research will identify the DNA sequences regulating the expression
of the chalcone isomerase and branch pathway P-450 genes. This will be
accomplished by: identifying branch pathway P-450 genes and characterizing their
expression in response to environmental inducers as well as during development;
mapping the transcription units on genomic clones; localizing regulatory regions
by construction of chimeric genes; and sequencing the functionally important
regions.%%% It is expected that this research will reveal distinct promoter
elements responsive to particular environmental or developmental signals. This
study of the organization of these elements in the phenylpropanoid pathway genes
may lead to a general model for differential regulation of metabolically related
genes in plants. Furthermore, a fundamental understanding of the genetic
regulation of phytoalexin biosynthesis is essential if this trait is to be
genetically manipulated to enhance disease resistance in plants.***//