* 8810017
* A Geometrical and Experimental Investigation of SimultaneousForce and Motion Control of Robot Manipulators
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Carl Crane, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 11/30/1991
* USD 230,587.00

This project focuses on the development of a general theory, based on screw
theory, for the simultaneous force and motion (hybrid) control of robot
manipulators. Successful conclusion of this research will enhance a
manipulator's ability to perform compliant motion tasks including industrial
assembly, machining, contour tracking, coordination of multiple manipulators
grasping the same workpiece, control of robots with less than six degrees of
freedom, and control of robots near singular configurations. The fundamental
problem addressed here is that given the requirement to control specific axes
for force, while simultaneously controlling the others for position, how must
the problem be formulated and error signals generated such that the error
correction signals sent to the actuators are consistent and provide a stable
response. Current research on the problem has focused on supplementing
environmental constraints with a set of artificial constraints. Although
promising, the approach when implemented has demonstrated instabilities. It is
not clear if the instabilities are kinematic in nature or a function of the
implementation approach. This project assumes a kinematic difficulty and
attempts to resolve the kinematic issue through an appeal to screw theory. The
hybrid control theory developed will be general in the sense that it must
provide a solution for simultaneous motion and force control of an end effector
performing any constrained tasks, and furthermore, will be invariant to
translation of origin, change of scale, and change of coordinate frame. The
theory will be evaluated by means of laboratory experiments.