* 8810639
* Research Initiation:  Fundamental Study of Abrasive Water   Jet Cutting
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Ernest Geskin, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 02/28/1991
* USD 69,684.00

This project deals with both experimental and analytical investigations of the
abrasive waterjet cutting of materials. The advent of new and more difficult-to-
manufacture materials lead to the development of many advanced manufacturing
techniques, the so- called non-traditional machine processes, of which abrasive
waterjet is one. Mathematical models will be developed using the equations of
motion for the waterjet, and the abrasive particles, as well as the energy
balance in the impingement zone. Non-dimensional numbers characterizing the
process will be determined and used to develop regression equations relating
process variables. Experimental studies will be carried out to validate selected
equations and evaluate the coefficients. The experiments will involve piercing
and cutting plexiglass plates, monitoring process variables and estimating
cutting performance. The measured variables include velocities of the water jet
and abrasive particles, distribution of forces at the jet/solid interface and
rate of motion of this interface. The Laser anemometry, Mach lines technique,
high speed photography will be used to measure velocity. High speed filming will
also be used to study the kinetics of surface formation. The topography of
surfaces will be studied by constructing (cutting slit or notch) replicas and
optical and electron microscopy of the surfaces. The procedure will enable
generating data for optimization and development of abrasive waterjet cutting.