* 8810312
* Characteristics of Grammatically-Specified, Publication-    Oriented, Structured Document Representations
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Richard Furuta, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gannon
* 05/31/1991
* USD 62,435.00

Existing systems have demonstrated the structured document representation's
usability and usefulness. The representation's continued importance is insured
by its inclusion in the ISO SGML Draft International Standard (8879). Recent
research has developed user interfaces for manipulating structured documents
that incorporate a grammatical definition of their component's
interrelationships. As this user interface design shifts from research to
development, it is appropriate to more closely examine the strengths and
weaknesses of the representation. Two aspects will be investigated. The first is
how the activities of cooperating authors can be aided in an environment
supporting such a representation. Such authors may be interacting with separate
computers that are only loosely-coupled--perhaps over an intermittent, low-
bandwidth link. An important part of this portion of the project will be the
development of mechanisms that permit repartitioning of the already structured
document. The second aspect is the degree to which the specification of a line-
oriented drawing can be isolated from the context in which the drawing is
displayed. A strength of the structured document is the degree of such isolation
with textual material. This portion of the research is directed to developing a
model of line drawings that permits a similar isolation from the display
context.