* 8810145
* Research Initiation:  Design of Robust and Multivariable    Adaptive Control Systems  - (REU SUPPLEMENT)
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1990
* Marc Bodson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/1990
* USD 41,689.00

The objective of the project is to study problems related to the design of
robust and multivariable adaptive control systems. Robustness is defined as the
ability of an algorithm to maintain stability in the presence of disturbances
and unmoldeled dynamics. We plan to apply averaging methods to study the
relationship between robustness and the error equation used for adaptation. The
existence and location of the tuned values will be investigated. These values
determine where the controller parameters converge in the presence of unmodeled
dynamics. The analysis is expected to lead to a better understanding of
robustness in adaptive control, and to suggest new approaches for design. We
will also be concerned with the design of multivariable adaptive control
systems. We plan to study parameterizations which guarantee parameter
convergence to a unique point, and require a minimal number of parameters. These
properties are desirable for convergence, robustness, and implementation
considerations. The prior information needed to design multivariable adaptive
control systems will also be investigated, together with ways to obtain this
information from input/output measurements. Experiments will be carried out to
validate the results of the theory, and motivate new problems. We expect that
the research will contribute to improve design methodologies for adaptive
control systems, and to a wider application of these methods.