* 8810617
* Research Initiation:  A Language for Multiprocessors:       Design, Implementation, Optimization
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Ronald Olsson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 06/30/1991
* USD 58,147.00

The objective of this project is to examine design and implementation issues in
languages intended for programming multiprocessor systems. The focus of this
project is the SR language, which was originally developed for programming
distributed systems. The research will study how to modify SR to support
programming in shared memory multiprocessor architectures. It is planned to
extend SR to exploit the shared memory by allowing variables and operations to
be declared globally or in the specification of a resource. The former would
provide truly global shared variables and operations; the latter would provide
resource instance-specific shared objects. Other language features to support
multiprocessor programming will also be investigated. The implementation of the
modified language will build on the current SR implementation; it will provide
important feedback on the language features. The implementation work will
investigate several optimizations that might be employed in the mutiprocessor
environment; e.g., expensive process rendezvous might be replaced by less
expensive semaphore or monitor operations. Interprocedural analysis techniques
will be used to identify optimizable code. The research will identify what
language mechanisms are most appropriate to support multiprocessor programming,
demonstrate that such mechanisms can be implemented reasonably efficiently, and
provide a usable tool for further investigations into concurrent programming.