* 8810615
* Play Communication and the Consequences of Imitation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Steven Matthews, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1991
* USD 78,999.00

The introduction of information acquisition and information processing into
economic models of decision making was a major breakthrough in the realism and
the relevance of economics. The paradigm of information economics provided new
insights in almost every area of economic research. One currently popular model
treats economic agents with private information as games of incomplete
information. Such models have penetrated most fields of economics, falling under
the rubrics of signalling, screening, sorting, adverse selection, and mechanism
design. Very few of these applied models allow agents to talk to each other,
despite the obvious prevalence of conversation and other types of communication
in reality. The central premise of this project is that communication should be
explicitly incorporated in a game-theoretic way into economic models. Some of
this research is in the context of two applications. The first consists of
voting-political situations in which speechmaking plays an important role; the
goal is to rationalize the role of political rhetoric. The second application is
to bilateral trading, studying the effect of communication between traders whose
preferences are private information on resource allocation. The double auction
is taken as the prototype trading institution. The project also develops a novel
approach to bounded rationality. Introspection tells us that the knowledge,
computational powers, and complexity of the strategies assumed of individuals in
economic models is beyond realistic belief. But rational choice models have not
been displaced by alternatives because rational choice models perform well and
the alternative models are descriptive and invariably break down. The model
developed in this project differs from past work in that bounds are imposed on
the individual's ability to compute, rather than on the complexity of the
strategies. The key assumption of this model is that a boundedly rational
individual confronted by circumstances for which he cannot, at the present time,
calculate an optimal action for himself, will imitate others. Both of these
lines of research are very exciting. Preliminary work shows that existing
bargaining models can make seriously wrong predictions by ignoring pre-play
communications. This project would correct the biases in these widely used
economic models. The development of a tractable formal theory of bounded
rationality would be a major breakthrough in economics. This new theory could
explain some of the empirical problems with models that assume completely
rational behavior by economic agents.