* 8810895
* Effects of Small-Scale Turbulence and Shear on Marine       Dinoflagellates: A Pilot Study
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1990
* Carl Gibson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1990
* USD 70,694.00

This study concerns the effects of small-scale turbulence and its small scale
shear on the growth rate, cell division, cell size distribution, and cell
morphology of marine dinoflagellates. The aspect of turbulence most important to
phytoplankton is the local shear, or rate-of-strain which varies over three
orders of magnitude in the ocean. The rate-of-strain in turn, determines the
relative velocities for separation distances smaller than the Kolmogoroff scale,
and phytoplankton are smaller than this scale in the ocean. Based on previous
results, the working hypothesis of this study will be that differences in
species composition of experimental cultures can be brought about by the
inhibitory effects of high turbulence. In controlled laboratory experiments,
turbulence and shear levels will be computed for the linear velocity profile and
small shears in laminar flow, or estimated from established turbulence formulae
for higher shear rates. The estimates will be confirmed by hot wire anemometer
and microconductivity probe measurements. Constant shear, or variable shear
under microcomputer control will be produced between rotating cylinders over a
wide range of Reynolds numbers, with or without time variation. Daily
measurements of chlorophyll fluorescence and cell numbers will be made to asses
culture growth rates. Changes in cell size distributions and cell division rates
will also be measured due to turbulence and shear and examine the cells
microscopically to assess morphological changes. The threshold turbulence and
shear levels which result in effects on these parameters will be ascertained.
The microscopic plants called phytoplankton that are responsible for most marine
biological production must contend with unique environmental conditions. For
example although (like their terrestrial counterparts) phytoplankton require
light and nutrients, these small and in some cases delicate cells are subject to
the small scale physical forces of the surrounding water, which is 1000 times
more viscous than air. Such small scale turbulence is generated in the sea by
wind, tidal, internal wave, and current motions. This work is a novel
collaboration between a phytoplankton biologist and a physicist to examine the
effect of these forces on the growth and selected other features of
dinoflagellates, a type of phytoplankton that is suspected to be susceptible to
turbulence. This laboratory study will be carried out in a specially built
apparatus in which the physical turbulence the phytoplankton are exposed to can
be carefully controlled. Although the work is a pilot project, the
interdisciplinary nature of the work by two very capable scientists has
generated great interest in the potential findings that may have broad
implications beyond dinoflagellates.