* 8810771
* Research Initiation:  Development and Validation of a       Rule-Based Simulation Algorithm for the Dynamics of Part    Orienting and Positioning Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Brian Gilmore, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 01/31/1991
* USD 59,380.00

This award is to develop and experimentally validate a rule-based algorithm for
the dynamics of mechanical part orienting and positioning operations found in
such systems as manipulator pushing a part and parts-feeders. The algorithm will
serve as an analysis and design tool for these systems. The algorithm will
consider the boundary representation of the parts and manipulator as an integral
component of the system dynamics. The kinematic constraint changes found in
these systems can be algorithmically handled by the development of rules. The
dynamic equations of motion can be reformulated to provide a continuous
simulation of the systems motion. The motions required for a manipulator to push
a part into a predescribed orientation will be planned with the aid of the
algorithm and physically implemented. The physical implementation of the planned
manipulator pushing operations will be recorded with a spin physics 2,000 high
speed camera and compared to the simulated motion. The significance of the
research is two-fold. First, the research will develop a rule-based algorithm to
simulate dynamic mechanical systems with changing kinematic constraints. Second,
it will obviate a present bottleneck to flexible manufacturing by developing a
tool, which considers the dynamic inertial effects and changing kinematic
constraints, to plan motion strategies for manipulator part orienting
operations, and to design parts-feeders.