* 8810052
* RUI:  A Parametric Investigation into the Existence of an   Economic Monetary Aggregate
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* James Swofford, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1991
* USD 32,672.00

This project belongs to the field of macroeconomics, the study of the behavior
of economic aggregates such as employment, inflation and economic growth. The
objective of the project is to perform parametric tests for the existence of an
economic monetary aggregate consistent with economic theory. Minflex Laurent and
generalized Barnett models of consumer demand are estimated for monetary assets,
goods consumption and leisure. Statistical tests are performed against the null
hypothesis that different groups of monetary assets are weakly separable from
other consumption goods. A broad range of monetary assets are analyzed
empirically, stretching from currency and checking accounts to small time
deposits in credit unions. The results are used to identify groups of monetary
assets that are weakly separable from other goods and can be aggregated into an
economic monetary aggregate. Monetary policy is now pretty much hit-or-miss on
account of our inability to get a fix on the demand for money. A significant
part of the problem is the establishment of an appropriate measure of money. The
official simple sum monetary aggregates require the untenable maintained
assumption that the summed monetary assets are perfect substitutes for one
another. This project provides new evidence on the elasticity of substitution
among different monetary assets and develops a measure of a monetary aggregate
that is better for formulating monetary policy than the official measure.