* 8810174
* Research Initiation:  Optimal Design of General MultipurposeBatch Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Iftekhar Karimi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1990
* USD 60,000.00

A significant portion of manufacturing operations in the chemical process
industry (CPI) and almost all the operations in the electronics industry and
discrete parts processing industry are noncontinuous (batch/semicontinuous) in
nature. These processes are economically very attractive for low-volume
specialty products with high profit margins. A major advantage of noncontinuous
processes is that they are flexible and can be multipurpose in nature, i.e. they
are ideal for producing multiple products by sharing of common equipment. They
provide flexibility in accomodating the variable nature of feed stock materials,
the large number of products using similar recipes, the nature of processing
steps (e.g. complex reactions, bacterial culture) and the short allowable
inventory life of the products. Often dedication of separate facilities for
different products can not be justified. Significant improvements in the cost-
efficiency, productivity and flexibility of such plants can be achieved by using
a systematic design methodology. The objective of the proposed research is to
develop a computer-aided methodology for optimally designing a multipurpose
plant in its most general form. A general multipurpose plant will employ a
common pool of units of different types and sizes to produce a set of products.
A unit may perform tasks for multiple products. Tasks may be assigned to a group
of single or multiple nonidentical units, thus fully parallel production of
different products can be achieved. Also a type of equipment may have items of
different sizes. The optimal design problem will be to determine the number of
batch/semicontinuous units, their types, their sizes, their time usage among
different products and the production schedule of products. A mixed integer
nonlinear programming formulation will be developed for the general design
problem. Several rules/procedures will be devised for the systematic
development, tightening and size-reduction of the formulation. An efficient
procedure based on an outer- approximation/relaxation strategy will also be
developed for the solution of the nonconvex optimization problem. This project
will establish a systematic engineering design base for general batch plants,
which will enable one to design them in a multipurpose form having high
flexibility, cost-efficiency and equipment utilization. The project is also
expected to lead to advances in the optimal solution of nonconvex mixed-variable
optimization problems.