* 8810611
* Nuclear Deterrence Theory and the Strategy of Limited       Retaliation as a Game of Sequential Bargaining with         Incomplete Information
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1989
* Robert Powell, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 12/31/1989
* USD 14,963.00

The purpose of this project is to analyze the strategic aspects of nuclear
deterrence and limited retaliation within a game-theoretic framework. Special
emphasis will be given to examining the effects of incomplete information. Most
existing formal work on deterrence theory focuses on some form of nuclear
brinkmanship. In a nuclear brinkmanship crisis, a state attempts to protect its
interests by manipulating the risk that the crisis will end in an unlimited,
all-out, nuclear exchange. The crisis is a competition in taking risks in which
each state tries to convince its adversary that the risk is too high and that it
should back down. There is, however, another approach to deterrence that is not
based on brinkmanship and manipulating the risk of an unlimited nuclear attack.
In this approach, a state attempts to protect its interests by inflicting a
limited amount of punishment in order to make the threat to inflict more damage
in the future credible. During a crisis, then, a state tries to make the threat
of future punishment sufficiently credible that its adversary backs down. This
second approach, based on limited retaliation, has received little attention in
the formal literature. The primary goal of this project is to extend the formal
analysis of deterrence theory to the study of the strategy of limited
retaliation. This research is important because it will shed some light on the
issue of the relation between limited nuclear options and the likelihood that a
crisis will escalate into a war. Does increasing the number of limited options
make a nuclear war more "thinkable" and, thus, reduce crisis stability by making
war more likely? Or, does increasing the number of options enhance the
credibility of a state's retaliatory threats, strengthen deterrence and,
therefore, increase crisis stability?