* 8810462
* UV Radiation in Antarctic Waters:  Dynamics Response of     Phytoplankton and Attenuation by Pigments
* O/D,OPP
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Maria Vernet, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 01/31/1991
* USD 169,838.00

The flux of ultraviolet-B radiation (UV-B, 280-320 nm) at sea level in the
Antarctic may be increasing due to decreases in stratospheric ozone levels.
Previous studies have shown that marine phytoplankton in the upper portion of
the water column are inhibited by natural UV radiation, and hence further
progressive increases in the flux of UV may have damaging effects on the food
web in Antarctic waters. Holm-Hansen proposes to measure the flux of natural UV
in the euphotic zone with a multi-channel spectral radiometer and document its
effect(s) on marine phytoplankton. Analysis of absorption by particulate and
dissolved components will enable assessment of the role of phytoplankton and
detrital pigments in the attenuation of UV radiation. Marine in situ studies
will examine both short-term effects of UV based on rates of radiocarbon
incorporation and long-term effects based on phytoplankton growth rates. In
addition to marine in situ studies, controlled experiments using artificial
light sources will be conducted to evaluate the effect of known UV doses on
isolated phytoplankton cultures as well as the differential sensitivities of
species in natural water samples. Photoadaptational responses involving
synthesis of UV absorbing pigments and their role in protection and/or
photosynthesis will be analyzed using HPLC, and particulate absorption and
fluorescence spectroscopy. These studies of the dynamic response of
phytoplankton to increasing dose-levels of UV will be important for
understanding the biological consequences of reduced ozone/enhanced UV-B levels
in the Antarctic and, through modeling efforts, will be of value in predicting
UV effects elsewhere in the world's oceans.