* 8810144
* Low Temperature Trapping of Intermediates in Enzyme-        Catalyzed Reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Anthony Fink, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1991
* USD 178,800.00

This research involves a combination of method development for the acquisition
of structural information concerning enzyme- substrate or enzyme-inhibitor
complexes, and application to the study of slow-binding transition-state analog
inhibitors, early events in protease catalysis and intermediates in glycosidase
catalysis. The focus of the investigation is on the application of attenuated
total reflectance (ATR) Fourier transfer infrared spectroscopy to study enzyme-
substrate intermediates, stabilized at low temperatures, and enzyme- inhibitor
complexes, and the use of immobilized enzymes and stopped-flow kinetics in
cryoenzymology studies. FT-IR has the potential to reveal not only new bonds
formed in enzyme-ligand complexes, but also bond deformations and polarization.
The importance of enzymes in numerous areas of science, medicine and industry
needs no elaboration. Recent developments in molecular biology and biotechnology
have led to a greatly increased interest in all aspects of enzymology. A major
problem in determining the details of an enzyme. Catalytic mechanism is the
short lifetime of enzyme - substrate complexes and intermediates, making it
particularly difficult to obtain structural information. The lifetimes of normal
transient species can be significantly increased at sintably low temperatures.
The development of some methods which should facilitate the acquisition of
structural data are underway here.