* 8810748
* The Interaction Between State Courts and the Local Legal    System
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1990
* George Westermark, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1990
* USD 45,955.00

Courts and informal procedures change as state power expands and economic
changes occur. Understanding of these transformations requires examination of
the historical evolution of conflict management procedures in relation to
political and economic change. In this project, Dr. Westermark revisits the
Highlands of New Guinea where ten years ago he had the opportunity to study the
then incipient centrally imposed court system. His inquiry focuses on how the
relationship between that centrally imposed court structure and the indigenous
legal culture has developed. Specifically, he investigates how local forms of
dispute processing are connected to the national legal system, from the
decisions of individual disputants to the policy decisions of legal planners.
The data from this study are drawn primarily from case records of local and
district courts, from in-court observations, and from systematic interviews with
the parties in the dispute. To insure that the range of disputes likely to occur
are considered in this research, periodic interviews with a community sample
will also be conducted, addressing such issues as individuals' knowledge of,
experience with, and problem solving strategies in handling recent disputes.
Using an interactionist model which pays heed to the adaptations of the state
system to indigenous legal cultures and practices, the project has the potential
to make an important contribution to understanding how state structures affect
both disputing and the effectiveness of dispute resolution procedures. It should
illuminate the interaction of local legal culture and state-ordered reforms in
different categories of cases and with different populations. As importantly, by
looking at changes and development over time, this study examines the state and
the function of village courts from a more dynamic framework.