* 8810948
* Structure of Kinetoplast DNA
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1993
* Dan Ray, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 03/31/1993
* USD 212,165.00

Kinetoplast DNA (kDNA) of trypanosomes has a highly unusual structural
organization consisting of thousands of catenated DNA circles termed maxicircles
and minicircles. In addition, these circular DNA molecules appear to replicate
under cell cycle control and minicircles, in particular, are segregated into
distinct domains of the kDNA network depending on whether or not they have been
replicated. The structural organization of kDNA networks at different extents of
replication will be investigated as a means of elucidating the mechanisms
controlling the precise duplication of individual networks. The mechanisms that
prevent the final covalent closure of duplicated minicircles and thereby prevent
their replication a second time prior to segregation of daughter networks is of
a particular interest. The manner in which maxicircles are catenated to the
network and the possible role of bent helical DNA segments of minicircles in
targeting duplicated minicircles to a specific domain of the network will also
be explored. Additionally a search will be made for proteins that may be
involved in the condensation and organization of the DNA network in vivo. The
mechanism of DNA replication in eukaryotic cells and the coordination of
replication with the cell cycle are fundamental problems in biology. Kinetoplast
DNA contains two distinct types of replicons, minicircles and maxicircles, both
of which, unlike mammalian mitochondrial DNA, are replicated coordinately with
the cell cycle. In addition, the genes that regulate kinetoplast replication are
likely to be encoded in the nucleus and may be similar or related to the genes
controlling nuclear DNA synthesis. Thus, the kinetoplast DNA system offers an
opportunity to understand fundamental aspects of the growth and division of
eukaryotic cells.