* 8810571
* Novelty Detection in Electric Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Randy Zelick, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Comer
* 06/30/1992
* USD 174,854.00

There are three general classes of behavioral responses to a novel stimulus:
startle, arousal and orientation. The startle response is a short latency set of
muscular contractions induced by a brief stimulus, typically visual or acoustic.
It is characteristic for the startle threshold to be much greater than the
animal's detection threshold. Arousal behavior is characterized by a suite of
physical responses. Although more subtle than startle behavior, both the
effective stimuli and the responses are quite general with arousal, making
investigation of the individual neural elements involved in novelty detection
problematic. Although orienting responses have not been well defined in fish,
the novelty response of pulse-type weakly electric fish fits best into this
category as defined for mammals. The novelty response is a transient
acceleration of the pacemaker which drives the fish's electric organ. Elicited
by small stimulus changes near detection threshold, it is a subtle but reliable
behavior which is not explosive, has a short refractory period, and involves a
single effector pathway. The novelty response of pulse-type weakly electric fish
is well suited to neurophysiological analysis and permits simultaneous
measurement of behavioral and neural responses. Dr. Randy Zelick will continue
his work on novelty detection in electric fish. This work is significant since
it will give us a better understanding of the means by which the nervous system
distinguishes novel from background sensory input. //