* 8810342
* Research Initiation:  Heat Transfer and Pressure Drop in    Tubes in the Transition Region for Various Entry            Configurations
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1988,10/31/1991
* Afshin Ghajar, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 10/31/1991
* USD 69,890.00

The objective of the proposed research project is to study the effects of
various entry configurations on local heat transfer and pressure drop in tubes
in the transition region. This includes Reynolds numbers from about 200 up to
10,000, depending on the type of inlet configuration. Local heat transfer,
pressure drop, and intermittency factor measurements will be made near the
entrance of a tube, with those measurements continuing far enough downstream
that fully- developed laminar or turbulent flow is achieved and the usually
cited correlations presumably become valid. Various entrance configurations will
be tested. Flow near the entrance of the tube will be modeled using existing
numerical techniques, and the results will be compared to the experimental
study. Independent measurements of pressure drop and velocity profiles in
unheated transparent tubes and flow visualization studies will be used to assist
in modeling the flow phenomena. An enormous amount of data and analytical
modeling is available for fluid flow processes in tubes in the laminar and
fully-turbulent flow regimes. However, very little has been done to examine the
problems in the transition flow regime encompassing Reynolds numbers from
perhaps 200 to 10,000. In practical engineering design, the usual recommendation
is to avoid design and operation in this regime; however, this is not always
feasible under design constraints. Much of the information available furthermore
deals with the fully- developed flows far from the entrance, or involves
entrance effects downstream from highly idealized entrances. The proposed
research, therefore, will provide a basic understanding and data in the spectrum
of tube flows, and also could have important practical design applications
leading to improved design methods.