* 8810292
* Object-Oriented Knowledge Base Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1988,03/31/1989
* Phillip Sheu, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 03/31/1989
* USD 13,600.00

In the past, we have proposed a knowledge base framework called Object-Oriented
Knowledge Base (OOKB) which successfully combines the concepts of deductive
database, object-oreiented programming and logic programming. In this research,
we propose to extend the framework of object-oriented knowledge base with an
efficient knowledge base management system. In particular, we propose the
following research tasks: Knowledge Management: In our research, we propose the
necessary constructs to describe our knowledge (meta-knowledge) about the
system-level objects such as integrity constraints, deductive laws, classes,
methods, and transactions. We also propose to employ the meta-level knowledge to
ensure the quality of knowledge in a dynamic environment where knowledge is
updated frequently and to facilitate to control of knowledge bases. Query
Processing/Optimization: In the context of query processing, we propose a
program transformation approach to avoid exhaustive search. The transformation
system employs rewriting rules to substitute pieces of a query with some
semantically equivalent sub-queries that can be solved more efficiently.
Subsequently, the conjuncts in the transformed query are reorderd dynamically to
minimize the evaluation cost. Concurreny Control: Coupled with the meta-
knowledge constructs proposed in (a), we propose that concurrency control (among
concurrent operations to knowledge as well as data) can be object-oreiented such
that it can be customized according to the semantics of objects. Also, we
classify the possible conflicts into six categoried and propose that concurrency
control should be performed at knowledge level as well as object level.