* 8810735
* American Society of Zoologists: "Symposium on Cellular and  Molecular Biology of Pattern Formation, December 1988,      San Francisco, California.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1989
* David Stocum, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1989
* USD 2,000.00

The general aim of this one day symposium is to provide an overview of our
current understanding of the cellular and molecular basis of pattern formation,
a field which has advanced rapidly during the last five years. Pattern formation
is here broadly defined to include maternal determination, induction of organ
districts, and the differentiation of tissue patterns within these districts.
The specific aims of the symposium are: (1) to bring together a group of
investigators who use a broad spectrum of organisms and technologies in the
investigation of pattern formation; (2) to determine what common and/or
different cellular and molecular themes are emerging from their studies, and how
these themes might relate to formal models of pattern formation that have been
proposed; and (3) to discuss new ideas that indicate the most significant
directions the field will likely take. An additional aim is to reach a broad
audience consisting not only of investigators who work in the field, but also
those in related fields, as well as postdoctoral and graduate students. %%% One
of the fundamental questions in developmental biology is how the complex
patterns of form found in living organisms arise. Recently molecular genetic and
biochemical techniques have been brought to bear on this question in a variety
of organisms. The purposes of this symposium are to asses the progress and
suggest the directions of future research in this area.