* 8810833
* Non-Expected Utility Theories: Axiomatizations and          Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Soo  Hong Chew, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1992
* USD 90,973.00

Uncertainty pervades the economy. Analysts have developed a number of tools for
understanding choice under uncertainty. These tools are used by industry and
government. The traditional expected utility paradigm is used in economics,
psychology, decision theory and operations research to model choice under
uncertainty. But expected utility theory does not explain the results of many
empirical tests. This project is part of an interdisciplinary effort to develop
an alternative to expected utility theory that better explains observed
behavior. This research project addresses a number of interrelated questions in
the theory of choice under uncertainty when preferences do not correspond to the
expected utility model. The axiomatic work in the project focuses on a number of
preferential attributes, namely, risk aversion, randomization preference,
induced preference over assets, preference for the timing of resolution of
uncertainty, and intertemporal substitution. These attributes concern both
atemporal and temporal aspects of decision making. The project studies each of
them individually and also examines their interrelationships. The primary
application is to explore the implications of non- expected utility
specifications for equilibrium asset prices. This work exploits the flexibility
of non-expected utility specifications with regard to the separation of
intertemporal substitution and risk aversion. A general equilibrium, Lucas-
style model of asset prices is developed and used to clarify the link between
preference theory and asset pricing theory. Other applications relate the
axiomatic work to behavior in economic contexts. New perspectives, both
atemporal and temporal, are applied to phenomena such as insurance demand and
gambling. This is an exciting project. It could produce a new paradigm for
studying choice under uncertainty. This paradigm would be more general than the
traditional expected utility paradigm. It would be more consistent with observed
behavior. The decision making tools derived from this paradigm could be used by
industry and government to make better decisions.