* 8810049
* Nonlinear Models with Individual Effects
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Whitney Newey, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 06/30/1991
* USD 31,219.00

Panel data, consisting of observations across time for individual economic
agents, allows the possibility of controlling for unobserved individual
heterogeneity. Such heterogeneity can arise from unobserved differences in
tastes or technology and can be an important phenomenon. In such instances
failure to control for it can result in misleading inferences. This problem is
particularly severe when the unobserved heterogeneity affects explanatory
variables. Situations of this sort arise naturally when some of the explanatory
variables are decision variables, as is the case, for example, in dynamic panel
data models. Models and methods of controlling for unobserved heterogeneity in
linear models are well established. However, less is known about how to control
for unobserved heterogeneity in nonlinear models. The methods that work for
linear models do not carry over in a straightforward way to most nonlinear
models. Except in special circumstances, it is not possible to eliminate
individual effects by some data transformation, such as first differencing of
time series observations which works in linear models. Also, fixed effects
estimators of nonlinear models, which treat the individual effects as parameters
to be estimated, encounter problems because of the short length of the typical
time series in economic panel data. This research concerns two topics in
controlling for unobserved heterogeneity in nonlinear models of panel data. The
first topic deals with modelling the distribution of the individual effects,
conditional on the explanatory variables. Such models can be used to specify
random effects limited dependent variable models with a nonparametric
conditional mean for the individual effect. The second topic investigates the
use of the jacknife, applied to the time series dimension of panel data, for
reduction of the bias of fixed effects estimators in nonlinear models. The
research will examine the extent to which this nonparametric bias reduction
method can alleviate the incidental parameters bias, in different models. The
basic goals of the project are to assess the potential empirical impact of the
models and methods to be considered, as well as derivation of asymptotic
distributions for the various estimators.