* 8810935
* Dynamic Problems in Industrial Organization and Public      Finance
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Kenneth Judd, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1991
* USD 107,887.00

This award renews support for further theoretical research on dynamic problems
in industrial organization and public finance. In the area of industrial
organization, the structure of the market in terms of competitiveness is a key
determinant of how firms behave and how efficiently a market operates. The first
part of this project will study a market dominated by two firms and will develop
and test an alternative theory of oligopoly behavior. An oligopoly model will be
constructed with linear demand functions and quadratic production functions and
inventory storage costs. This model employs fewer restrictive assumptions than
the standard models and will provide a deeper understanding of behavior of
markets dominated by two firms. The second part of this project involves three
studies analyzing the effects of tax policies in environments characterized by
risk. The effect of tax policy on investment and consumption decisions and on
the overall economic performance remains a central issue in the area of public
finance. Changes in the tax codes are an important source of uncertainty that
will be studied in terms of how frequent changes affect investment and
consumption decisions. Another study will look at the effects of the
differential taxation of capital gains, dividends, and pension type investments
on choosing an investment portfolio. The third study will analyze optimal tax
policy under situations where government expenditures are subject to sudden,
unexpected changes. The study of oligopoly in a dynamic setting is important for
better understanding monopolistic competition and the extent to which imperfect
markets are efficient. The analysis of tax policy is of major importance because
it may have implications for adopting more effective strategies of taxation.