* 8810126
* Incorporating Age into the Geographical Analysis of TemporalChange in Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* David Plane, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/1990
* USD 36,786.00

Striking changes in American population movements in the 1970s and 1980s have
attracted considerable attention to the different factors that affect which
regions increase population through migration and which regions suffer net
losses through residential relocation. Especially significant have been the
aging of different age-related cohorts of the population. Because people are
much more likely to change their residences at certain ages than at others, the
movement of larger and smaller groups into critical age periods has alternately
increased and lessened the numbers of migrants in the nation as a whole and in
subnational regions. At the same time, differential economic growth and changing
perceptions of different regions have also affected movements of people.
Scholars from various disciplines have examined different aspects of these
changes, with demographers identifying regularities in migratory patterns that
often are obscured in aggregate data sources, economists focusing on the
development of behavioral models to highlight how economic factors influence
individual decisions, and geographers analyzing how the flows of people between
regions change over time. This project will continue efforts to integrate the
insights generated in these disciplines by exploring how locational, economic,
and age-related aspects of migration patterns change together over time. The
project will adapt a geographic version of a technique developed in economics
called "shift-share analysis" to explain how much of the total net migration for
a region can be attributed to factors of population change for the nation as a
whole, how much to factors related to changing levels of movement in other
regions, and how much to factors related to the relative attractiveness of the
region itself. The project will be conducted in three phases. In the first
phase, adaptation of shift-share analytic techniques will continue in order to
distinguish the impacts of different regional age structures from other factors
that influence migration patterns. In the second phase, the adapted procedure
will be used to analyze U.S. migration flows from the late 1950s into the 1980s.
These analyses will more clearly identify the impacts on migration of economic
change (such as the growing importance of service and office-based activities
and the energy crises of the 1970s), the changing age-composition of the
population (such as the maturing of the massive "baby boom" generation and the
increase in the number of Americans aged 55 and up), and the changing
perceptions of different geographic locales (such as "Sunbelt" amenity areas and
settlements outside metropolitan areas). The third phase of the research will
examine how effective the adapted shift-share procedure is in explaining
migratory behavior, and it will explore how it might be further adapted to
increase the reliability of regional population projections. This project will
be beneficial in two major ways. First, its empirical investigation of the
forces affecting the migration of people between different regions will advance
understandings of the dynamics of U.S. population movement and provide decision-
makers with better means of assessing the impacts of current and proposed
policies. Second, theoretical understandings will be increased (a) by
determining how effective the modified shift-share technique can be as a means
of distinguishing between various forces affecting population movement, (b) by
determining the stability of certain factors affecting migration and therefore
how current population data must be in order for them to be useful for certain
types of analyses, and (c) by identifying other types of approaches that might
be used to improve population projections.