* 8810787
* Examination of the Mathematical Models Used in Atmospheric  Source Apportionment Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1988,07/01/1989
* Philip Hopke, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 07/01/1989
* USD 28,000.00

Identifying the various sources responsible for the composition of airborne
particles at a given location is an important prerequisite to developing
effective regulatory policies for air quality. During the past decade, there has
been increasing use of elemental and chemical analytical methods to
characterized airborne particulate matter and collected precipitation. With the
availability of these large data sets and new multivariate of statistical
methods that have been made practical by the continuing increases in computer
size and speed, there is an enhanced opportunity to extract information about
atmospheric processes from data characterizing collected particles or
precipitation. Since some elements are strongly geochemically related, there is
redundancy in the elemented data that limits the number of parameters that are
influential in identifying sources. Another source of data is physical
characterization (size, shape, texture) of individual particles by computer-
controlled scanning electron microscopy. This project will examine several
eigenvector-based statistical methods to investigate regional scale transport of
airborne particulate matter. By using principal components analysis, empirical
orthogonal functions, and three-mode factor analysis, is it expected that the
patterns of spatial and temporal variations in the aerosol compositions can be
better understood and relationships with the regional meteorology defined. In
addition, methods will be developed for extracting quantitative measures of
particle texture from images of individual particles obtained with a Scanning
Electron Microscope. Fractal dimension, eigenvector and Fourier analysis methods
will be explored. The effects of chemical modification of the particle surface
by reaction with gaseous species on the visual surface texture and results of
the image analysis methods will be examined.