* 8810996
* Sources and Shapes of Economic Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Olivier Blanchard, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 07/31/1991
* USD 89,835.00

The past work of the investigator on business cycles has proceeded along two
related lines. The first has been theoretical, focussing on models of nominal
price and wage setting under imperfect competition and their implications for
macroeconomic fluctuations. The other has been empirical, focussing on the
origin and the transmission mechanism of shocks on macroeconomic fluctuations.
The completed work has led to a better understanding of the reaction time of
prices to wages and wages to prices. The nature of the interactions between
price decisions, it was found, can lead to aggregate nominal price rigidities.
The present research plan continues the basic monopolistically competitive
framework, but with some shift in focus toward sectoral evidence and the
relation between sectoral and aggregate fluctuations. Within the projected
disaggregated formulations, it will be possible to consider the effects of both
sector and aggregate shocks on sector output, prices, wages, and employment.
Some of the results already obtained suggest that productivity shocks play a
particularly important role in the sectoral fluctuation of these variables. The
planned extensions of the original study will help to reveal the facts about
local shocks, whether from the supply or the demand side, and the nature of
their relations across sectors. The focus on wage setting also will enhance our
understanding of its role in the dynamic adjustment process.