* 8810283
* Research Initiation:  Species Transport Across Polymerized  Vesicle Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Vinayak Kabadi, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 80,000.00

The objective of this project is to examine the transport rate in polymers as a
means of assessing the feasibility of using synthetic polymerized vesicles as
separation vehicles to concentrate selected species from dilute solutions. The
unique advantage enjoyed by the polymerized vesicles is that their membranes are
very thin, typically five nanometers. As such, the species transport rate can be
greatly enhanced. Two specific issues will be addressed in this work: the effect
of polymerization on membrane permeabilities; and the incorporation of chemical
carriers with preserved functional activities in polymerized vesicles membranes.
The labeled tracer technique will be used to study the membrane permeability.
Marker leakage tests will be conducted to evaluate the stability of polymerized
vesicles after the incorporation of chemical carriers. The activities of
chemical carriers in polymeric membranes will be compared with those in
monomeric membranes. Vesicles are of considerable research interest in the area
of drug delivery, separation technology, solar energy conversion, catalysis, and
chemical sensing. The transport results from this project will establish the
long term framework for the study of polymerized vesicles as separation vehicles
in an uphill active transport mode.