* 8810149
* Studies of Zeolite Catalysts of Control of Emissions:  RedoxReactions and Cation Siting
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* William Millman, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* GAA
* Farley Fisher
* 01/31/1992
* USD 257,846.00

This is a study of transition metals exchanged into zeolites or into silicon-
containing aluminophosphate molecular sieves (SAPOs) as catalysts for redox
reactions. The zeolites studied include silicon-enriched faujasites and other
large-pore zeolites such as zeolite L and zeolite omega. The kinetics of
reactions such as the reduction of nitric oxide with carbon monoxide or ammonia,
the decomposition of nitrous oxide, and the partial oxidation of methane are
examined. Emphasis is placed on how the coordination environments of the
transition-metal cations in these materials are related to their catalytic
behavior. Kinetic measurements are combined with studies involving isotopic
tracers, and these findings are coupled with spectroscopic and calorimetric
studies of the interactions of the cations with various adsorbate molecules. A
goal is to determine the sitings of exchanged cations and the natures of their
interactions with the zeolite (or SAPO) matrix, adsorbed gases, and other
coexchanged metal cations. Spectroscopic techniques used include high-field
magic-angle nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared spectroscopy (both midrange and
far range), and Moessbauer spectroscopy. The issues being addressed are of
considerable fundamental importance. In addition the systems under investigation
may have direct application in partial oxidation in a variety of industrial
settings, fixation of methane, automotive emission control, and acid rain
amelioration. This is a collaborative effort between the Milwaukee and Madison
campuses of the University of Wisconsin.