* 8810238
* Electron Optical Studies of Crystal Disorders, Defects and  Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* John Cowley, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 01/31/1992
* USD 484,468.00

This grant is a renewal for research by Professor John Cowley on the use of
high resolution electron microscopy for the investigation of the structure of
defects and surfaces of ceramic and electronic materials. The current research
concentrates on a range of new techniques and the further advancement of
established techniques for the more detailed atomic description of the
structures and chemical compositions of crystal surfaces and atomic disorder in
thin films and small particles. The effects of surface resonance channelling,
which confine the electron beam to the topmost lines or planes of atoms on
crystal surfaces will be investigated for the reflection electron microscope.
These effects are observed in the Kikuchi line patterns in reflection high
energy electron diffraction, and they provide for the basis for the technique
developed by this group called electron energy loss spectroscopy. These new
techniques allow micro-chemical and atomic analysis of surface monolayers. These
techniques are being applied to studies of surfaces of oxide ceramics (e.g.
magnesium oxide) and semiconductors (e.g. silicon and gallium arsenide). Two new
ultra high vacuum high resolution electron microscopes are to be used for this
study. The research of Professor Cowley has been at the leading edge of high
resolution electron microscopy for years. It has led to several of the
techniques in use worldwide today. The present research will continue to advance
these techniques, and their use in characterization of ceramics and electronic
materials on the atomic scale. This group at Arizona State University continues
to train graduate students and post doctoral students in the use of these
advanced analytical techniques.