* 8810131
* Research Initiation:  Dependability and Performance Models  for Parallel Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1991
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 06/30/1991
* USD 79,400.00

Fast and accurate characterization of parallel computers is essential in finding
their suitability for different applications. The thrust of the proposed
research is to analyze and evaluate the dependability and performance issues of
two promising classes of parallel computers. These are multistage
interconnection network (MIN) systems and hypercube systems. The research is
aimed at developing complete system models considering the degradation of both
computing elements and communication network. Various dependability and
performance measures, applicable in the domain of parallel processing, are used
to characterize these architectures. Analytical/simulation/hybrid models are
being developed to compute the dependability and performance-related
dependability parameters for both repairable and non-repairable systems. The
analytical models are based on approximate techniques and Markovian approach.
The Markov model will be implemented as a program package to study the transient
and steady state behavior of these systems. While the structure of the package
will be somewhat similar to those of CARE III/HARP, it will have additional
features such as automatic state generation and performance prediction. A major
contribution of this research will be the availability of a set of tools that
can be used for the evaluation of some of the existing and evolving parallel
architectures.