* 8810917
* National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1988,12/31/1997
* Terence Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 12/31/1997
* USD 9,800,148.00

This award for a National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis
(NCGIA) is made to a consortium consisting of the University of California at
Santa Barbara, the State University of New York at Buffalo, and the University
of Maine at Orono. NCGIA research will advance the theory, methods, and
techniques of geographic information analysis (GIA) based on geographic
information systems (GIS). Three impediments hamper more effective GIS-based
analysis: deficient capabilities for data-handling, insufficient analysis and
modeling capabilities, and meager understanding of applicability and user
acceptance. Research addressing such impediments will at the outset focus on the
accuracy of spatial data bases, languages of spatial relations, scale dependence
in representations of cartographic features, and the value of geographic
information in decisionmaking. Additional initiatives will evolve from the first
four. The NCGIA will augment the nation's supply of experts in GIS and
geographical analysis by offering educational programs will increase the
quantity and quality of GIA/GIS degrees. Graduate, junior faculty, and
postdoctoral fellowships will channel students into academic careers. The NCGIA
will create curricula and conduct summer institutes to upgrade GIA/GIS
instruction nationwide. The NCGIA will act as a central clearinghouse for
disseminating information regarding research, teaching, and applications in GIS
and related fields. NCGIA will promote the diffusion of analysis based on GIS
throughout the scientific community. Consortium faculty now conduct
collaborative research with government agencies and the private sector. The
consortium will expand current collaboration into a comprehensive outreach
program that will match NSF funds with government and industrial support for
cooperative work on problems of common interest. Workshops, seminars,
conferences and a publication series will disseminate NCGIA findings. Science
and society require information systems that can accommodate exceedingly large
spatially-referenced data bases to support analysis and modeling of complex
spatial phenomena. Geographic information systems can perform logical,
statistical, and mathematical operations on maps. Information from different
sources can be brought to a common projection and scale, analyzed, and displayed
far more readily than is possible with hard copy maps. The NCGIA will narrow
gaps among theory, technology, and applications in GIA/GIS in the engineering,
natural, and social sciences. It will ensure that the nation's needs to capture,
process and analyze geographic data in support of scientific research,
environmental analysis, and civil administration are well met during the
remainder of the century.