* 8810604
* Research Initiation:  Analysis of Waste Heat Recovery by    Phase-Change Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Stefan Thynell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tammi Owens
* 07/31/1991
* USD 69,660.00

The objective of this project are to analyze the effectiveness and compactness
of an innovative approach for recovering and reusing the wasted energy from a
typical combustion system. Such energy recovery and reuse are achieved by
employing small particles encapsulating a phase-change material. To successfully
accomplish the proposed objectives, it is necessary to analyze the fluid
dynamics and heat transfer problem both theoretically and experimentally. The
theory involves a numerical solution to a formulation of the conservation
equations for mass, momentum, energy and radiation. The experiments, which
employ solid particles to verify empirical relations used in the theory, include
measurements of velocities and temperatures of the gas and particles by standard
methods. The proposed work could be of significant interest to power and
industrial plants for several reasons. First, its use, either as retrofitted or
in new installations, should yield significant savings in fuel over conventional
fixed or rotary heat exchangers. Second, the unit is operable and particles
cleanable from unburnt fuel and dirt on a continuous basis, resulting in
improved thermodynamic conversion efficiencies and better control of the oxides
of nitrogen formation. Finally, the particles may act as scrubbing media for
removal of particulate matter and gaseous pollutants, thus serving a dual
purpose: recovery of wasted energy and pollutant control.