* 8810903
* Archaeology of the Iron Mill Site
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* George Frison, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1990
* USD 70,139.00

Between 1984 and 1987, Dr. Frison and his colleagues excavated at the
paleoindian Iron Mill site (24CT30) which is located in southeastern Montana.
Materials from the site are assigned to the Goshen Complex and have been
radiocarbon dated to between 10,760 and 11,360 B.P. (Before Present). The site
is particularly important because it provides excellent documentation on the
little known Goshen culture and because it is associated with a dense bed of
bison bone. The abundant and varied nature of the faunal and cultural materials
will permit reconstruction of subsistence strategies, paleoecology, and the
relationship of the Goshen to other archaeologically defined complexes. Dr.
Frison and his colleagues will continue excavation and survey at the site and
will analyze materials collected. They will define the site geology, attempt
more refined dating, determine the processes which affected the bison bones
after they were deposited, and collect botanical remains from the soil. They
will also perform a limited survey and refine techniques for electronic field
recording and processing of data. This research is important because it will
shed additional light on the prehistoric North American past. While it is known
that early aboriginal Americans depended heavily on large game, the details of
this subsistence adaptation are not well understood. The Iron Mill site provides
relevant data. On a broader scale this research should increase our
understanding of adaptation at simple technological levels.