* 8810856
* RUI:  Cost/Benefit Analysis of Territoriality
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Paul Ewald, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 101,729.00

Agonistic behavior, which includes aggressive behavior and responses to
aggression, is one of four general categories into which the behavior of humans
and all other animals can be divided. The ubiquity of agonistic behavior makes
it broadly relevant not only to basic science but also to practical problems
from the population to the individual level. One kind of site-specific agonistic
behavior, territoriality, is particularly amenable to study because its spatial
localization allows measurement of its costs and benefits under field
conditions. However, it is often difficult to evaluate both costs and benefits
in a common unit that is strongly correlated with survival and reproduction. Dr.
Ewald will carry out field experiments with one of the few study subjects for
which these obstacles can be readily surmounted: hummingbirds defending feeding
territories. For this subject, both costs and benefits can be quantified in
units of energy and experimentally manipulated; moreover, the rapid responses of
hummingbird territoriality to changes in these costs and benefits makes field
experiments exceptionally feasible. Dr. Ewald will conduct the first rigorously
controlled tests designed to resolve three fundamental, unanswered questions
about agonistic behavior. First, he will assess the utility of controlled field
experimentation by comparing the territorial responses to highly accurate but
artificial energy sources with responses to the less-controllable natural energy
sources. Second, he will test predictions about the existence of territoriality
in relation to the net benefits obtained from the territory. Finally, he will
determine whether or not the quality of the best alternative to territoriality
influences the presence and/or form of territoriality. The areas of agreement
and divergence between theoretical predictions and actual territoriality in this
system should clarify the applicability of the cost/benefit approach to
territoriality. More generally, by helping to develop the cost/benefit theory of
agonistic behavior, this clarification should eventually improve our
understanding of the interaction between internal and environmental influences
on agonistic behavior across the entire animal kingdom, including humans.