* 8810385
* Research Initiation:  Detailed Three-Dimensional Simulation of Steel Frame Subassemblages
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Donald White, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 11/30/1990
* USD 69,999.00

Improvements in the static and aseismic design of steel-framed structures are
hindered by the inability to simulate adequately their three-dimensional
nonlinear response to monotonic, nonproportional, and cyclic loadings. This
research involves the development of advanced finite element and computer
graphics capabilities for the analysis of steel frame subassemblies, and the
application of these research tools to achieve a better understanding of the
full-range behavior of structural steel frames. The effects of initial
imperfections and residual stresses, spread of plasticity, the detailed
constitutive response of structural steel to nonproportional and cyclic
straining, inelastic nonuniform torsion and torsional- flexural coupling, cross-
section distortion, joint deformations, and the interaction of local and overall
instabilities will each be modeled and studied. Computer graphics techniques
will be developed for monitoring and control of nonlinear simulations and for
animation and visualization of the complex three-dimensional phenomena modeled
by the planning and interpretation of experimental tests, the extension of
experimental knowledge to a wide range of geometries and loadings, and the
development and calibration of approximate models for non-linear analysis of
large frame structures.