* 8810153
* Symposium on Parasites and Sexual Selection; Thousand Oaks, California; December 1988
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1989
* Glenn Hausfater, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 07/31/1989
* USD 9,000.00

The goal of this one-day symposium is to bring together a diverse and
multidisciplinary group of scientists, all of whom are actively investigating
the role of parasite infection as a driving force in sexual selection. 'Sexual
selection' is the term used by biologists to refer to changes in gene
frequencies resulting from competition among members of one sex for mates.
Specifically, research to be presented in this symposium is aimed at assessing
the extent to which variation among individual traits evaluated during mate
choice accurately reflects variation among those same individuals in resistance
to parasite infection and disease. Sexual selection is known to have been of
great importance in shaping the physiology, morphology and behavior of a wide
range of vertebrate species, including humans; hence this very basic genetic
process is of considerable interest in its own right. However, the research to
be presented in this symposium is also likely to contribute to our understanding
of other equally important genetic and behavioral process, most especially
processes affecting the transmission (and control) of parasites and disease
among both humans and animals. Hence, from the standpoint of human welfare the
value of the proposed symposium may lie in its contribution to the emerging
synthesis of epidemiology with the closely-related disciplines of population
genetics and behavioral ecology. The proposed symposium will be held in
conjunction with the 1988 meetings of the American Society of Zoologists (ASZ)
and will provide the first opportunity for behavioral ecologists involved in
research on sexual selection to interact with parasitologists and other
scientists knowledgeable about host- parasite coevolution. It is anticipated
that papers presented in the symposium will be published in the American
Zoologist or other appropriate outlet, thereby making results of the symposium
accessible to a larger audience than simply those individuals attending the 1988
ASZ meetings.