* 8811320
* Workshop for the Cretaceous Resources, Events and Rhythms   Project of the Global Sedimentary Geology Program
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1989
* Eric Barron, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1989
* USD 15,000.00

A newly established International Union of Geological Sciences Commission on
Global Sedimentary Geology has initiated as its first project a study of
Cretaceous Resources, Events and Rhythms (CRER). The Cretaceous Period offers
special opportunities to understand global processes and their variations. It
was a time of pronounced eustatic change and oceanic anoxia. Its sediments
record Milankovitch rhythms and the development and demise of carbonate
platforms. It is a turning point in the evolution of life, and its deposits
include vast amounts of natural resources including oil and gas, coal,
phosphorite, bauxite, kaolinite and manganese ores. To implement this pilot
project, a series of five workshops is planned in Europe for 1988, each
corresponding to one of the working groups within the CRER project: (1) sequence
stratigraphy and sea level change, (2) sedimentation in oxygen-deficient oceans,
(3) cyclo- stratigraphy, (4) development and demise of carbonate platforms, and
(5) paleogeography, paleoclimatology, and sediment flux. Following these
workshops, a general workshop will take place near Digne, France, to provide
overall coordination for this project. An Interim U.S. Program Committee for the
Global Sedimentary Geology Program (GSGP) has been established by the Society of
Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists (SEPM), under whose auspices GSGP was
initially developed. This committee has the responsibility of ensuring adequate
participation of U.S. scientists in Project CRER. This project represents
support for the travel of key U.S. personnel to the planned workshops in Europe.