* 8811437
* Symposia on Directions and Implications of Advanced         Computing; Summers 1988 and 1989
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Douglas Schuler, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 12/31/1990
* USD 6,000.00

This award provides modest support to enable expertise on ethical and value
aspects of research and education in advanced computing to be incorporated into
two technical and policy symposia -- called "Directions and Implications of
Advanced Computing" (DIAC), sponsored by Computer Professionals for Social
Responsibility. CPSR is a national professional organization with over 2200
members. The symposia will be held in the summers of 1988 and 1989. The 1988
symposium will take place on August 21, in the Earle Brown Center at the
University of Minnesota - St. Paul. This is the day before the national
conference of the American Association for Artificial Intelligence begins there.
The symposium will include six presented papers, a plenary address, and a panel
on "How are ethical values imparted and sustained in the computing community?"
For 1989, the program committee will include a philosopher who specializes in
the study of computer ethics and a social scientist who studies the influence of
values in the selection of research priorities. Plans will expand the publicity
and outreach of the symposia to improve the exchange and interaction between
technical professionals and scholars and the dissemination of materials to lay
audiences. Results from each symposium will include a book and journal
publications. Editorials, commentaries, and educational materials may also be
prepared. This project is undertaken by competent professionals with appropriate
organizational support. Collaborative efforts are likely to continue well beyond
the period of this award. The project is designed well; plans for review and
dissemination of materials are appropriate. An award in the amount of $6,000 is
recommended.