* 8811498
* Engineering Research Equipment Award:  Geometric and        Mechanistic Models of Numerically Controlled Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Robert Jerard, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/28/1990
* USD 35,192.00

This research is focused on developing methods which increase the reliability
and efficiency of Numerically Controlled (NC) machining. The award will be used
to purchase a five axis machining center to experimentally test the concepts.
The development of variational geometric models is an important topic of current
research. The equipment purchased by this award will help the principal
investigator's investigate how tolerance information contained within the
geometric model of a mechanical part can be used to automate the selection of
spindle speeds and feedrates in a NC milling operation. The tolerance
information can be used to calculate the allowable cutting forces if the
stiffness of both the workpiece and the machine tool is known. Geometric and
mechanistic models of the cutting process will then be used to select
appropriate speed/feed settings which result in actual cutting forces below the
allowable threshold. Finally, force sensing during machining can be used to
adapt to spindle speeds and feedrates to maintain acceptable tolerances and
surfaces finishes. The practical realization of the stated goal requires two
advances in the current state of the art: (1) an efficient geometric simulation
method capable of verifying tolerance discrepancies, and (2) a reliable and
complete model of the cutting process, capable of estimating cutting forces for
a wide range of cutting conditions.