* 8811345
* Contracting, Search, and Missing Markets
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1992
* Peter Diamond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 171,591.00

This research is part of an on-going upheaval in economic theory caused by the
use of contract theory as a foundation for understanding economic behavior. This
project continues work on two strands of economic theory - search models of
macroeconomics and a model of taxation under global uncertainty. Trade
coordination difficulties appear to be an important cause of macroeconomic
problems in the US economy. In part, trade coordination difficulties come from
the fact that economic decisions are made at many points of time. Search
theoretic equilibrium models have explored the implications for resource
allocation of decentralized and staggered economic transactions and decisions.
This extension of the research approach will focus on credit; including the role
of credit in enhancing the efficiency of transactions, the determinants of the
equilibrium terms of credit; and the effects of credit on the presence of
multiple equilibria. Optimal tax theory is one approach to thinking
systematically about how the government should set taxes and the levels of
public expenditure. Most work on optimal taxation has assumed either certainty
or individual uncertainty with no aggregate uncertainty. This project explores
the implication for optimal taxation of uncertainties which are large for the
economy as a whole. Attention is paid particularly to the implications of
limited markets for insuring these uncertainties. These two strands of research
are considered by many economic theorists as two of the most important and
promising current lines of research. Work on the coordination difficulties could
provide a synthesis of microeconomic and macroeconomic theories of the economy.
The specific work in this project should provide insights into the way banks and
other financial intermediaries influence the overall economy. Research on this
topic is very timely given concerns about the fragility of US financial
institutions and the possibility that bank runs could cause a depression. The
other line of research is also important because it addresses a major weakness
in the tax theory used by analysts in policy debates about tax reform. The
weakness is that optimal tax theory does not rigorously incorporate the
uncertainty that pervades the economy. Tax theory is forced to assume away the
uncertainty because of the lack of a good theory of the behavior of the firm in
the presence of uncertainty, missing markets, and many owners. The investigator
proposes to develop just such a theory of the firm that will be tractable for
optimal tax questions. Preliminary work by the investigator suggests that many
of the results of optimal tax theory change once uncertainty is introduced into
the analysis.