* 8811629
* Engineering Creativity Award:  Nonlinear Optical CompositiesUsing Nonlinear Organic Molecules in Inorganic Matrices
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Bruce Dunn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/1992
* USD 89,400.00

The goal of this research project is to create electrooptical devices for
optical communications and/or computing systems using nonlinear optical
materials. In particular, nonlinear optical composites will be fabricated and
characterized by placing highly nonlinear organic molecules in inorganic
matrices. Nonlinear effects have been shown to be much larger in organics
compared to the best inorganics. Significant fabrication problems exist,
however, in developing materials containing organic molecules. A possible
solution to these problems lies in the sol-gel process for making glass. In this
project, sol-gel solutions will be used as the host material for optical organic
molecules. The new organic- inorganic composite material will be formed by
mixing nonlinear optical organics into the sol-gel solution so that SiO2 is the
host. The sol-gel should form a SiO2 cage around each organic molecule locking
it in place. Alignment of the organic molecule composites is accomplished by the
poling techniques in order to observe the necessary second order effects. By
depositing sucessive layers of sol-gel with different indices, nonlinear optical
waveguides can be realized. The general plan of research is essentially
synthesis (fabrication), characterization (of materials), and device
realization.