* 8811714
* Biochemistry of Fatty Acid Uptake in Escherichia Coli
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Paul Black, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/29/1992
* USD 214,560.00

Long-chain fatty acids (LCFA) traverse the cell envelope of Escherichia coli by
a high-affinity, saturable, energy-dependent process. This uptake system
requires the functional activities of at least two genes, fadL and fadD, so that
LCFA can be used as a sole carbon and energy source. The fadL gene codes for an
outer membrane-bound long-chain fatty acid binding protein, FadL, that is
required for the transport of LCFAs into the cell. The fadD gene codes for acyl
CoA synthetase, an enzyme presumed to be associated with the inner membrane. The
kinetics of LCFA binding to whole cells blocked for fatty acid utilization will
be determined in an effort to further define the role of FadL. In particular,
the temperature, pH optima, and fatty acid chain length specificity of fatty
acid binding will be determined. The cloned fadL+ gene will be mutagenized in
vitro using hydroxylamine and in vivo by cycling through mutator strains to
generate mutants in fadL that will be used in defining the functional domains of
FadL. The fatty acid binding domains will be identified using affinity-labelled
LCFAs coupled with peptide sequencing. Collectively, the data generated from
this project will be used to develop a model correlating the functional domains
of FadL with the linear amino acid sequence. In more broad terms, the
information gleaned from these experiments will provide information describing
the molecular basis of protein- fatty acid interaction at the cell surface. This
description, therefore, may be applied to more complex cell types in evaluating
how fatty acids traverse the membrane.