* 8811059
* Ocean-air Exchange of CO and Some Methyl-Halides and Haloforms
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Reinhold Rasmussen, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 12/31/1990
* USD 60,000.00

The oceans may be a significant source of many trace gases that affect the
global environment. Trace gases that accumulate in the atmosphere can change the
chemistry and composition of the atmosphere. These changes can lead to climatic
effects such as global warming and altered rainfall patterns. Global emissions
of trace gases from natural sources are particularly difficult to estimate and
little is known about production of gases in the oceans. This project will
provide data that can improve our understanding of the role of the oceans in
determining the levels of certain trace gases. This project is a follow-up on a
supplement to a previous grant that allowed the collection of air and seawater
samples during a cruise of the Akademik Korolev in the Pacific. The samples will
be chemically analyzed for carbon monoxide, methyl halides, and haloforms.
Carbon monoxide is important in that it is a primary species for the loss of
hydroxyl radical. The hydroxyl radical, in turn, largely controls the oxidizing
capacity of the atmosphere which is responsible for the removal of many trace
gases. The methyl halides are generally the most abundant halogen containing
trace gases and the oceans are probably their most significant natural source.
By using statistical techniques and cluster analysis, the air and seawater
concentrations of these trace gases will be correlated with each other and with
other parameters such as biological productivity and temperature. Objectives of
this project are to delineate the latitudinal distributions of these gases and
thus evaluate the distributions of their sources and to estimate fluxes of these
gases through the ocean-atmosphere boundary.