* 8811923
* International Workshop on Long-Term Ecological Research: A  Global Perspective; October 1988
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1990
* Paul Risser, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 05/31/1990
* USD 48,447.00

Approximately 30 international experts will be brought together in a workshop
to discuss the current state of long-term ecological research, primarily in
North America and Western Europe. They will also consider the future directions
for and possible future cooperation among long-term research sites on both
continents. The development of an international network of sites dedicated to
conducting long-term ecological research is a necessary component of the world
scientific community's efforts to study global change. Careful long-term
measurements of key ecological parameters at sites distributed over the face of
the earth will permit us to document, in an unambiguous way, changes in
ecosystem structure and function, and the aerial extent of the changes. With
additional information from atmospheric and ocean scientists we will be able to
develop hypotheses about the causes of change at large scales. To the degree
that we are able to link cause and effect we will then be able to develop
predictive models of ecosystem responses to global change. These models can be
used to develop strategies for the management of the earth's ecological
resources. The results of the workshop will be shared with the world's
scientific community through the publication of the proceedings as a book. The
organizing committee for the workshop, lead by Dr. Risser, is made up of
experienced scientists from through out the world. The preliminary list of
workshop participants is outstanding. The opening address is to be given by Dr.
Gene Likens, a co- founder of the long-term (25 year) ecological study at
Hubbard Brook. No better scientist could have been chosen to set a more
appropriate tone for the workshop.