* 8811209
* Energetic and Respiratory Role of Lipids in Thermally       Acclimated Fish
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1992
* Bruce Sidell, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 10/31/1992
* USD 211,640.00

Most fish species are ectothermic, i.e. their body temperature is directly
determined and not significantly different from that of the water in which they
live. This means that, for many temperate zone fish species, cell temperatures
many vary seasonally by >20 degrees centigrade. Although decreasing temperature
has a significant depressing effect upon biochemical reactions, many of these
fish species display relatively constant biological activity at warm and cold
temperatures, behavior which requires adaptive responses at the cellular and
biochemical level. In particular, many adaptations of fishes to cold body
temperature described to date are very similar to those shown by mammalian
species (including man) to different physiological stimuli - e.g. endurance
training. Dr. Sidell will utilize the more easily studied fish muscle system to
: 1) define adaptations for metabolism of fatty fuels to support locomotion in
fishes and how this system is influenced by changes in body temperature, and; 2)
evaluate the adaptive significance of cold temperature-induced increases in
intracellular fat content upon movement of oxygen through muscle. His
experiments will focus upon striped bass (Morone saxatilis), a migratory fish of
considerable economic importance. The investigator will utilize gas
chromatography to determine how changes in body temperature affect the molecular
composition of blood-borne and storage deposits of lipid (fat) fuels. The rate-
limiting enzyme in breakdown of fatty fuels, carnitine long chain fatty
acyltransferase, will be purified from aerobic muscle of striped bass. He will
determine by enzyme kinetic analyses and metabolic experiments with isolated
tissues which normally available fatty acid fuels are best metabolized at
different temperatures. He will also quantify the concentrations of an
intracellular fatty acid binding protein (FABP) in muscles of temperature
acclimated fish. FABPs have been implicated in accelerating the intracellular
movement of fatty acids. Titers of FABPs in tissues of thermally-acclimated
animals will be correlated with the ability of these tissues to metabolize fats.
FABP further will be purified and used to perform experiments that will directly
resolve whether this protein can facilitate movement of fatty compounds in
aqueous solution. Oxygen electrodes will be used to determine whether the
presence of lipid droplets in cells (which accumulate in muscle at cold body
temperature) can enhance the rate of diffusion of oxygen from capillaries to its
site of cellular utilization, the mitochondria. Results from these studies will
better define effects of seasonal cycles in temperature upon utilization of
lipids which are important caloric resources in the aquatic environment.
Findings may apply to the physiology of less easily studied muscle systems which
show very similar treatment effects.