* 8811269
* Macrofaunal Effects on Nitrification and its Coupling to    Denitrification in Coastal Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* William Kemp, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1991
* USD 132,114.00

This study examines the interaction between benthic macrofauna and sediment
nitrification and denitrification in the coastal marine environment. Dr. Kemp
and his co-inves- tigator Dr. Boynton will make direct measurements of
macrofaunal influence on nitrification and coupled nitrification -
denitrification using a modified 15N isotope technique for intact coastal marine
sediments with manipulated animal densities. Three levels of macrofaunal
abundance will be used for representative species (e.g. amphipod, bivalve,
polychaete). Alternative mechanisms by which macrofauna may stimulate
nitrification (e.g. increased supplies of oxygen vs. ammonium) will be examined
separately using artificial tubes will be compared using microelectrode
techniques. Three possible mechanisms for macrofaunal enhancement of
nitrification - denitrification coupling will be tested with the isotopic
procedures including: 1) effects of radial diffusion geometry; 2) effects of
alternating oxic- anoxic conditions; 3) role of anoxic microsites in surface
deposited fecal pellets. Dissolved nitrogen compounds such as nitrate and
ammonium are important nutrients for biological production. However, the
oxidation of ammonium (nitrification) coupled to the reduction of nitrate to
nitrogen gas (denitrification) results in the decrease of nitrogen in
biologically active pools and may serve one of the important mechanisms
controlling the nutrient levels in sea water. This study addresses the coupling
of these processes and their relation to the larger organisms living in the
coastal sediments, an environment in which nitrification/denitrication is
particularly active. The work will test quantitatively the notion that the
sediment burrows these organisms construct (along with the activities of these
animals) facilitates the microbiological nitrification/denitrification activity
in the surrounding sediment. The work include novel experiments using sediment
samples with varying numbers of organisms and laboratory experiments using
artificial burrows. Isotopic labelling experiments will be used to measure the
actual rates of nitrification/denitrification and to address the mechanisms by
which the larger sediment organisms influence these microbiological processess.