* 8811100
* The Environmental History of the Panama Land Bridge
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Paul Colinvaux, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/1990
* USD 25,000.00

Because of its critical location as a landbridge linking North and South
America, Panama has been an area of intense interest to climatologists,
biologists, anthropologists, geographers, and other scientists trying to
reconstruct and interpret the distribution and movements of plants, animals, and
people in the Americas. Because movements of species have been influenced by the
limited number of natural environments on the isthmus, and because climatic
changes have altered the mix of environments dramatically over the last few
dozen millennia, reconstructing the environmental history of Panama is a
critical facet of research for a broad range of inquiries into the paleoecology
and paleoanthropology of the Americas. This project is part of a larger,
integrated effort to gather and interpret evidence that will substantially
improve knowledge of the environmental history of Panama. Sediment cores have
been gathered from lakes and bogs in scattered parts of Panama, two sets of
which provide especially good records over periods as long as the last 26,000
years. This project will focus on analyzing the two sets of cores in
laboratories, using pollen, diatoms, and phytoliths in the cores to reconstruct
the range of species present in the vicinities of the core sites. These data
will be integrated with data from other sites to develop more complete records
of environmental change in Panama than have been available before. The
enhancement of the data-based environmental history of Panama that will result
from this project is significant in its own right, but it also will assist
scholars in many other lines of inquiry. More accurate reconstructions of
vegetational change will permit climatologists to refine regional climatic
histories, which will help arbitrate current theoretical debates regarding the
nature of post- glacial climatic change. Biologists and biogeographers will have
more detailed data for their analyses of the migration of species and the
character of response to environmental change. Anthropologists will find the
data useful for better determining the timing and location of human occupancy
through the presence of pollen and phytoliths of domesticated plants. This
project therefore provides opportunities for increasing knowledge in a broad
range of sciences.