* 8811423
* A Tool-Based Software Laboratory for Distributed and        Parallel Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1992
* Udi Manber, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 04/30/1992
* USD 232,523.00

This is a project to build a tool-based software laboratory to facilitate
experimental research in distributed and parallel computing. The laboratory has
three major components: a collection of high-level tools to aid in the
development of distributed and parallel algorithms, a programming language
workbench, and a configurable operating system kernel. The long term goal is to
use the laboratory as a vehicle for addressing several problems fundamental to
the design and use of distributed and parallel systems. These problems range
from implementing parallel algorithms that exploit alternative architectures, to
understanding the principles of interprocess communication and synchronization
across a wide spectrum of architectures, to designing system software that
exploits the heterogeneity and redundancy inherent in distributed and parallel
architectures. In addition to this long term goal, designing and implementing
the laboratory will allow investigation of two complementary issues. First, the
problem of building powerful and efficient tools is interesting and challenging
research in its own right. Each tool must be general enough to support a wide
range of applications and at the same time must be efficiently implementable on
a wide spectrum of underlying architectures. Second, the breadth of the
laboratory will allow study of the interaction between system components. In
particular, how high-level tools for designing parallel algorithms depend on the
language support systems, and how these systems, in turn, depend on the
communication support provided by the kernel.