* 8811732
* Paleobiological Patterns in Species Extinction, Survivorshipand Evolution across the K/T Boundary
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Gerta Keller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 04/30/1991
* USD 85,000.00

This project addresses three major objectives in current biostratigraphical and
paleobiological research. 1. THE NATURE OF SPECIES EXTINCTIONS ACROSS THE K/T
BOUNDARY: To what extent was the end-Cretaceous mass extinction event gradual or
sudden in geological terms? To what degree was extinction selective towards
certain groups of species? 2. SPECIES SURVIVORSHIP: To what extent did planktic
foraminifera survive the end-Cretaceous mass extinction event? Were certain
morphologies favored? Which species were more favored, generalists or
specialists? How long did they survive? Did surviving species give rise to new
Tertiary species? 3. POST-EXTINCTION-EVENT RADIATION: How does species diversity
rebound after a mass extinction event? What are the rates of diversification,
are they high immediately after the extinction event, or are there substantial
lags? What taxonomic groups, generalists or specialists, contribute to
diversification in both numbers of species and relative abundance of
individuals? Does the diversification correlate with environmental factors such
as climate or productivity? %%% This project will examine the evidence for a
mass extinction and subsequent radiation of foraminifera across the
Cretaceous/Tertiary boundary at 65 million years in both land and marine
sections. The rate of extinction and radiation will be measured and the role of
species morphology and ecology on those rates will be examined. The post-
extinction radiation will be examined to see which species survived and how
their subsequent diversification occurred. The role of climate and productivity
in the survivorship of different species will be examined. The results of this
study will provide a detailed picture of the events surrounding the most well
known extinction in the geologic record.