* 8811519
* Molecular Genetics of the Cut Locus in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Joseph Jack, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 02/29/1992
* USD 330,000.00

The cut locus of Drosophila melanogaster is a large gene of more than 200 kb,
with a complex pattern of complementation. Each of the two complementation
groups of viable mutations has a different phenotype, and the two groups of
mutations affect different tissues. There are also a number of complementation
groups of lethal alleles, one of which fails to complement all cut locus
mutations. Two of these lethal complementation groups have a particularly
interesting phenotype. In mutant files, all of the external sensory organs,
including both the external structures and the neurons that innervate them, are
transformed into a morphologically and antigenically distinct, internal sensory
organ. The transformation can be observed in both larvae and adults. Mutations
from five of the complementation groups have been mapped, and the mutations from
each group fall into a different part of the gene. This proposal sets out to
correlate the complex genetics of the cut locus with its activity at a molecular
level. Transcription will be analyzed in wild type and mutant flies, and
individual transcripts will be correlated with complementations groups. Specific
cDNAs will be sequenced in order to determine whether more than one protein is
synthesized at cut. Complex genes in Drosophila have the potential to provide
insight into regulatory features of genomes not accessible in other systems as
yet. This project will provide the necessary ground work for approaching
questions of regulation of complex genes, in particular, the cut locus.