* 8811061
* Plate Motion Statistics and Relation of Propagation and Overlap for the Juan de Fuca Ridge
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Douglas Wilson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/1990
* USD 50,968.00

Lithospheric plates that compose the outer shell of the earth form by volcanic
processes at mid-ocean ridges (spreading centers) where igneous material is
added more or less symmetrically to each plate which borders on the mid-ocean
ridge. This growth process is accompanied by relative motion between the two
plates on either side of the ridge crest-motion that can be determined from a
study of amgnetic anomalies observed at the sea surface over the mid-ocean
ridge. Over a short period of geologic time ( < few million years) this relative
motion can be described in terms of rotation about a point (pole) that remains
fixed to each plate. Over longer periods of time the motion is moe complicated
and is accompanied by changes in the configuration of the mid-ocean spreading
center, changes which are manifest as overlapping spreading centers and
proagating rifts. %%% This project investigates the details of this process for
the Juan de Fuca Ridge, a spreading center off the Washington- Oregon coast.
Wilson plans to determine a revised rotation pole with confidence limits for
motion of the Juan de Fuca plate with respect to the Pacific plate. In the
process he will make computer modesl to demonstarate the development of
overlapping spreading centers and propagating rifts. He will also attempt to
determine over what interval the relative plate motion can be described in terms
of a sample rotation.