* 8811141
* Career Advancement Award on the Transformation of Property
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Lenore Weitzman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 11/30/1990
* USD 40,841.00

This career advancement award will permit Dr. Lenore J. Weitzman to initiate a
major new line of inquiry on the role of property in modern society. The
ultimate goal of scientific research in this area is to illuminate changes in
the legal and cultural conceptions of property over time. This could very well
be a pathbreaking endeavor: First, this work aims to address how property is
defined, including a wide variety of forms of "new" property such as ideas and
other creative assets, investments in human capital and future earnings
capacity, and pensions. Second, it envisions examining how property is
distributed in the United States, including measures of the "new property."
Third, the research plans to relate this inquiry to how property and income are
allocated, managed, and controlled in family units. And, finally, this agenda of
study focuses directly on the role of law in shaping how marital property is
held and how decisions about property are made. This support is crucial to
future work on the transformation of property and to the career advancement of
this investigator. Although Dr. Weitzman brings substantial expertise to
studying this problem, greater knowledge of property law, legal history, and
economics--to be developed under this career advancement award--is essential.
Also, a pilot study is necessary in order to assess the feasibility of empirical
work on the transformation of property and to develop the methodologies to map
out the range, scope, and impact of the "new" property on society and within
families in particular. Finally, coincident with the goals of the career
advancement initiative, this award provides an opportunity for this
investigator, who has not yet been evaluated for tenure, to embark on a
promising new line of work.