* 8811834
* Benthic Foraminiferal Carbon Isotopes and the Cenozoic      Development of Deep-Water Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1988,04/30/1991
* Kenneth Miller, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 04/30/1991
* USD 191,732.00

Cenozoic climate and ocean chemistry changes are linked to the evolution of
deep-water circulation patterns. A project to reconstruct Cenozoic deep-water
circulation changes will use benthic foraminiferal >.>13C comparisons,
supplemented by ongoing faunal (benthic foraminiferal) and sedimentological
studies (CaCO3, opal, organic carbon accumulations). An integrated statigraphic
framework for synoptic interbasinal and bathymetric (vertical) >.>13C
comparisons will be constructed. Detailed interbasinal >.>13C reconstructions of
the Oligocene to Pliocene oceans will delineate various water-type end members
(Northern Component, Southern Component, Indian Ocean Water, Pacific Deep
Water). Vertical >.>13C gradients will be reconstructed in several regions
including the North Atlantic and Southern Ocean. These reconstructions will
allow evaluation of the role of these critical bottom-water source regions upon
the development of long period (106yr) deep-water circulation. The importance of
shorter-period (104-105yr) changes across two major climatic transitions (ca.
14-12.5 Ma and 3-2 Ma) will be used to determine if climatic forcing on this
bandwidth was linked to deep-water variations as in the Quaternary. %%% This
study will involve the use of oxygen and carbon isotopes of foraminifera from
sedimentary cores. The history of deep circulation will be inferred for the last
40 million years in order to examine the effects of climate on paleocirculation.
The results will provide the opportunity to test models of the interaction of
paleoclimate, paleoceanography, and plate tectonic reconstructions on the
evolution of the modern ocean.