* 8811900
* Thermal Physiology of Cicadas and Regulation of Cuticular   Permeability in Insects
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Eric Toolson, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 01/31/1993
* USD 183,506.00

Dr. Toolson has recently discovered that cicadas can reduce their body
temperature by evaporation of water. This ability is known only for a handful of
insects. What makes cicadas unique among all animals except mammals is that they
achieve the high water loss rates required for evaporative cooling by means of
an energy-dependent process that causes extrusion of water through large-
diameter cuticular ducts. The extrusion of water is triggered when a cicada's
body temperature threatens to go above a specific setpoint (Tsp), and is thus
the functional equivalent of sweating in mammals. The proposed research entails
two somewhat distinct themes. First, extending the PI's discovery that cicadas
can evaporatively cool by activating an energy- dependent process that
facilitates transcuticular water flux (TWF) rates, the PI's will conduct studies
to elucidate the chemical and neurological mechanisms involved in regulation of
the TWF- facilitating process. Compounds, such as aspirin, acetominiphen, and
prostaglandins, that have been shown to affect body-temperature regulation in
mammals, and compounds with known regulatory activity in insects, e.g.,
octopamine, will be tested for their effect on TWF and, therefore, on body
temperature. Localized regions of the cuticle will be warmed to determine if
this affects TWF. Classic ligation experiments will be used to assess whether
the nervous system regulates TWF and, if so, at what level neurological
regulation is mediated. Finally, acclimation experiments and comparative studies
involving cicada species from a variety of habitats will be conducted to
elucidate the interaction of thermal regime, size, color/reflectivity, and other
factors in determining Tsp. The second part of the proposed research consists of
experiments designed to test between two alternative hypotheses proposed to
account for the habitat-associated and seasonal patterns of cuticular
permeabilities reported for most terrestrial arthropods. Cockroaches, crickets,
and scorpions will be subjected to different combinations of food and water
availability to determine whether the ability to modify cuticular permeability
in response to changing desiccation stress reflects a need to conserve
energy/precursors or to regulate rates of TWF.