* 8811570
* Engineering Creativity Award:  Investigation of Sounds      Emanating from Contracted Muscles
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Lawrence Schramm, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 02/29/1992
* USD 89,400.00

This research project is concerned with the investigation of sounds emanating
from muscles as they are contracted in the field of bioengineering. Sounds made
by contracting muscles represent the means to obtain knowledge about muscle
biomechanics and the processes of muscle contraction. Based upon previous
results, a strong interest has developed in the understanding and prediction of
muscle sound frequency. Using an electromagnetic driving apparatus the
instantaneous frequency of vibration at different times during muscle
contraction will be determined. Experiments will be conducted to ascertain the
exact relationship among the frequency of muscle sounds and the length, tension,
and mass of the muscle. Experiments under conditions of zero passive tension
will be conducted to find the relationship between frequency and the elastic
modulus of the muscle. The effect of temperature on muscle sound production and
frequency will be examined. There is high potential that muscle sounds may be
used as a diagnostic tool for human muscles. Sounds measured from functioning
muscle tissue near an artificial limb could be used as control signals for the
artificial limb. Muscle sounds can also be used as a method of measuring the
extent of muscle fatigue.