* 8811776
* Cloning the Drosophila Gene Abnormal Oocyte
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Hallie Krider, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1991
* USD 122,214.00

The gene abnormal oocyte (abo) is one of a cluster of maternal effect genes. Its
unusual phenotypes are moderated by specific regions in heterochromatin.
Analysis of the abo mutation has led to the suggestion that the gene may
regulate aspects of heterochromatic function, heterochromatic structure, and the
replication of heterochromatic sequences. Copies of the gene may also reside in
the heterochromatic DNAs and be functional in contexts when other sequences are
not. Such times may include gamete and early embryo formation. Analysis of the
gene has rested on a single mutant allele. Collection of new mutations has been
difficult because the gene lies in a poorly saturated and studied region of the
second chromosome, and because the existing hypomorph produces no visable
phenotype when homozygous. The proposal describes a new method of screening for
mutations at the abo function, and the several approaches that will be taken to
characterize new alleles. The identification of new alleles will allow us to
determine if the effects of abo are a general property of the gene's normal
function, and to distinguish between several aspects of models which describe
the process producing the known abo phenotypes. There are many genetic studies
on the function and structure of euchromatic chromatin. There are few studies or
even possible approaches on the structure and function of heterochromatin, or
that part of genomes which has been found to contain very few functional genes.
The abo mutation promises to allow approaches to be devised which could change
that situation. However, more alleles must first be found for the system to be
optimal.