* 8811375
* Ocean-Basin Scale Modeling of Plankton Dynamics in the NorthAtlantic and Eastern North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Joseph Wroblewski, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/1992
* USD 111,142.00

The objective of this effort is to construct ocean-basin scale models of
plankton dynamics in the North Atlantic and the North Pacific in support of the
overall objectives of the U.S. Global Ocean Flux Study sponsored by NSF and
NASA. These new physical-biological models will utilize historical data on the
climatological mixed layer depth , historical data on the large scale, wind-
driven Ekman flux at the base of the mixed layer, and the GEOSECS nutrient
chemistry data in the North Atlantic and North Pacific. These ocean-basin scale
models will study how seasonal mixed layer deepening and shallowing, along with
wind-driven Ekman upwelling and downwelling, interacts with the vertical
gradient of dissolved nutrients to determine the total amount of limiting
nutrient available to the plankton ecosystem. This in turn determines the
biological productivity of the ocean. Maps will be produced by the model of the
monthly and annual primary production in the North Atlantic and eastern North
Pacific basins. Estimates will be made of the interannual variability in primary
production due to interseasonal fluctuations in the large scale wind stress over
the North Atlantic. %%% The models will incorporate details on the physiological
growth rate of the phytoplankton, enabling resolution of regional variations in
chlorophyll content of the plant population. This will enable direct comparison
of model predictions of the phytoplankton distribution to ocean-basin scale
composites of historical CZCS images of surface chlorophyll. These basin- wide
models will be validated by comparison to plankton abundance and productivity
data published in the literature, and historical CZCS imagery. New data
forthcoming from the GOFS field program and new ocean color imagery may or may
not become available for assimilation into these models within the time frame of
this proposal (1988-1991). However, this modeling effort can help provide an
essential link between general theory and observations planned by GOFS
investigators.