* 8811777
* Sediment Transport by Unconfined Turbidity Currents:        Aleutian Forearc, North Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Michael Underwood, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/1991
* USD 28,686.00

This project focuses on forearc sediment transport by turbidity currents. The
study area is located south of the Aleutian volcanic arc, North Pacific Ocean.
Two important sedimentologic phenomena will be addressed: (1) upslope flow of
unconfined turbidity currents, and (2) interdigitation between transverse influx
into the trench and axial flows. Upslope sediment transport is an extremely
important process to consider because it allows bypassing of bathymetric
obstructions even in the absence of large erosional features (i.e., submarine
canyons). Three independent phases of research are required to document patterns
of forearc sediment transport in convincing detail: (1) quantification of
detrital mineralogy for turbidite sands, and identification of provenance; (2)
quantification of detrital mineralogy for continental shelf sands, and
identification of provenance; (3) interpretation of bathymetric/seismic data,
together with GLORIA sonar images, as a means of charting all potential flow
paths for turbidity currents. %%% Turbidity currents represent the single most
important physical process responsible for transport of sandy epiclastic
detritus into deep-marine depositional environments. Future research on
turbidity currents should concentrate on: (1) the physical character and
hydrodynamic evolution of individual flow events; and (2) the stratigraphic
cyclicity of turbidite deposits within specific sub-environments of deposition.
The latter goal will be satisfied only through deep ocean drilling. The former
goal will be satisfied, in part, by this study.