* 8811899
* A Symposium on Marine Invertebrate Allorecognition and the  Evolution of Immunity, to be held December 27-30, 1988 in   San Francisco, California
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1989
* Virginia Scofield, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 05/31/1989
* USD 8,000.00

This proposal requests support for a symposium entitled "Marine Invertebrate
Allorecognition and the Evolution of Immunity" which will be held at the annual
meeting of the American Society of Zoologists in San Francisco on December
27-30, 1988. The symposium will bring together whole-animal biologists who study
self-recognition in invertebrates with molecular biologists whose technological
approaches to vertebrate self recognition are applicable to invertebrate
systems. The invited speakers, who are leaders in their respective fields, will
discuss basic questions regarding the evolution of vertebrate adaptive immunity
using the phylogenetic perspectives that the invertebrate allorecognition
systems offer. There are two objectives for this meeting: (1) to formulate a
consensus, using the workshop format, as to which biological questions are
common to all our research efforts, and (2) to facilitate discussion of
invertebrate models in the context and language of molecular biology and protein
chemistry. This symposium should provide important new perspectives on self-
recognition and self-defense in marine invertebrates. Enhancement of basic
knowledge in this area is important not only for its intrinsic interest, but
because, in the long term, it may provide insights into the practical problems
of maintaining the diversity of marine organisms inhabiting the oceans. In
addition, the many potential uses of marine invertebrate systems in
biotechnology has also just begun to be appreciated. The area represented in
this symposium represents an important part of the basic science foundation for
these applications.