* 8811254
* Research Initiation:  Fundamental Studies & Device          Applications of Superconductors at Rf, Microwave & MM-Wave  Frequencies (REU Supplement)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Srinivas Sridhar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 06/30/1991
* USD 74,000.00

This Research Initiation Award focusses on high frequency electromagnetic
studies of high-transition-temperature superconductors, between frequencies
covering "dc" to 75 GHz. The proposed work involves: (1) Fundamental studies of
the electromagnetic response via measurements of the surface resistance and the
penetration depth as functions of temperature, frequency and applied magnetic
field. The results will be interpreted to yield fundamental information
regarding the nature of the superconducting state, and the dynamics of vortices
and fluxoids in these materials. (2) Materials fabrication and processing in
bulk monolithic, single crystal forms and also coatings. The effects of
materials processing on the ideal high frequency response of the superconductors
will be studied. (3) Fabrication and testing of devices in bulk monolithic and
coated forms. The specific devices that will be studied are: high Q fully
superconducting cavities at microwave and mmwave frequencies, interdigital
filters, and waveguides at X-band and higher frequencies. the device performance
will be determined, correlated with expected ideal estimates, and the effects of
materials processing will be examined.