* 8811101
* Advanced Shaft Coupling Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Ian Fischer, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 08/31/1992
* USD 118,826.00

This project addresses the analytical modelling of a particular class of
mechanical shaft couplings. Such couplings are used to connect rotating shafts
which intersect at an angle. Those prevalent in practice include the universal
joint and the constant velocity joint. The latter class includes the Rzeppa
coupling which is the subject of this study. These couplings are used in a
variety of applications, most notably in the wheel drives of front wheel drive
automobiles, where transmission of constant angular rate is desired. Presently,
Rzeppa couplings are designed empirically. The general procedure is to construct
a number of prototypes embodying the wisdom of prior experience and then proof
test to determine which model should be put into production. If none is
adequate, then repeating the procedure is required. In the today's competitive
world with its demands for higher speeds, increased loads, and improved
reliability, this method is excessively expensive and time consuming. The
purpose of this study is to provide analytical procedures for the design of
Rzeppa couplings. Dual number element coordinate transformation matrix methods
will be applied to analyze its kinematic and static behavior. Specific topics
addressed herein include synthesis of pilot lever proportions, cyclic velocity
fluctuations through pilot lever manipulation, Rzeppa coupling groove geometry,
load sharing among coupling balls, general analysis methodology, and
experimental investigations. This investigation has the added feature that it
will further generalize the analysis procedures for general spatial mechanisms.