* 8811449
* Probing and Modelling Electrochemical Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1988,10/31/1990
* Wilford Hansen, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Thomas
* 10/31/1990
* USD 134,500.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of electrochemical interfaces. This research continues the
Principal Investigator's application of photoelectron and infrared reflection
spectroscopies to characterize the structure and composition of the
electrochemical interphase. Studies of the electrochemical double-layer
employing the electrode emersion technique will be performed in order to clarify
fundamental aspects of double-layer structure. These include the role of water
in the double-layer, interfacial chi potential differences, absolute half-cell
potentials, and reference levels for liquid ESCA. The studies will be correlated
with theoretical models of the emersed double-layer. The electrochemical double-
layer plays a principal role in determining the kinetics and mechanisms of
electrochemical reactions. Removal of a charged electrode from the electrolyte
leaves the very thin double-layer region principally intact, while stripping the
bulk electrolyte from the surface. This emersion process makes possible
determination of the structure and composition of the double-layer by applying
surface analytical techniques such as photoelectron and infrared spectroscopies.
Measurement of the work function of the emersed electrode surface allows
estimation of single electrode potentials.