* 8811093
* Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies of Polymer-Salt Complexes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1988,01/31/1990
* Roger Frech, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly O'Neal Moorer
* 01/31/1990
* USD 42,733.00

Long term research in Nuclear magnetic resonance studies of polymer-salt
complexes. This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long and
Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program is designed
to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at
research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the
conduct of joint research and the utilization of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. Awards
are selected on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to the applicant's
field of science, the prospective potential of the applicant for professional
growth, as well as criteria relevant to the furthering of international
cooperation in science and engineering. The program is particularly directed to
scientists and engineers who are embarking on their research careers. The
project is under the direction of Professor Roger E. Frech University of
Oklahoma, Norman OK, in collaboration with Professor H.W. Spiess, Max-Planck
Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz, West Germany. The award recommendation
provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international travel, local travel
abroad, stipend, dependents allowance, if applicable, language training, if
required, and a flat administrative allowance of $250.00 for the U.S. home
institution.