* 8811578
* Engineering Creativity Award:  Optoelectronic Multilayer    Characterization
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1988,09/28/1990
* Nancy Haegel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 09/28/1990
* USD 53,900.00

This research project is concerned with the innovative growth of new
combinations of materials and creative methods for characterization and quality
assessment of these new materials systems for use in ultra fast optoelectronic
communication and switching systems. Cadmium telluride (CaTe) layers will be
grown on gallium arsenide/silicon (GaAs/Si) substrates. The use of GaAs/Si
substrates offers the possibility of exploiting the fast optoelectronic
circuitry of BaAs and established silicon VLSI technology. Combinations of GaAs
and mercury CaTe will be investigated in the creation of a monolithic infrared
detector system. Photoluminescence (PL) which is a well known characterization
technique will be combined with new ideas to characterize the film quality and
to correlate defects with the film growth conditions. The approach centers
around spatially controlling the area where the luminescence emanates from the
sample. Photoluminescence is to be combined with electroluminescence and
geometrical arrangements of pn junctions in order to confine and control
carriers in areas of importance. The combination of luminescene techniques
provides the injection of excess carrier from different parts of the sample and
the pn junctions confine the carriers with built-in electric fields. Some new
approaches to the characterization of thin layers from the combined used of
photo and electroluminescence in unique ways can be anticipated.