* 8811906
* Ecological/Climatic Gradients on the Sevilleta
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1988,03/31/1996
* Manuel Molles, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* None
* 03/31/1996
* USD 3,025,322.00

The Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge in New Mexico is a 100,000 ha
transitional area including Great Basin, Great Plains, Chihuahuan Desert and
Mogollon conifer woodland biomes. Steep climatological, elevational, and edaphic
gradients within the site regulate biotic responses which, in turn, are mediated
by threshold effects of resource availability. Consequently, the Sevilleta is
ideal for studies of biotic responses to climatic fluctuation. This project will
support research aimed at achieving predictability of ecological change in time
and space by using experimentation and advanced technology (e.g., remote
sensing, geographical information systems, LIDAR, FTIR). Results will enhance
ecological knowledge about; 1) complex processes contribution to spatial
patterning at the 1-30,000 m scales, 2) biotic responses differing among
neighboring ecosystem types, 3) how climatological events originating in the
Pacific Ocean modify local semiarid systems, and 4) the modifying role of
animals in population and ecosystem responses to fluctuating abiotic conditions.
Emphasis is on change in heterogeneous systems and the attendant considerations
of nonlinearity, threshold effects, time lags, and the strongly scale-dependent
aspects of regulatory factors. In terms of its fundamental worth and meaning the
results from the project should be important additions to the body of ecological
knowledge and theory as well as to the better management of natural resources
and the resolution of global- scale ecological concerns, for example climate
change. A major strength of the project is the scientific group's aggressive
attitude toward identifying, testing, adapting, and utilizing newly available
technologies in an ecological research context. This approach should not only
provide a productive base within the project but also foster on impetus across
the entire national network of Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) projects.
The research team is excellent, drawing from three academic institutions, and
enjoys the cooperation of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (DOI) who are the
stewards for the Sevilleta site. Institutional facilities are quite good with
major additions and improvements planned. In all, the conditions for productive
pursuit of this research are highly conducive. The Ecosystem Studies Program
recommends strongly that six years of funding be committed to this worthwhile
addition to the LTER network of projects.