* 8811779
* The Role of Biologically Produced Structure in Deep-Sea     Community Organization
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1988,10/31/1990
* David Thistle, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/1990
* USD 39,997.00

Recent work in deep-sea, soft-substratum communities suggests that species'
abundances are strongly affected by processes at centimeter-to-millimeter scales
and that many of these processes are governed by biologically produced
structures (e.g., animal tubes). However, no mechanistic understanding of the
role of such structures in deep-sea community dynamics has been obtained. Dr.
Thistle and collaborator Dr. Eckman are evaluating mechanisms by which the 2-cm-
diameter sediment concretions built by polychaetes affect harpacticoid copepod
abundances in the San Diego Trough. In particular, their efforts will be focused
on testing responses to fluid- and particle- dynamic effects of sediment
concretions. They have used the submersible ALVIN to sample individual sediment
concretions and bare areas of the sea floor and to initiate in situ experiments.
They will complete analysis of samples, which were obtained in previous cruises.
The analysis of these samples will enable the determination the importance of
hydrodynamic and predation-refuge effects created by these structures. The
former, in particular, are likely to be especially important in the deep ocean,
because of the relatively low rates of physical disruption of sediments there.
Further, sediment concretions are comparable in size to other widespread, deep-
sea structures (e.g., ferromanganese nodules). generalizable.