* 8811722
* Spatial Price Competition and Market Share Among            Multi-Locational Corporations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1991
* Eric Sheppard, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/1991
* USD 116,865.00

In recent years, considerable attention has been paid by economic geographers
and spatial economists to the operation of spatial markets. Most of our
understandings of spatial competition assume independent entrepreneurs rather
than franchises of larger corporations. Study of the behavior of multi-
locational companies, which must simultaneously develop strategies at both
national and regional or local levels, can provide new insight into some of the
more significant yet neglected aspects of spatial competition. Such work will
ultimately make possible the development of theory which is no longer restricted
to the analysis of space economies under conditions of perfect or near perfect
competition. Specifically, Dr. Sheppard examines the relationships between
selected processes of macro-level corporate strategy and micro-level behavior of
the firm in the context of spatial competition in multi-location corporations,
typified by the gasoline distribution and retailing industry. Separating supply
side issues of distribution from demand issues of consumer behavior, he will
develop mathematical models of these relationships to provide a basis for
simulation routines. The simulations will in turn be used to examine realistic
situations. This examination of spatial price competition and market share
amongst multi-locational corporations has the potential to make major
contributions to our understanding of the spatial dynamics of economic
activities and to the development of theory in economic geography that
incorporates the institutional context of economic relations and applies to
realistic situations. It will provide a foundation in the field of economic
geography for the capability of theoretically informed international comparative
analysis.