* 8811198
* The Roles of Calcium Pulses, Waves, and Gradients in Early  Development
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Lionel Jaffe, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Brady
* 04/30/1992
* USD 228,600.00

The roles of free cytosolic calcium pulses, waves, and gradients in the early
development of ascidian eggs as well as of cellular slime molds will be
explored. The proposal is particularly concerned with the roles of calcium in
establishing developmental pattern in these systems, i.e., in ooplasmic
segregation in the Ciona or Phallusia egg; and in establishing a pattern of
prestalk and spore cells in Dictyostelium. These explorations will be carried
out in three main ways: 1) Directly visualize free calcium changes and patterns
with the aid of the photoprotein aequorin and an imaging photon detector. 2)
Specifically perturb (and thus study the roles) of these calcium patterns with
various means which will include the injection of newly synthesized weak calcium
buffers. 3) Examine the transcellular calcium currents which help produce these
free calcium patterns by using a newly developed calcium-specific vibrating
extracellular electrode. %%% The development of an early embryo is controlled by
gradients of informational molecules localized in different regions of the
unfertilized and newly fertilized egg. One of the major components involved in
establishing this information appears to be coupled to calcium distribution
itself. Dr. Jaffe will test this idea directly using reagents and detectors
originally developed in his laboratory.