* 8811067
* NBER Summer Institute-Cambridge, MA:  July-August 1988 &amp;    1989
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Geoffrey Carliner, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 152,600.00

The NBER Summer Institute brings together economists from universities,
government, and international organizations for a few days or a few weeks of
seminars, workshops, conferences and collaborative research. Last year's Summer
Institute included 435 economists from 124 universities and nonacademic
institutions and a similar number is expected to attend this summer. Special
efforts are made to include young economists. The Summer Institute is organized
into seven programs: economic fluctuations, economic history, financial markets
and monetary economics, international studies, labor studies, productivity, and
taxation. Each program has its own group of participants and its own structure.
Although there is considerable variation among the programs, a typical Summer
Institute program will last for one to three weeks, with seminars each morning
and afternoon devoted to individual research. Some programs conclude with a more
formal conference. Programs may include a variety of subjects or they may be
organized around specific topics. The Summer Institute provides a unique
opportunity for economists to work closely with others in their areas of
specialty for extended and gernerally intense periods of research. Although
numerous conferences permit researchers few hours in which to exchange ideas,
only NBER's Summer Institute lasts long enough to allow serious collaboration
among economists from several institutions. While there are of course
presentations of work nearing completion, emphasis is placed on the workshop
aspects of the program, where new ideas are raised, preliminary research ideas
are developed, and plans for joint or coordinated research efforts are
established.