* 8811227
* Regulation of Proline Synthesis in Osmotic Response
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1992
* Ronald Burton, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 10/31/1992
* USD 170,900.00

The proposed research seeks to elucidate the biochemical mechanisms by which
cells acclimate to changes in the osmolarity of their external environment. The
focus of the work will be on the regulation of proline accumulation in response
to salinity change in an intertidal marine crustacean which frequently
encounters such environmental changes. Previous work has shown that proline is
synthesized by the organism only in response to salinity increases; experiments
will now determine the metabolic step at which this regulation is exerted and
the mechanism by which the regulation is achieved. While many marine organisms
are known to accumulate proline in response to elevated salinity, the metabolic
site and mechanism of the regulation of this response has never been
demonstrated. A second aspect of the research focusses on the influence of
genetic variation on salinity response. Previous work has shown that some of the
enzymes involved in synthesizing free amino acids during salinity response are
genetically variable. By studying the physiology of different enzyme genotypes
experiments will determine if this genetic variation is important in the
adaptation of organisms to different salinity environments. Potential applied
aspects of the project involve the use of genetic variation at specific enzyme
encoding gene loci for the development of salt tolerant crustaceans for
aquaculture.