* 8811936
* Investigation of the Use of Three-Dimensional Computer      Modeling on Construction Sites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Fletcher 'Bud' Griffis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 11/30/1989
* USD 30,000.00

This expedited award for novel research is to investigate the use of three-
dimensional computer modeling on construction sites. The project is to conduct
fundamental research in the use of three- dimensional modeling as a means of
communication and construction process simulation. It will test the differences
in constructability reviews, quality of design, construction schedules,
construction planning, and construction progress reporting when accomplished
using a three-dimensional model versus traditional two-dimensional models. In
addition, it will investigate techniques for using three- dimensional models to
instruct and train construction supervisors on site to improve productivity as a
consequence of the learning curve effect. The research program is novel, in that
it combines the research strengths of the University with the best available
computer technology of the construction industry in an intimate working
relationship. This form of collaborative research is unique, but should become
the standard approach for future work in computer- integrated construction. The
research program is timely, in that the Columbia Center for Engineering and
Physical Science Research provides a unique experimental laboratory for
collaboration between University researchers and design and construction firms
in the Metropolitan area. The Center is currently under design and will commence
construction in 1988. Finally, the research program is not merely a general
academic study of computer technology but rather identifies scientific
hypotheses that can be experimentally verified or refuted. This proposal covers
the detailed design of the experiments for empirical confirmation during the
construction of the actual project. The results of the study will provide
definitive conclusions that can be immediately applied to advance the technology
and productivity of the U.S. construction industry.