* 8811036
* Biochemical and Molecular Analysis of Mutations Caused by   Transposable Element Insertions in the bz Locus of Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Oliver Nelson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 09/30/1991
* USD 232,698.00

A number of provocative leads, which concern the effect of transposable element
insertions in the bz locus of maize on the expression of functional (Bz) alleles
and which have arisen during our research of the past three years will be
investigated. The research will involve bz-m13 (an insertion of a 2.2 kb
defective Spm (dSpm) in the second exon of a Bz allele) and the change of state
derivatives therefrom as well as Bz-wm, which resulted from a Ds insertion 63
base pairs upstream from the transcription start site in a BZ allele, and the
stable Bz revertant from Bz-wm. The areas in which we expect to derive basic
information concerning control of gene expression are: 1) the effects of
perturbation of a 5' regulatory sequence, which modulates the quantity of
UDPglucose:flavonoid glucosyl transferase (UFGT, which is the enzyme encoded by
Bz alleles) and which probably has a role in tissue-specific gene expression as
well, by extra nucleotide or small deletions resulting from excision of the Ds
transposable element present in Bz-wm; 2) the role of an antisense dSpm message
in reducing the transcription or processing of the pre-mRNA in the CS12 allele
and whether this antisense dSpm message is transcribed from the dSpm inserted in
CS12 or from a dSpm elsewhere in the genome; 3) the flexibility of the maize
pre-mRNA processing system in dealing with transcripts containing a dSpm and the
sequence signals to which the system responds most strongly; and 4) the effect
of having two large dSpms inserted within 363 bp of each other in exons 1 and 2
of the bz locus in the CS10 alleleon of gene expression and possible chromosome
breakage as well as the possibility that the two insertions, which may be
identical, excise at different times in development when an active Spm is
present. If the insertions are shown to be identical, sequences flanking the
transposable elements may be the determining factor. Molecular genetics has made
it possible to learn a great deal about the structure of transposable elements
and their effect upon gene expression, usually through insertion into a
structural gene. However, it is becoming apparent that more subtle interactions
maybe occuring between transposable elements and the genomes in which they
reside. Studies such as this one will help to clarify the situation.