* 8811713
* Collaborative Research:  Development of Triad Junction in   Skeletal Muscle
* BIO,DCB
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* John Sutko, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/29/1992
* USD 276,200.00

The long term goals of this project are to understand the molecular mechanisms
underlying the formation and function of the triad junction in muscle cells.
This is a junction between plasma and sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) membranes that
is thought to have a critical role in coupling excitation and muscle
contraction. This research will establish the developmental history of a key
element of the triad junction, the "foot" protein in embryonic and neonatal
chick skeletal muscle, in order to gain insight into the role of this protein in
junction formation, muscle morphogenesis and the biogenesis of SR membranes. The
plant alkaloid, ryanodine, binds specifically to the "foot" protein; this
compound is, thus, a useful experimental probe of this protein. The
developmental time course of the appearance of the "foot" or ryanodine-binding
protein (RBP) and of the manifestation of its ability to bind ryanodine and to
alter the calcium permeability of SR membranes will be examined. The appearance
of the "foot" protein will be measured by specific tritiated ryanodine binding,
and detection of the 400-500 kDa RBP using SDS-PAGE and RBP specific antibodies.
The appearance of "foot" protein function will be assayed by measurement of
intracellular calcium transients and contractile activity. These events will be
correlated with the development of a mature muscle morphology and SR function in
pectoral muscle from embryonic and neonatal chicks and primary cultures of
embryonic muscle as visualized using electron microscopy and immunocytochemical
techniques. The results of this research should contribute substantially to our
understanding of the mechanism by which excitation of the surface membrane of a
striated muscle cell triggers calcium release from an intracellular compartment,
the sarcoplasmic reticulum, as the key step in initiation of muscle contraction.