* 8811026
* Attention and Preattention in an Instance Theory of         Automatization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Gordon Logan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/29/1992
* USD 213,511.00

Automaticity is an important phenomenon in everyday mental life. Many routine
activities are performed quickly and effortlessly with little thought, in short,
automatically. Over the last decade, psychologists have learned a lot about its
empirical characteristics, but automaticity is poorly understood theoretically.
This research addresses a new theory of automaticity, testing its assumptions
and comparing its predictions against previous approaches. The theory assumes
that automatic processing is based on direct-access, single-step memory
retrieval, as when 4 pops into mind as the sum of 2+2 or the route home comes to
mind as we enter our cars at the end of the day. Practice is important because
it strengthens memory and makes it more reliable, so that performance on a well-
practiced task can depend entirely on memory retrieval. The assumptions about
strengthening memory allow the theory to predict the form of the learning curve
and the reduction of verifiability with practice, which are basic effects that
all theories must predict. The research examines the role of attention in
encoding into memory and retrieval from memory. The theory assumes that whatever
is attended will be encoded into memory, which implies certain context effects
not predicted by other theories. Specifically, it implies that memory will
contain a trace of the person's attentional history with a stimulus, associating
the different things the person attended to in responding to the stimulus. That
trace will be different depending on the attentional requirements of the task.
Tasks in which attention can be focused directly on the stimulus will have
weaker context effects than tasks in which the person must search for the
stimulus, dividing attention among several possible stimuli. Previous approaches
predict no effect of context regardless of the conditions of attention. The
theory assumes that attention to a stimulus causes whatever was associated with
it in the past to be retrieved. This is the basis of the speed and
effortlessness of automatic processing. In addition, it implies that knowledge
about the stimulus is available only after the person attends to it. Thus,
directing attention toward a familiar stimulus should "turn on" automatic
processing and directing attention away from it should "turn it off." This
contrasts with previous approaches, which assume that automatic processing
becomes available prior to attention, before attention is focused on the
stimulus.