* 8811601
* Engineering Creativity Award:  Efficient Near Surface       Aquitards to Prevent Entry of Hydrocarbona into Shallow     Confined Aquifers
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/1988,03/31/1990
* Paul Roberts, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 03/31/1990
* USD 30,000.00

This research project resides in the field of geotechnical engineering and
groundwater resources. The proposed problem addresses the efficiency of near
surface aquitards (a relatively impermeable layer comprised of glacial sill or
alluvial silt) to retard the entry of hydrocarbons into shallow confined
aquifers. The proposed effort involves the study of the pattern and parameters
of immiscible (non-mixable) fluid flow near the interface between two strata
with moderately dissimilar permeabilities (hydraulic conductivity). A hydraulic
gradient causing lateral flow is implanted in the lower, more permeable
straturm. the effects of relative permeability and varying artesian pressure on
the movement of immisable fluids at strata interfaces and the resulting vertical
distribution of the containment within the aquifer are the central focus of this
investigation. the subsurface environment will be modelled in a clear
rectangular container as a confined aquifer. To simulated localized
contamination of the confined aquifer, the penetration of an immiscible fluid
(probably kerosene for safety reasons) will be permitted to penetrate a small
area of the aquitard. This study will extend flow analysis to stratified
subsurface environment subject to fluctuating flow pressures and velocities
which better approximates in-situ conditions.