* 8811563
* Engineering Creativity Award:  Biodegradable Polymers for   Orthopedic Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Kam Leong, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 02/28/1991
* USD 60,000.00

The primary objectives of this research project are the synthesis and
characterization of a new class of biodegradable, phosphorous-containing
polymers. The biological, chemical, and mechancial properties of these polymers
will be evaluated to determine their potential for orthopedic implant
applications. The synthesis technique involves the polycondensation of a diol,
the main component of the backbone, and a phosphate compound which contains a
pendant molecule. The two are dissolved and blended together. After separation
into an organic layer, the polymer is washed and quenched in a petroleum ether.
The final product is a clear, white powder. A wider variety of polymers can be
anticipated by further changing the components and degrees of cross-linking. The
polymers will be characterized chemically in several ways. Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy, gel permeation chromatography and differential scanning
calorimetry are characterization techniques that will be used. A comprehensive
model will be considered to explain relationships suggested by the results of
testing. Such factors as the mechanism of polymer particle release to the
physiological environment, the effects of certain biological agents on the
degradation process, the ability of the polymer to induce significant tissue in
growth, and the degradation and eventual performance of the implant will be
investigated. A wide range of medical orthopedic applications is possible: less
rigid fixation plates, joint stabilty with fixation rods, resurfacing materials
to induce regeneration, and prosthetic ligaments and tendons.