* 8811769
* Development of an Expert Microscope System for 3-D Mapping  of Neurons
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Edmund Glaser, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 02/28/1990
* USD 39,211.00

This project will develop a neuron-tracking microscope system that utilizes
built in knowledge of neuronal morphology to perform three-dimensional neuron
tracing with minimal human assistance. It will be accomplished by integrating
newly created expert system and computer vision software with a computer driven
video light microscope. The software will be designed for an existing Zeiss -
Sun 3/160C video imaging computer microscope system. The expert microscopy
system (EMS) will acquire a depth sequence of images of the neuron and its
neighborhood. The sequence will include all of the neuron's branching structure.
The EMS will analyze the images, treating them just as the human would treat the
ordinary visual images he obtains while tracing the same neuron. Human
assistance will be called upon at the outset of data acquisition in order to
guide the system to the neuron in question, and then later only if the system is
incapable of making a reliable decision based upon its existing knowledge base.
The system will produce 3-D neuronal maps containing all the structural data of
interest. These will permit computer graphic reconstructions (including dynamic
rotations) as well as numerical morphometric analyses. They will also permit
spatial analyses of populations of neurons. The EMS is intended to be capable of
performing at least as well as a trained human using the same knowledge base.
The software will be designed to be device independent and therefore
transportable to other imaging systems. It will also be applicable to the new
high resolution scanning confocal microscopes. The architectural organization of
the nervous system is highly complex, with one nerve cell making numerous
interconnections with other cells. Presently, neuroscientists must mechanically
trace the course of a neuron shown in microscopic images. The software to be
developed will automatically perform this task, saving substantial man-hours.
This capability will accelerate the acquisition of data to be analyzed for
underlying patterns, leading to greater understanding of the relationship of
structure to function.