* 8811027
* Analysis of Duplicate Loci for Orange Pericarp in Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Myron Neuffer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1991
* USD 140,000.00

From previous work on mutant induction in maize with EMS, one ear was found
which segregated for kernels with orange pigmentation in the pericarp (Neuffer
and Chang, 1986). The segregation ratio was 15 normal to 1 orange, indicating
duplicate unlinked factors (designated orp1 and orp2). These factors have been
located to chromosome arm; orp1 on 4S and orp2 on 10L (Neuffer, Beckett and
Wright, 1987). Since the pericarp is maternal, diffusion into the pericarp of a
substance from the underlying filial tissue of the doubly homozygous recessive
combination is implied. The pigmentation is restricted to the pericarp,
suggesting that thesubstance which diffuses into the pericarp is not the pigment
assuch but rather a colorless precursor which is converted afterentry into the
pericarp. Plants from mutant kernels growpoorly, are somewhat adherent and have
thus far died beforereproducing. The mutant kernels have a somewhat
flouryendosperm, perhaps a secondary effect of the biochemical lesion. The
research proposed is to biochemically characterize thismutant through the
identification of the orange pigment andprecursor and through rescue by
exogenous feeding. Linkage analysis of both factors will be undertaken as well
as transposon tagging of the orp2 locus. Cloning and characterization of the
locus and its message is the ultimate goal. Preliminary data suggest that this
mutant could be a tryptophan auxotroph. If the biochemical characterization of
this corn mutant supports that hypothesis, this will be the first true
auxotrophic defined in a commercially important plant and as such, this work
could have tremendous impact bothat a fundamental and practical level.