* 8811884
* Successional Dynamics and Spatial Patterning in Ecosystems  at the Prairie-Forest Border
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1989,04/30/1995
* Eville Gorham, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 04/30/1995
* USD 2,589,026.00

This project represents the renewal of the Cedar Creek Natural History Area
Long-Term Ecological Research project. Long-term observation and experimentation
will be used to examine the controls of successional dynamics and spatial
patterning in ecosystems at the prairie-forest boundary. The investigators will
build on the detailed data record already accumulated in a series of permanent
observational and experimental studies in old field and will expand the project
into a range of non- successional habitats. Studies will focus on hypotheses
concerning the direct, indirect, and feedback effects of various species and
ecosystem elements on each other, and how they control both successional
dynamics and spatial patterning in non-successional ecosystems. The main
processes to be studied are (1) controls of carbon and nitrogen dynamics in
soils: (2) controls of primary production and plant species composition; (3)
controls of herbivore dynamics and abundances; and (4) the impacts of
disturbances such as fire, gopher mounds and climatic change. The 6-year-running
data sets already collected on physical factors, soils plants, and herbivores
have allowed the investigators to address some major questions, but it will
become increasingly unique and powerful with each additional year of
observational and experimental data. The generality of on-site research will be
tested by performing a series of comparisons and syntheses across the LTER
network. Institutional support for the research is solid. Collaborative
arrangements with two young scientists from Idaho State University should
continue to be productive. The project team is a good one. In addition to
providing fundamental insight on the processes that are generative to ecological
succession the project should also produce significant implications for
agricultural management since agriculture must interact with the natural
ecological matrix in which it is embedded.