* 8811330
* Ethics and Values in Technology Development: A Case Study ofCritical Care Monitoring
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1988,03/31/1992
* Valerie Mike, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 03/31/1992
* USD 98,738.00

The spiraling cost of health care in the United States--due in large measure to
the explosive growth of medical technology--is a major national problem. Yet
many of these technologies have not been properly evaluated. They may in fact be
ineffective or even harmful, but once a technology has become part of accepted
practice, the threat of malpractice suits alone tends to mandate its continued
use regardless of its actual efficacy. With support from this grant, Dr. Mike is
undertaking a case study which examines factors in the introduction and
diffusion of a perinatal technology, that of transcutaneous blood gas monitoring
(TCM). Her study will include: a literature review concerning the development of
scientific evidence in support of TCM; an examination of the available data to
establish the pattern of diffusion of TCM; interviews with company managers,
bioengineers, and others involved in R&D and marketing; and a review of the role
of regulation and reimbursement. In the course of this study, she will identify
at each stage the ethical and value dimensions of the process of development and
diffusion of this technology. This study of factors outside of the health care
community is part of a larger project which will examine diffusion of perinatal
technologies. By obtaining clearer insights into the complex diffusion process
of these expensive new medical technologies, this case study will aid public
discussion and should ultimately contribute to more efficient health care
planning for the nation.