* 8811511
* An Unusual Chlorophyll a Derivative in Tropical             Phytoplankton:  Artifact or Real?
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Maria Vernet, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1990
* USD 28,898.00

A derivative of chlorophyll has been detected in tropical North Atlantic and
North Pacific in recent years. This is significant because the derivative was
found in concentrations equal or higher to chlorophyll a. The derivative also
has similar optical characteristics and thus this finding may alter our
interpretation of chlorophyll as a biomass marker. This support will enable Dr.
Vernet to isolate, identify and begin a preliminary characterization of this
chlorophyll a derivative by using a combination of techniques. These include;
high performance liquid chromatography, absorption and fluorescence spectra, and
high resolution mass spectrometry. Accessory pigments associated with the
chlorophyll derivative will be estimated by chromatography and in vivo
fluorescence spectra. Also, the photosynthetic activity of the plankton fraction
rich in this chlorophyll derivative will be determined using in vivo
fluorescence excitation spectra and 14C labeled chlorophyll. The combination of
these methods should establish the authenticity of this altered chlorophyll in
marine phytoplankton and its activity with respect to chlorophyll a. Microscopic
plants suspended in the surface layer of the ocean are responsible for most of
the ocean's biological production, and these plants contain pigments for
absorbing sunlight just as their terrestrial counterparts do. Pigments such as
chlorophyll a have long been used to quantify marine phytoplankton through
direct chemical analysis of the chlorophyll present in a given body of water.
Dr. Vernet will investigate an unusual pigment that has been discovered in
tropical water that is chemically similar to chlorophyll a. Because chlorophyll
a is used extensively to estimate plant biomass in biological oceanography, the
potential impact of this recently discovered pigment on our interpretation of
surface ocean biology is substantial. Through chemical and biological studies in
association with a recognized expert in the field, (Dr. W. Gieskes), Dr. Vernet
will determine if this unusual pigment can also be used as an indicator of plant
biomass. Dr. Vernet is very qualified to carry out this study and significant
benefit to our understanding of plant pigments in ocean water will result.