* 8811077
* Characterization of Cis- and Trans-acting Factors RegulatingRoot-Specific Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1992
* Mark Conkling, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 09/30/1992
* USD 268,200.00

This is a proposal to study the regulation of organ-specific gene expression in
plants. The mechanisms are most easily conceptualized as trans-acting factors
that interact with some cis-acting sequence determinants. In this proposal we
detail experiments designed to molecularly clone and characterize both cis-
acting and trans-acting factors responsible for organ-specific gene expression
in tobacco. Sytems allowing the in vitro purification and manipulation of genes
and their subsequent reintroduction into cells are required. the totipotency of
plants and existence of efficient transformation systems make plants excellent
model systems for such studies. Tobacco genomic clones that have been isolated
are expressed at high levels specifically in either leaves or roots. Putative
regulatory regions from these genes will be fused to a reporter gene and these
constructions transformed into tobaco cells via Agrobacterium-mediated vectors.
After plant regeneration, the organ-specific expression of the reporter gene
will be determined. Some of the regulatory regions are likely to confer organ-
specific gene expression and will be further analyzed. A generalized cloning
strategy will be developed that allows the isolation of cDNA clones encoding
proteins that bind particular DNA sequences. A system in which the precise
limits of the DNA binding sequence need not be known has been sought. In fact,
regions of several hundred base pairs may be used. The selection system exploits
an observation that the binding of a protein between an Upstream Activating
Sequence (UAS) and the GAL1 gene of yeast interrupts GAL1 expression. With this
system cDNA libraries may be screened for specific trans-acting factors. This
system may be used in concert with defined cis-acting sequences to identify and
characterize trans-acting factors responsible for organ-specific gene
expression. Although all cells of an organism contain the same DNA, it is clear
that genes are expressed selectively in different cells. Some situations have
been defined that implicate specific DNA regions, named enhancers, and specific
factors which interact with those enhancer regions as controlling regions and
factors for such differential expression. However, the development of a system
as described above could vastly increase the rate of obtaining such information.