* 8811058
* Magnitude of the Carbonate Dissolution Recycling Flux from  Shallow Marine Carbonate Sediments:  Evaluation from Pore   Fluid and Sediment Geochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1989,11/08/1989
* Lynn Walter, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 11/08/1989
* USD 91,045.00

This project will investigate pore fluid and sediment geochemistry of shallow
marine carbonate sediments from Florida Bay in order to assess their
significance as recycling sites for calcium carbonate and organic matter.
Results of a pilot study suggest that, contrary to prior assumptions,
significant carbonate dissolution occurs in sediment pore fluids, driven by
carbonic acid liberated from organic matter oxidation during sulfate reduction.
The expanded investigation will evaluate this process across a wider range of
environments and water depths than were accessible in the pilot study. The pore
fluid chemistry (emphasis on Ca/Cl, degree of sulfate reduction, and carbonic
acid system parameters) will be determined and sulfate reduction rates measured
experimentally. Sediment organic carbon contents and carbon isotopic
compositions of pore fluids will be determined to better constrain controls and
consequences of sulfate reduction. Results will provide a rigorous assessment of
the role shallow carbonate shelf deposits play in the oceanic cycles of calcium
carbonate and organic matter. %%% The dissolution of calcium carbonate has long
been thought to occur in deep water. The results of the pilot project, however,
prove that much dissolution occurs in shallow water. This project will collect
sedimentary cores from Florida Bay and begin geochemical analyses of the
sediments immediately after their collection. This study will expand the
knowledge of this important geochemical process to a new environment at greater
depth to examine the role of other environmental parameters on the process.