* 8811299
* REU: History of Southern Hemisphere Atmospheric Circulation:The Indian Ocean Record
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1992
* David Rea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 10/31/1992
* USD 251,294.00

This project will construct whole-Cenozoic record of eolian deposition from ODP
Leg 121 drillsites in the eastern Indian Ocean. That record will reveal the
history, on tectonic timescales, of Southern Hemisphere atmospheric circulation
intensity and of patterns of continental (largely Australian) aridity. Further
the data will link the entire late Cretaceous to recent eolian record to the
history of the ocean and cryosphere based on isotopic and other proxy indicators
determined from the same core, and sometimes the same samples. There are several
specific questions or events to be investigated. The first of these is the
nature of any changes in atmospheric circulation across the Cretaceous-Tertiary
boundary. Secondly, to delineate the Southern Hemisphere record of the important
change in atmospheric circulation that occurs in the Northern Hemisphere at the
Paleocene-Eocene boundary. Third, examine significant changes in Southern
Hemisphere atmospheric circulation that occur in conjunction with the latest
Eocene - early Oligocene polar cooling and changes in Antarctic ice volume. In
this regard the fact that wind intensity is another indication of the planetary
temperature gradient means that the data will place further constraints on the
ice-volume vs. temperature discussions. %%% The effects of paleoclimatic changes
during the last 60 million years on atmospheric circulation may be determined
from changing patterns of wind-blown particles in deep-sea sediments. This
project will utilize the eolian material in drill cores from the Indian Ocean to
infer shifting wind patterns that may be linked to climate changes. Because the
atmosphere is very sensitive to climate, these paleocirculation results will
provide a monitor of paleoclimatic changes in the Southern Hemisphere. This
information will be very important in modelling studies of the Indian Ocean
response to Antarctic glaciation, uplift of the Tibetan Plateau, and the effect
of the Northern hemisphere glaciation.