* 8811378
* Embryonic Axis Determination by Localized RNA Sequences
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Klaus Kalthoff, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1991
* USD 160,000.00

In preliminary experiments with Chironomus eggs, a bioassay for anterior
determinant activity has been established. The activity is necessary for head
and thorax formation. It is localized anteriorly in the egg and is associated
with a relatively small (250-500nt) cytoplasmic poly(A)+RNA. More narrowly
defined size fractions containing the activity will be isolated by gel
electrophoresis and used to prepare a size-restricted cDNA library. If sense RNA
transcribed in vitro from this entire library is active in the bioassay, the
library will be subdivided progressively until individual sequences with
anterior determinant activity are identified. Alternatively, the bioassay will
be combined with a hybrid-depletion procedure. The principle of this procedure
is to selectively remove certain RNA sequences from a biologically active
complex mixture of RNA molecules. This is accomplished by solution hybridization
with cloned cDNA and subsequent digestion with RNase H. These steps have been
tested in preliminary experiments and can be carried out with batches of several
hundred cDNA clones at a time. If the depleted RNA mixture is no longer active,
then the previous activity must have resided in one or more of the removed RNA
sequences. These can then be identified by progressive subdivision of the batch
of cDNA clones used for depletion. The Chironomus RNA sequences identified as
anterior determinants will be compared to similar sequences in other organisms,
in particular to known Drosophila transcripts involved in defining the
anteroposterior polarity. %%% It appears that the earliest information about the
polarity of an organism in laid down in the egg cytoplasm. By the time an egg is
fertilized, it is already determined which will be the head and tail end of the
organism. Dr. Kalthoff is exploring how this positional information is laid out
in the egg and what molecules contain this information. He is using insects for
the model system in which to carry out this investigation due to the fact that
there are mutants available in insects which affect this aspect of pattern
formation.