* 8812702
* A Panel Study of Environmental and Organizational Decline
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 07/31/1991
* USD 124,015.00

How organizations respond to declining resources and opportunities is crucial to
understanding the way organizations develop over time. This study examines the
interplay between organizational structures, organizational decline, and the
strategic response to that decline. It focuses on the types of constraints
within the organization itself that precluded certain strategic responses to
environmental decline and thus contribute to organizational inertia. Dr.
Galaskiewicz addresses specifically the actions of nonprofit organizations
located in the Twin Cities of Minneapolis-St. Paul. Nonprofit organizations have
faced severe cutbacks in federal support. The goal of this study is to
understand why some non-profit organization, in the face of these cutbacks,
pursued retrenchment strategies, while other pursued new funding sources,
increased prices for current goods and services, or else engaged in public
relations campaigns. The hypothesis is that the choice of strategy depends upon
the organization's product line, the power structure within the organization,
the organization's culture, the availability of slack resources, and the
specificity of assets. The study draws on existing surveys of 201 nonprofit
organizations, representatives of which were interviewed in 1981 and 1984. It
involves a new round of interviews, in order to create a panel survey of these
organizations that will permit the analysis of changes over time. A second focus
of the study involves the determinants of the level of corporate giving. By
interviewing representatives of publicly held business corporations
headquartered in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metro area the study will shed light
on why, under environmental conditions of tight resources, corporate
philanthropy has in fact increased since 1980. Corporations in the Twin Cities
are a good case in point since their levels of corporate philanthropy are among
the highest in the nation. The hypothesis is that contributions will be greater
if an ethic of social responsibility has become part of the corporate culture,
and that this should be independent of a firm's market position, executives'
ties to local elites, and profitability. This research examines some important
and timely problems involving the linkages, in the form of philanthropy, that
develop between corporations and nonprofit groups in urban communities. But it
uses the specific instances of philanthropy and nonprofit groups to examine
broader issues involving organizations more generally. Accordingly, it should
produce valuable insights on the processes of organizational decline and
rentrenchment.