* 8812851
* Laser Fluorescence Studies of Interfacial Diffusional       Processes (REU Supplement)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/1988,03/31/1991
* Ronald Neuman, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/1991
* USD 133,700.00

An advanced laser fluorescence apparatus is employed to determine the surface or
translational diffusion coefficients of fluorescent-labeled probes in
monomolecular films at air-water interfaces using fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching. The effects of molecular packing, temperature, and various ions
on the translational mobility in single and double hydrocarbon-chain surfactant
systems are investigated. The fluorescence-recovery-after-photobleaching
approach avoids many of the problems associated with the radiotracer technique
for measuring surface diffusion. This experimental technique also permits one to
extend the study of surface diffusion to interfacial systems previously
inaccessible to study by the radiotracer method. In addition, one is able to
distinguish between flow and diffusional transport processes occurring in
monomolecular films. The procedure provides, for the first time, reliable
experimental values of the surface diffusion coefficient to test a recently
developed theoretical model of surface diffusion and to elucidate the nature of
two- dimensional mass transfer at fluid/fluid interfaces. The results of this
research have applicability to a wide range of areas, including pulp and paper
processing. Reliable values of the surface diffusion coefficient are needed for
use in a variety capillary waves and the stability of thin films which, in turn,
are very important to evaluating and understanding foam problems in the pulp and
paper industry. Surface mobility is important in the stability of foam; however,
experimental determinations of this parameter are virtually nonexistent. This
research on interfacial mass transfer is directed to overcoming this serious
limitation; when combined with interfacial rheological measurements, it will
assist in advancing the understanding of foams and the development of improved
foam inhibitors and foam breakers.