* 8812989
* Provision of Growth Chambers and Greenhouse Renovation for  Blandy Farm
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Edward Connor, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 01/31/1991
* USD 30,000.00

The Blandy Experimental Farm is a 700-acre field research station of the
University of Virginia. It is comprised of a mosaic of old fields, woodlots,
pasture, cropland, and at its center, the State Arboretum of Virginia. Research
projects underway at the Farm focus on various aspects of the population and
community ecology of plants and their insect and mammalian herbivores. While no
agricultural research is conducted at the Farm, crop plants and their insect
pests have been used to test hypotheses of general ecological importance. The
Farm is well suited to support research examining patterns or processes at
several spatial scales such as the movement of nutrients and organisms between
different habitats or the interactions of individual plants or animals occurring
at the level of the local neighborhood. The Farm is eminently suited for
manipulative field experiments in old field or forest habitats, or in
experimental plantings or gardens. This project will provide funds to make
improvements to an existing greenhouse and to purchase two controlled
environmental chambers. With the additional greenhouse space and controlled
environment chambers on-site, Blandy Farm will be able to provide researchers
with the facilities to perform experiments under three levels of environmental
control: field, greenhouse, and growth chamber.