* 8812401
* Flicker and Flicker Interactions in Human Vision
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/1988,07/31/1992
* Donald Macleod, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/1992
* USD 140,002.00

Color vision in humans depends on particular receptor cells called cones in the
retina of the eye. One population of cones, known as the short-wavelength cones
or S-cones is most sensitive to light in the blue region of the spectrum; others
are the medium-wavelength or M-cones, and long-wavelength or L-cones, most
sensitive to red. Cones contribute to two conceptual channels of information
leading to visual perception. Intensity of light stimuli is signalled in the
luminance channel, and color of light is signalled in the chromatic channel.
Sorting out the relative contributions of the different kinds of receptors to
these different channels has been an important problem. This project will
examine the temporal properties of the chromatic and luminance contributions. A
human subject will set flicker of a colored test light to be at just the
threshold of visible flickering. The frequency or the intensity of the flicker,
or the background, or a second stimulus that tends to mask or augment the
flicker of the first, can all be varied. Using very intense lights, this lab
already discovered that S- cones can contribute to the luminance channel. Fast
responses to light intensity apparently use a brisk pathway to a luminance
channel, while slower responses to color use a sluggish pathway to a chromatic
channel. The current project will asses the relative prominence and the temporal
properties of the two pathways at more normal light levels, and try to determine
if the S-cone contribution to luminance is important at these lower levels. This
work uses innovative techniques and methodology for delivering and analyzing
pulsing stimuli, and results from this work will be very important to theories
of color vision, to commercial engineering measurements of colored lights, and
to understanding human vision in general.