* 8812902
* Exploitation of Modulation Properties For Blind Adaptive    Signal Processing
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1992
* William Gardner, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/1992
* USD 261,338.00

Research is being conducted to develop and evaluate algorithms that exploit the
properties of randomly modulated sine-wave and pulse-train signals to accomplish
detection and time-difference-of-arrival (TDOA) estimation, phase-array
direction-of-arrival (DOA) estimation and beam/null-steering signal extraction,
and periodically time-variant signal correction. Both single-platform and
multiple-platform reception is being considered. The properties being exploited
include the spectral self-coherence that results from cyclostationarity, and
periodic or constant modulus properties. The algorithms being studied perform
blind adaptive signal processing which circumvents the need for training
signals, pilot signals, preambles, knowledge of DOA, and so on, which are
typically required for conventional adaptive processing. The detection and TDOA
algorithms under investigation use FFT-based measurements of auto- and cross-
spectral correlation to perform signal- selective detection and TDOA estimation.
The phase-array algorithms use singular-value-decomposition and projection of
cyclic correlation matrices to accomplish signal-selective DOA estimation and to
accomplish beam/null-steering signal extraction by performing spectral self-
coherence restoral. The signal correction algorithms use both carrier-modulus
and base-band-modulus restoral to adapt periodically time-variant (frequency-
shifting) filters for cochannel interference rejection, and correction of
multipath and other distortion. Some algorithms employ both self-coherence
restoral and modulus restoral. The a priori information required by all the
algorithms being investigated is knowledge of at least one frequency of
cyclostationarity - typically for the signal of interest - such as a baud rate
or carrier frequency and, in some cases, knowledge of such frequencies for both
the signal of interest and interfering signals. The research being conducted is
based on both theoretical analysis and computer simulations. This research
focusses on significant problems and is being conducted by a well qualified
researcher. Support is highly recommended.