* 8812986
* Nuclear Reaction Mechanisms, International Conference in    Calcutta, India, and Indo-U.S. Workshop, Bangalore, India,  January 3-13, 1989, Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1989
* Harry Holmgren, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1989
* USD 47,400.00

Description: This project supports attendance of 12 U.S. scientists at the
International Conference on Nuclear Reaction Mechanism to be held in Calcutta,
India at the Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics on January 3-9, 1989, and to
participate in a U.S.-Indo Workshop to identify future research areas in the
field. The principal organizer of the Conference is Dr. Suprokash Mukherjee of
the Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics. The principal investigator organizing
travel on the U.S. side is Dr. Harry Holmgren of the Department of Physics and
Astronomy, University of Maryland. All the U.S. participants have been invited
to present talks on recent developments in their specialties. The international
nature of the Conference is clear in that the advisory committee has
representatives from 16 nations. The timing of the Conference is also
particularly appropriate as the field of nuclear reactions has generated large
amounts of experimental results from new heavy ion facilities. The Conference
will allow for the sharing of these results and discussion of the direction
research should follow. Scope: The project continues the long tradition of
collaboration between U.S. and Indian scientists in the field of nuclear
physics. The outcome of the workshop is expected to enhance scientific
collaboration between the two countries in this basic science area.