* 8812471
* Dissertation Research: Visual Scanning During Information   Processing in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Louise Hainline, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1990
* USD 3,675.00

When a person looks at a visual stimulus, all the information in the scene is
not taken in in one glance. Rather, the person scans the visual scene in a
series of "snapshots" (individual pauses or fixations of the eye), while
sequentially collecting the information from which the brain constructs a
unified experience of the world. How this scanning takes place depends, to some
extent, on what the person already knows, and how sophisticated the person is
cognitively. But how does a baby, whose visual system is immature and who has
neither extensive experience in the world nor highly developed mental abilities,
scan the world? Can the way in which babies look at visual stimuli be used as a
way to understand their mental processes? This research will explore the
relationship between visual scanning and information processing during infancy.
Babies will be shown one pattern repeatedly, until their interest in this
stimulus wanes (a process called "habituation"). Each baby's pattern of scanning
eye movements and fixations during the habituation process will be recorded
using specialized television equipment. The baby will then be shown a new
pattern, different from the first. Usually, if the new pattern is distinctive
enough, the baby's attention to the new stimulus increases again, in a process
termed "dishabituation". This research will examine the details of visual
scanning during habituation and dishabituation to see whether differences in
scanning across phases of the experiment reveal the expectations that the babies
have developed about what they are looking at. The results of the research will
contribute to our knowledge of how babies learn about the world around them.