* 8812390
* The Fabrication of Multicomponent Oxide Films by Computer-  Controlled Dual Ion Beam Sputter Deposition
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Robert Pascal, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Koop Lammertsma
* 10/31/1991
* USD 176,190.00

This grant in the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program provides support
for the research of Dr. Robert Pascal, Jr., Princeton University. The work is
focused on the structures of molecules in which two relatively unreactive
molecular entities are forced to be very close together. Groups of atoms which
are forced in this way to occupy a limited space have unusual behavior, both in
terms of their chemical reactivity and their physical properties. In one class
of target molecules, methine, amine, and ammonium groups will be pressed near
the periphery of the pi electron clouds of aromatic rings; in a second class
these same groups will be projected toward the center of the rings. In the first
case, the substituents on the "target" phenyl groups will be varied to produce
aromatic rings which are relatively electron-rich or electron-deficient. The
extent of interaction of the functional groups with the ring should vary with
this electronic substitution. In the second class of compounds, increased
interactions will be achieved not by the variation of aromatic ring
substituents, but by synthesizing a series of compounds in which the distance
between the functional group and ring is systematically reduced. By balancing
the forces due to intramolecular strain in these compounds with the degree of
nucleophilicity or electrophilicity of the ring, structures may be observed with
partial bonding between these groups. Such structures should be interpretable as
analogs of transition states (which are not themselves observable) in the
nucleophilic and electrophilic substitution reactions of aromatic compounds.