* 8812933
* A Panel Study Analysis of Claiming Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1988,04/30/1991
* E. Allan Lind, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 04/30/1991
* USD 195,000.00

Many theories of legal behavior and legal processes include implicit or explicit
assumptions about how people come to be involved with the law or about the needs
that legal institutions fulfill. Because disputed claims are the raw material of
the civil justice system, an understanding of the claiming process goes to the
heart of who uses the legal system, under what circumstances, for what purposes,
and with what consequences. One of the truisms in the study of law and society
is that there are enormous numbers of potential claims that are never pursued.
Despite the importance of claiming behavior for legal theory and policy,
relatively little empirical work has addressed the topic since existing data
lack the time-based comparisons needed for definitive tests of what causes some
people to claim compensation while other similarly injured people do not. The
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) recently awarded a grant to the
Institute for Civil Justice at RAND for a study of accidental injury
compensation that provides an opportunity to test some of these issues. Drs.
Hensler and Lind will conduct a panel study that will be coordinated with the
DHHS survey. They will reinterview 400 of the respondents in the DHHS survey in
order to gather pre-claim and post-claim measures of a number of factors that
might drive claiming behavior. A control group of 100 injured individuals will
be interviewed a single time to test for reactivity effects. By using the
approach of reinterviewing a sample of injured individuals over time, it will be
possible to determine the sequence of events such as injury progression, loss
accrual, and acquisition of knowledge about the legal process that leads to
claiming. Several models of claiming behavior will be tested including a fault-
responsibility-equity model, economic models, and a procedural model. The
results of the analyses will be used to develop more integrative theories of
claiming. The DHHS study will provide a nationally representative and rich
database on the characteristics and economic and social consequences of injuries
using a cross-sectional approach. This grant, using the panel study approach,
will provide opportunities for comparing the predictive value of a variety of
claiming models that derive from different disciplinary traditions. The research
will significantly improve our basic understanding of the dynamics of claiming
compensation for injury. In addition, the two databases, which will be archived
at the completion of the project, will provide a resource for further analytic
work.