* 8812455
* Mechanism of Signal Transduction in Drosophila              Photoreceptors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Edwin Johnson, Marshall University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/29/1992
* USD 130,712.00

The mechanism by which the eye generates nerve impulses in response to light,
the process known as visual transduction, is incompletely understood although
obviously important and scientifically interesting. This project is intended to
improve our understanding of the process. The fruit fly, Drosophila, has long
been used as research material because of its small number of chromosomes and
their unique property of having easily visible structural details during certain
phases of the insect's life. There are now many mutant strains available, a
number of which have visual defects that probably include defects in their
ability to perform the sequence of events that comprisevisual transduction. Such
mutants will be exploited in this project in an effort to do a molecular genetic
"dissection" of the process. The basic experimental method will be to record
electrical events (precursory to and secondary to nerve impulses) from cells of
the eyes of mutant flies while exposing the cells to various pharmacological
agents and compounds that are believed to be produced at various steps in
transduction. In this way it will be possible to define the steps better and
clarify the overall process. It will also precisely define the defects in the
mutants, thereby rendering them more useful in other studies of genetic aspects
of the problem.