* 8812172
* Spinal Excitatory Synaptic Transmission:  Mediators,        Modulators and Second Messengers
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Mirjana Randic, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 09/30/1992
* USD 193,700.00

Intercellular communication mediated by bioactive substances occurs in
virtually all multicellular systems. Chemical neurotransmission in the
vertebrate nervous system represents a form of this type of signalling. Fast
chemical signalling (within milliseconds), in which the neurotransmitter is
released at specialized neuronal junctions, called synapses, stimulates the
opening of receptor-controlled ion channels in the post- synaptic cell. There is
evidence that the amino acids, glutamate and aspartate, may represent the
principal fast transmitters used by many central neurons. However, the actions
of some chemical mediators, for instance neuropeptides, are slow (acting over
seconds or even minutes) and they are functionally important as modulators of
synaptic transmission. Since the chemical nature of excitatory synaptic
transmitters in the mammalian spinal cord is still unknown, this research
project will analyze cellular mechanisms underlying the rat spinal dorsal horn
in vitro. The experiments will be directed at the role of excitatory amino acid
synaptic mediators (l-glutamate and its analogues), receptors for excitatory
amino acids, the role of tachykinins (substance P and neurokinin A), and the
activation of intracellular second messenger systems (phoshoinositides) by
excitatory amino acids and the tachykinins. Specific objectives to be examined
are: 1) the pharmacological properties and ionic mechanisms of fast and slow
excitatory postsynaptic potentials in the rate spinal cord slice preparation.
The emphasis will be on NMDA receptors, since information about their role in
primary afferent transmission is lacking; 2) the possibility of the involvement
of second messenger systems (phosphoinositides and cyclic nucleotides) in the
regulation of actions of excitatory amino acids and tachykinins at afferent
synapses in the rat spinal dorsal horn; and 3) modulation of voltage-dependent
calcium conductance of acutely-isolated rat dorsal horn neurons by excitatory
amino acids, tachykinins and second messengers using whole-cell voltage clamp
technique with a patch microelectrode. These studies will provide for a better
understanding of synaptic signalling via chemical mediators within the nervous
system.