* 8812970
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Effects of Interfacial   Structure on Film Condensation and Aerosol Transport in a   Noncondensible Gas
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Michael Corradini, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1991
* USD 17,234.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Michael L. Corradini, Department of
Nuclear Engineering, University of Wisconsin to pursue with Dr. Moohwan Kim,
Mechanical Engineering Department, Pohang Institute of Technology (POSTECH), for
a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on the effect of
interfacial structure on film condensation and aerosol transport in the presence
of a noncondensable gas. Two major test series will be conducted by the PI at
the University of Wisconsin, (1) an air/steam-water series will be used to
characterize the effects of interfacial waves on the condensation heat transfer
coefficient and (2) a repeat of these tests with aerosols included in the gas
mixture to investigate the effect of steam condensation on aerosol transport
under various air-steam ratios. The companion research effort at POSTECH will be
directed toward analyzing the experimental data and comparing the results with a
condensation model developed by the Korean collaborator. In addition to the
importance of the project as a basic research study, this research is important
to an understanding of how passive condensation can assist in the removal of
radioactive aerosols from air/steam-water mixtures in severe nuclear reactor
accidents. This project will add an international cooperative dimension to
ongoing research at the University of Wisconsin supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. MEA8351983, a 5-year Presidential Young
Investigator (PYI) award. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.