* 8812998
* Synchronous Laser-Fourier Transform Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Robert Bernheim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 11/30/1991
* USD 316,420.00

This research, part of the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, involves the
development of several new techniques for the observation and assignment of
rotation vibration transitions of polyatomic species in excited vibrational
levels of the ground electronic state. Pulsed infrared laser excitation is
synchronized with the measurements taken to record a Fourier transform infrared
spectrum of the polyatomic species in selected excited ro-vibrational states.
There are several advantages to this methodology. It simplifies the observed
spectrum, thereby facilitating its interpretation. It is also possible to study
states that are normally forbidden by one-photon selection rules. In addition it
is also possible to study the time evolution of the spectrum. This study will
mainly be concerned with the simplification of the infrared spectrum. The
research will elucidate the new experimental methodology through the study of
symmetric top molecules. The practical extent of the spectral simplification
will be determined. Information on excited vibrational states and harmonic
vibrational potential constants will be obtained for the species studied. The
vibrational energy levels of selected prototypical species involved in
multiphoton induced chemistry will be elucidated.