* 8812668
* Impacts of Frontier Migration on Migrants
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Dennis Conway, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/1990
* USD 70,784.00

Since the end of World War II, nations throughout the world have experienced
increasing rates of internal migration, as people from less productive areas
have relocated to areas with more cultivatable land in order to raise their
standards of living. Some of this relocation has been spontaneous, but in many
nations, "frontier migration" has been encouraged by national governmental
policies. Research on resettlement from one rural area to another has focused on
the costs and benefits of these policies, but little attention has been given to
the impacts of migration on the ultimate disposition of the migrants themselves.
Have migrants succeeded in acquiring land? How have they adapted to the new
social, economic, and environmental settings in which they reside? This project
will address these questions by developing a theoretical framework for assessing
the impacts of frontier migration on migrants and by refining that theory
through field research in Nepal on migration from the central hill regions to
the Terai plains in the south. The project will combine qualitative and
quantitative research methodologies in order to develop better understandings of
the processes and outcomes of resettlement on migrants. Information will be
gathered through traditional means of participant observation, oral history, and
informal discussion with migrants and state officials and through collection of
standardized data in interviews with more than 350 migrants. Those data will
provide the basis for analysis by simultaneous solution of a set of equations
assessing the relationship between different social, economic, demographic, and
geographic variables. Refinements of the theoretical framework based on Nepalese
field work will permit its use in other developing nations where frontier
migration is occurring. The benefits of this research project will be threefold.
At the theoretical level, it will develop a new framework for assessing how
rural-to-rural migration affects the migrants themselves. At the empirical
level, it will provide useful information on the way in which frontier migration
has altered the ways of life of Nepalese who have resettled in the Terai region,
and data collected in this project will be available to other scholars examining
a variety of issues in this and similar locales. The research will also be
beneficial to policy- makers, as it will provide a more comprehensive means of
assessing the efficacy of various regional development policies and of
determining the ways in which those policies affect the residential locations,
economic activities, and agricultural practices of migrants.