* 8812567
* Parallel Architecture: Design, Validation, Implementation
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Arnold Rosenberg, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 12/31/1991
* USD 196,341.00

This project is a program of research on theoretical aspects of the design cycle
for a special genre parallel architectures, namely, multipurpose arrays of
identical processing elements (arrays, for short). The first phase of the
program will concern itself with issues concerning the design of arrays,
concentrating on questions concerning the relative computational efficiency
gained by incorporating a variety of structural features into the design. As but
one example, what are the relative merits of point to point communication vs.
communication via shared memories vs. communication via (reconfigurable) busses?
The main vehicle for this phase will be studies of the intersimulatability of
architectures. The second phase of the program will concentrate on the problem
of validating a proposed multipurpose architecture by demonstrating its ability
to handle a variety of classes of computational tasks efficiently. The main
vehicle for this will be an enhanced version of the logical mapping problem for
parallel architectures. The final phase of the program will be concerned with
the physical implementation of the proposed architecture, focusing on issues
such as fault-tolerance and efficient implementability in physical space. One
major tool in this phase will be the new notion of the physical mapping problem
for parallel architectures. Throughout, our measures of efficiency will include
delay, resource utilization, and load balancing; and, we shall consider a
variety of modes of parallel computation, viewing SIMD and MIMD as the extremes
in the spectrum of modes.