* 8812656
* Marine Biotechnology Instrumentation for Woods Hole         Oceanographic Institution and the Marine Biological         Laboratory
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Felix Strumwasser, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 07/31/1991
* USD 350,000.00

This project provides funds to establish a joint facility for marine molecular
biology to serve the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the Marine
Biological Laboratory, both located in Woods Hole, Massachusetts. The facility
will add a new capability for research in marine science to resident and
visiting investigators at both institutions. There is a long history of marine
research in Woods Hole, with important contributions from the two institutions
in marine biology, biomedical science and oceanography. Particular strengths at
the Marine Biological Laboratory are in the areas of physiology and
biochemistry, and at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in whole animal
biology and ecology. The joint facility for molecular biology and biotechnology
will bring a new dimension to these institutions, allowing studies involving
protein sequencing, peptide synthesis, DNA sequencing and DNA synthesis. The
immediate needs for such a facility involve research objectives in molecular
phylogeny and evolution, in gene regulation and environmental adaptation in
marine organisms, in developmental and neurobiology of marine species, and in
ecology. Combining the present strengths of year-round and visiting scientific
staff with molecular biology instrumentation will create an unusual strength in
marine biology at Woods Hole and will serve the marine science community for
years to come.