* 8812954
* Catalytic Dehydration of Carbohydrates in Near- and         Supercritical Polar Solvents
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Michael Antal, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 02/29/1992
* USD 151,444.00

Biological processes can produce large quantities of ethanol, i-propanol, lactic
acid, and 1-Butanol at moderate cost from renewable biological resources. The
acid catalyzed dehydration of these bioproducts in supercritical water can
result in high yields of the important high value petrochemicals ethylene,
propylene, acrylicacid, and 1-Butene at pressures exceeding 22 MPa. Thus these
industrially important monomers can be produced from dilute aqueous phase
solutions of the biological substrate at pressures appropriate for the direct
synthesis of polymeric plastics, such as polyethylene and polypropylene.
Similarly, furfural and 5-hydroxymethyl furfural can be obtained from pentoses
and hexoses in high yields. These furaldehydes are used industrially to
synthesize resins. Unfortunately, parasitic reactions compete to consume the
bio-substrate and reduce the yield of the high-value monomer. The objectives of
this research are to identify the mechanisms and kinetics of these competing
reactions in order to determine conditions and catalysts which optimize yields
of the double bond forming dehydration reactions. The key element of this work
is its emphasis of near and supercritical water as a reaction medium. Hawaii and
many of the developing tropical countries (such as Thailand and the Philippines)
could enjoy a resurgence of their agricultural economies if higher value uses
for the fermentation products of sucrose were identified. Similarly, Nebraska,
Kansas, Iowa, and other mid-western states would benefit from alternative,
higher value uses for ethanol, lactic acid, and other fermentation products of
the corn products industry. The production of plastics, resins, and
petrochemical intermediates from bio-materials is perhaps the most promising
option for improving the economics of sugar- and corn-based agricultural
economies. Prior work has revealed the promise of catalysis in supercritical
water as a new method for producing petrochemicals from bio-materials. This
research will lay the foundation for industry to exploit this new reaction
chemistry.