* 8812929
* Acquisition of the Earth Resources Data Analysis Systems    (ERDAS) for Multiuser Research
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Floyd Henderson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/1990
* USD 30,000.00

This award will enable the State University of New York at Albany to purchase
Earth Resources Data Analysis Systems (ERDAS) software and supporting hardware
for use in several research projects. ERDAS is a microcomputer-based analysis
system that does not require special support from a central computer center. It
is a stand-alone, turn-key system that is easy to manage and has low maintenance
costs. It is a flexible geographic information system (GIS) that will
significantly augment the research capabilities of the several academic
departments and faculty members who will use the equipment. The equipment will
also improve instructional programs at the graduate level in a number of
departments and curricula. The research programs that will originally benefit
from the hardware and software purchased with this award are a project to model
relationships between satellite radar response patterns and environmental
conditions, an investigation based on processing digital images from multiple
sources to determine causes of forest damage in the Saar Region of West Germany,
and an examination of the potential of personal computer-based image processing
and GIS systems for assisting archaeological exploration in Crete. In addition
to supporting these and other research projects, the award will provide
opportunities to advance our understanding of basic questions concerning the
interpretation of radar imagery for earth science applications.