* 8812084
* Significance and Consequences of Avian Vocal Development
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1992
* Donald Kroodsma, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1992
* USD 240,711.00

Dr. Kroodsma will carry out four interrelated studies of vocal development and
its consequences among passerine (perching) birds. These four developmental
studies are important for understanding the neural control, the evolution, and
the functions of acoustic signals among birds. 1. In contrast to true (oscine)
songbirds, flycatchers seem to lack the ability to imitate vocal signals.
Comparison of song development by (suboscine) flycatchers and by oscine
songbirds is a critical first step to understanding the consequences of
strikingly different modes of song development and the possible differences in
the neural control of vocal signals in these two suborders of passerine birds.
2. Laboratory experiments on song development with towhees will reveal the
processes by which interacting birds develop songs that are either similar or
dissimilar to those in their acoustic environment. 3. Paruline warblers use
different songs in different contexts. Studies of their song systems will help
in understanding the relationship between vocal development and geographic
variation in songs, the selective forces on the structure of acoustic signals,
the responses of males and females to these songs, and how warblers use this
remarkably complex communication system. 4. A study of wren vocal behavior will
examine the possible role of song development and cultural evolution in
maintaining genetic isolation between two song populations in an area that they
both inhabit. To do this research, Dr. Kroodsma relies on a combination of field
and laboratory studies, and chooses the most suitable species for each set of
questions. The results should yield important insights into the relationship
between song development and the functions of vocal behaviors of birds.