* 8812952
* Chemical Signal Detection:  Filter Properties of            Chemoreceptor Organs
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1993
* Jelle Atema, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1993
* USD 451,637.00

This is a project to study some of the physical factors involved in sensing of
chemicals. The basic issue being approached is how the chemicals that are being
sensed are transported to the receptor organs, and how the processes are
modified by evolutionary specializations in morphology and behavior. The animal
model of chemical sensing that is used is the detection of amino acids by
lobster olfactory receptors. In these animals the amino acids, which are feeding
stimuli, diffuse to the receptors. In doing so, they finally must diffuse
through very thin layers of fluid adjacent to the organs themselves. Different
chemoreceptor organs, even in the same animal, can have dramatically different
morphology that can result in different diffusion layers. In addition, the
animal's behaviors in sampling the environment (flicking and sniffing, for
example), affect the boundary layer and also help to minimize the confounding
effects of turbulence in the environment. The project will include testing a
computational model of receptor organ filtering by measuring and manipulating
diffusion layers in different chemoreceptor organs and measuring the time
courses of responses in the cells in the living animals. Thus, it will result in
an understanding of the structure and function of diffusion layers and of their
contribution to analysis of chemical signals. The principles of filtering being
studied here in the lobster are important components of all chemical sensing
systems. They are little studied and poorly understood, and the conclusions
drawn in this study should have wide generalizability to other systems as we..