* 8812121
* Cholinergic Drug Actions on Motor Nerves and Muscle         Endplates
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1990
* Robert Storella, MCP Hahnemann University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1990
* USD 20,000.00

Acetylcholine (ACh) is the neurotransmitter that allows nerves to stimulate
skeletal muscles to contract. The muscle receptors that accept this ACh message
are well described, and many compounds (referred to as cholinergic drugs) are
known to act on these muscle ACh receptors. These same cholinergic drugs seem to
affect the nerves that innervate these muscles. The drugs can affect the ability
of the nerve to become excited (and generate action potentials), as well as
affect the amount of ACh that can be released by the nerves. Due to technical
complexities, these drug actions on nerves have received much less attention
than their affects on muscles. This project will study the actions of
cholinergic drugs on the ability of nerves to become excited and to release ACh.
Additionally, the nerve effects of these compounds will be compared to their
muscle effects in order to see whether the nerve and muscle effects are related.
One hypothesis is that an acetylcholine receptor exists on nerves as well as on
muscles. This project will examine whether cholinergic drug effects on nerves
are consistent with actions at these putative neuronal ACh receptors. The
project will provide new information concerning cholinergic drug actions on
motor nerves, and relate these actions to those on muscle endplates.
Additionally, the investigations address a fundamental issue of neuromuscular
transmission, role, if any, of motor nerve receptors for acetylcholine.