* 8812048
* Cognition, Learning and Memory:  A Parallel Distributed     Processing Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* James McClelland, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1992
* USD 133,121.00

This project will consider two topics that arise in the development of a
theoretical framework, known as the parallel distributed processing (PDP)
framework, for understanding learning, memory, and cognitive processes. In this
framework, cognitive processes emerge from the simultaneous activity of a large
number of simple processing units; the knowledge that governs processing is
represented by the numerical strengths of connections among the units. The
approach will be applied to recall of information from memory and to language
acquisition. From a PDP perspective, recall becomes a process of constructing
the representation of a to-be-remembered item from the contributions of a number
of prior experiences. This view predicts that information acquired at different
times may be combined in the same act of recall, producing "blend" errors in
memory. The first part of the project will verify that such errors occur and
will examine the circumstances under which they occur. The experiments will
examine the effects of similarity of memory traces, will assess the tendency for
blend errors to occur in recognition as well as recall, and will determine
whether blend errors occur more frequently when the different experiences to be
combined complement, rather than conflict, with each other. These experiments
will help clarify when and how the mechanisms of memory can give rise to errors
that could invalidate eyewitness testimony. From a PDP perspective, learning
language is not a matter of learning a system of linguistic rules per se;
rather, it is a matter of adjusting connection strengths among units. The second
part of the project will examine whether this view is consistent with children's
acquisition of one aspect of language, namely the use of inflected forms of
verbs (e.g., the past tense). This part of the project will attempt to develop a
revision of an earlier model of acquisition by connection strength adjustment
and to use the model to account for errors that children make during
acquisition. This part of the project should help clarify the nature of the
mechanisms that underlie the acquisition of language.