* 8812408
* Verb Movement
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1992
* David Lightfoot, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 11/30/1992
* USD 199,896.00

ABSTRACT In a large class of languages there are sentences in which verbs
appear in non-canonical positions. These phenomena have recently been analyzed
in terms of verb movement, a process that raises unique empriical and
theoretical questions. The movement of heads (such as verbs) displays very
special properties which differ from the movement properties of phrasal
categories, which have been a major focus of syntactic research from the
inception of generative grammar. The movement of verbs is strictly local and
displays significant variation from language to language. The central empirical
question is whether verb movement processes manifest a single unique grammatical
operation across construc- tions and across languages. The central theoretical
issue is whether the observed locality and variation can be reduced to the
principles governing the behavior of phrasal categories. Three ideas lie at the
center of the research. First, there are two types of verb movement processes:
one moves the verb to an auxiliary position, the other moves it to a
presentential position. Second, these movements leave behind traces which are
subject to a head government condition which operates in the phonology and,
possibly, to the Binding Conditions in Logical Form. The third idea is that the
classical notion of movement should be reinterpreted in terms of relatedness
among multiple representations. This involves generalizing the notion of
derivation in terms of the concept "delocalized" category. These central ideas
can be formally realized in many different ways. The correct formulation will be
shaped by the need to parameterize the emerging theory so that it accommodates
the observed variations appropriately. The parameterization must be responsive
to both synchronic variation among languages and diachronic relationships among
stages of a given language. Extensive work on variation among the Romance and
Germanic languages and on the history of English and French strongly suggests
that differences cluster in identifiable subgroups which reflect a small number
of underlying parameters. The project focuses on a related set of central issues
in contemporary linguistic theory. The investigators will examine a number of
different languages and attempt to develop and refine a theoretical model of
grammar which can account for the variations among them in a thorough and
parsimonious way. A successful outcome of the project would provide a
significant advance in our understanding of the underlying nature of language,
and hence of the human mind.