* 8812619
* Collaborative Research on Generational Change and            Support for the Soviet System
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1988,09/01/1989
* Donna Bahry, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 09/01/1989
* USD 396.00

This study examines the nature and extent of intergenerational change among
variously disaffected members of the Soviet population in regard to their
support for political institutions. The investigators reanalyze data from the
"Harvard Project" of Soviet refugees, which was conducted in the early 1950's,
and replicate and reassess some of the key findings of the original analysis. In
addition the project draws on two surveys of Soviet emigrants from the late
1970's and early 1980's: the Soviet Interview Project (SIP) General Survey I and
the follow.up SIP General Survey II. The findings of the Harvard Project
revealed a significant generation gap in the way people viewed the Soviet system
under Stalin. The young and highly educated were the most supportive of the
Soviet system under Stalin. More recent interviews suggest that this pattern may
have been reversed. Alternative Soviet sources for analyzing the
intergenerational cleavages in political support manifested by groups in the
population are minimal. This investigation should provide new understanding of
the political attitudes of significant dissident elements in the USSR overtime
by replicating the findings of the Harvard project and reexamining the
generational cleavages in political support.