* 8812715
*  A Proposal to Build a Deep Ocean Rock Coring Drill
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Harlan Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 12/31/1992
* USD 442,724.00

The objectives of this oceanographic instrumentation development project are to
design, build, and test a modern rock coring drill and establish a facility for
its operation. Design criteria require the drill to penetrate and recover three-
meter core samples from igneous basement rocks, lithi- fied sediments, and
sulfide deposits at ocean depths of up to 5,000 meters. The drill will be
deployed from conventional deep-sea research vessels and will collect spatially
oriented cores from environments that are difficult or impossible to sample
using conventional sediment coring or dredging tech- niques. Areas of specific
research applications that would make use of such a capability include sampling
of mid-ocean seamounts, drilling carbonate blocks at convergent margins, off-
axis sampling of igneous rocks for studies of crustal evolution, and sampling at
hydrothermal deposits. The new drilling capability will also be useful in
resource assess- ment such as Exclusive Economic Zone mapping efforts off
Hawaii. Advances in the field of ocean engineering are also anticipated. Robotic
and system control technology must be developed to mark and extract the rock
cores with reference to polar coordinates. Control of the drill system must be
such that accommodations can be made for differing seafloor conditions and off-
vertical placement. This project will also provide the engineering foundation
for a planned 50- meter rock coring capability.