* 8812087
* Secular Climate and Atmospheric Circulation Fluctuations    over the Atlantic Area
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Jeffrey Rogers, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 04/30/1991
* USD 74,164.00

This project will continue the analysis of secular climate and atmospheric
circulation fluctuations occurring around the Atlantic Ocean. The study will
analyze Atlantic sea surface temperature (SST) and associated atmospheric
circulation variability as well as recent climatic fluctuations occurring since
the mid-1940s. The role of the Southern Oscillation (SO) in the development and
evolution of Atlantic SST anomalies will be evaluated. The interaction between
the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) and SO in the Atlantic will be examined as
will their association with SST anomalies in non-winter seasons. Since the
mid-1940s, the wintertime Atlantic westerlies have fluctuated in strength, being
unusually strong until the late 1950s, the 1960s and late 1970s. The study will
further document these circulation and associated climatic fluctuation in the
land station and marine air temperature fields, and it will evaluate the
evidence for climatic fluctuations occurring in spring, summer and autumn. The
association between SSTs and the climatic fluctuations will be examined, to
explore ocean linkages to the abrupt fluctuations and subsequent persistent
circulation and climate regimes. This work may improve our capability for
seasonal climate prediction and may benefit marine fishery industry in the North
Atlantic.