* 8812509
* In-Plane Stress Variations during the Rift/Drift Transition at Passive Continental Margins: Formation of the Break-up   Unconformity on the Grand Banks
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Nicholas Christie-Blick, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 01/31/1991
* USD 181,591.00

This project is to test the idea that the break-up unconformity may, in some
cases, be associated with variation in in-plane stress within the lithosphere.
The area chosen for study is the Aptian break-up unconformity of the Grand Banks
of Eastern Canada because in this setting the PIs expect a significant
likelihood of detection. They ask whether the proposed mechanism is necessary to
explain the observed stratigraphic relationships and whether the mechanism is
sufficient for plausible assumptions regarding lithospheric properties and
magnitudes of the in-plane stress. The proposed study includes analysis of the
seismic and stratigraphic data from the region as well as the development of
three dimensional lithospheric deflection models. The data analysis will be done
in conjunction with personnel from Petro-Canada Resources. %%% The concepts of
seismic stratigraphy and sequence stratigraphy, that is, stratigraphic sequences
that can be attributed to the fluctuations in sea level over geologic time, have
come to the forefront of geological thinking. It is not yet clear whether the
sequences are strictly due to actual sea level fluctuations or whether they may
be due in part to tectonic effects. This project will help sort this matter out.