* 8812870
* Moisture Transport in Unconsolidated Porous Media During    Drying:  Use of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Imaging as an    Experimental Probe
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1988,09/30/1991
* Stephen Whitaker, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/1991
* USD 150,000.00

This proposal presents a program of theoretical and experimental work directed
toward a predictive theory of drying. The influence of local heterogeneities is
incorporated into both the theoretical framework and the experimental
measurements that were proposed. The theoretical analysis is based on the method
of large-scale averaging and a closure scheme that incorporates the effect of
local heterogeneities. The experimental studies make use of nuclear magnetic
resonance imaging (NMRI) to both quantify the heterogeneities in a porous medium
and to measure the local volume averaged saturation during drying. Determination
of the spatial variation of the local volume averaged saturation will provide
experimental values of the large-scale spatial deviation of the saturation.
These in turn, will be compared with predictions from the closure calculations.
The key feature of the method of large-scale averaging is the appearance of
large-scale spatial deviations in the velocity and concentration, and the
existence of a closure scheme that can predict these spatial deviations. In all
previous studies of transport phenomena in porous media, theory and experiment
have been compared in terms of measured and predicted effective transport
coefficients. With the use of NMRI, the PI's are in a position to develop the
comparison beyond the level of the effective transport coefficients and make a
direct comparison between calculated and measured large-scale spatial
deviations. The process of drying is of interest to a very wide range of
engineering and scientific practitioners who are concerned with moisture
transport in final or intermediate products. Some of these applications are
given as follows: in agricultural products, paints and inks, wood, gels, soils,
catalyst pellets, and foams. This investigation should permit a greater
understanding of this important transport process.