* 8812184
* An Analysis of Emergent Complexity in the Prehistoric       Channel Islands, California
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Jeanne Arnold, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1991
* USD 94,608.00

Dr. Arnold and colleagues will conduct archaeological research on Santa Cruz,
the second largest of the Channel Islands, located off the California coast. In
early historic times these islands were occupied by Chumash Indians who by the
time of contact had developed a stratified chiefly society. Archaeological data
indicates original colonization of the island took place over 5,000 years ago
and suggests that a relatively abrupt change in social organization occurred
about 900 years ago when a relatively egalitarian system was replaced by a more
stratified one. The goal of Dr. Arnold's research is to understand this
transformation. Because deep sea cores have been drilled in the Channel Island
region, paleoenvironmental data is excellent. These suggest a warming of the
ocean and the destruction of rich kelp beds at approximately the time when this
social reorganization occurred. The probable result was a decrease in available
food for Channel Island inhabitants, and Dr. Arnold postulates that this
provided the calatyst for change. To test this, she will conduct survey and
excavate a series of sites on Santa Cruz. Analysis of faunal remains will allow
her to determine if a change in diet actually occurred, while examination of
human skeletal remains will permit changing nutritional status to be assessed.
Dr. Arnold postulates that social stratification and craft specialization both
accompanied this change, and analysis of changing site sizes and differential
distribution of prestige items should provide relevant data. This research is
important because it will shed light on the prehistory of Native American
cultures. It will also increase our understanding of how complex societies
develop and how they respond to environmental stress.