* 8812957
* Experimental and Analytical Investigation of Tranient Forcesin Roller Chain Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1988,09/01/1989
* Glen Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 09/01/1989
* USD 31,507.00

This project investigates the nature of the transient forces in roller chain
drives. Chain drive mechanisms have been in use since the 1800's, but despite
their age and widespread use, chain drives remain poorly understood. The
popularity of the mechanism is expected to increase due to its low cost and
simplicity. The auto industry is currently investigating the possibility of
using the chain drive as the primary drive mechanism for certain types of future
passenger cars. The project comprises an experimental and analytical component.
The experimental component has three phases and will investigate the impact
force between a roller element on the chain and the sprocket as the roller is
seated onto the sprocket, the forces that exist in the chain during all
operating conditions, and the forces on the sprocket teeth during operating
conditions. Earlier research efforts focused on the construction of the chain
drive test machine to be used in the experimental activity. Impact force
measurements are obtained by instrumenting a sprocket with strain gauges,
obtaining strain gauge measurements for a variety of chain speeds and sprocket
sizes and chain tensions, and converting the measurements into force data. These
data will be instrumental in determining the effect of impact forces in the
galling and pitting of roller elements. The second experimental phase,
measurement of the forces in the chain is accomplished by instrumenting the
plates of the chain with strain gauges. The force time history information is
useful for design purposes. The third experimental phase, measurement of
sprocket tooth loads, is accomplished by the use of proximity sensors. All
experimental evidence will be used to develop mathematical models to predict the
dynamic behavior of chain drives.