* 8812283
* Ethnic Group Consciousness and Political Mobilization in theAsian, Black, and Hispanic Communities of Los Angeles: A Theoretical and Comparative Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* Byran Jackson, California State University-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1989
* USD 12,000.00

Studies assessing the effects of race and ethnic group identity on political
behavior are recognized as important components of a general theory of citizen
political participation. These studies have investigated ethnic voting patterns
and have found high levels of ethnic vote cohesion. In addition, they have
examined patterns of ethnic political mobilization stemming from the development
of an ethnic political culture which stresses high levels of political
involvement among ethnic identifiers independent of each identifier's socio-
economic status. Although many of these investigations have been useful in
illustrating outcomes from ethnic involvement in American Politics, they have
failed to provide a theoretical link between ethnic identity and political
participation. As a result, little attention has been directed toward assessing
why, and the conditions under which ethnic group identity affects political
attitudes and behavior. This planning grant activity of the Minority Research
Initiation Program is directed at filling this void. The researcher develops a
theoretical framework for understanding how ethnic group identity shapes
political behavior and formulates a survey questionnaire for acquiring
information on elite and small attitudes and behavior. The researcher also
develops a political profile of Asian, Black, and Hispanic communities in Los
Angeles, California and analyzes the structure of networks operating in these
communities. Finally, in order to assess mobilization and cohesion in ethnic
communities, the researcher devotes attention to the identification of salient
issues and causes within each community.