* 8812505
* Direct Observational Studies of Carbenes
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1988,07/31/1992
* Robert Moss, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 07/31/1992
* USD 333,000.00

This grant in Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry provides support for the
research of Dr. Robert Moss, Rutgers University. The work is focused on the
direct observational studies of carbenes, which are a class of important
reaction intermediates in organic chemistry. They are important because of their
unusual reactivity which arises because carbenes are electron deficient and can
exist in more than one accessible electronic state. Fundamental studies of
carbenes and other highly reactive intermediates will be carried out by direct
spectroscopic observation and absolute kinetic methods. The diazirine halide
exchange reaction will be used to prepare novel diazirine precursors for
dimethoxycarbene and fluoromethoxycarbene. For dimethoxycarbene, spectroscopic,
absolute kinetic, activation parameter, and reactivity studies will define the
behavior of this representative nucleophilic carbene. Parallel studies will be
made with fluoromethoxycarbene. The free energies of activation of the
carbene/alkene addition reactions will be determined and analyzed for
enthalpy/entropy partition. Other carbenes to studied include
methoxymethylcarbene, fluoromethylcarbene, and dimethylaminomethoxycarbene.
Activation parameters will also be measured for additions of phenylhalocarbenes
to hindered alkenes, where unusual behavior has already been observed. Finally,
several methods of generating carbonium ion from diazirines and carbenes will be
studied.