* 8812736
* A Polyhedral Based Software System for Solving              Generalized Assignment Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Elsie Gottlieb, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 07/31/1991
* USD 66,120.00

The generalized assignment problem (GAP) is a specially structured integer
programming problem. Typical applications include facility location, personnel
assignment, logistics and computer networking. A totally automated software
package designed for solving large-scale GAP and related problems will be
available for both experimental purposes and production applications. The
resultant software will be a linear programming based system which incorporates
a polyhedral cutting plane philosophy. This approach, which is particularly
geared toward the solution of large-scale problems, is based upon the structural
properties of the polytope associated with GAP. In general, current solution
methods for GAP ignore the structure of the polytope; consequently, these
methods tend to be appropriate only for problems of moderate size since
computational requirements tend to increase very rapidly as problem size
increases. The foundation for the system will depend upon constraint
identification algorithms developed for three classes of facet defining
inequalities which have been derived for GAP. These facet defining inequalities
represent a significant extension within this area of integer programming since
they are based upon combinations of knapsack constraints. On the other hand,
currently available integer programming systems, which employ a polyhedral
philosophy, have only considered the information embedded within individual
knapsack constraints when generating inequalities.