* 8812492
* The Genesis of Cyclic Limestones and Unconformities in the  Northern Bahamas:  Recent Processes and Ancient Analogs
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Kenneth Rasmussen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 09/30/1991
* USD 90,421.00

The shallow limestones of the Bahamas accumulate in pulses. Each rise of the
interglacial sea floods the banktops and superimposes another sediment cycle
upon the remains of the former. To understand the geologic record of the last
few sealevel rises, and more importantly, to contribute to the understanding of
cyclic limestones worldwide, this project is focussed on the latest Bahamian
depositional cycles and the erosional surfaces that separate them in both dished
interior and ramped margin lagoonal study sites. The present phase of the study
will concentrate on (1) the carbon isotopic signal of the organic fraction as a
function of the depositional environment, (2) the spectrum of paleoecological
information imprinted upon banktop discontinuity surfaces as they are modified
by sealevel encroachment, (3) the geological/ geochemical nature of the present
sediment cycle and the subjacent rock cycles, and (4) the geological/geochemical
criteria derived from the cyclic deposition/erosion couplet that can be applied
to ancient analogs. %%% The shallow limestones of the Bahamas accumulate in
pulses. Each rise of the interglacial sea floods the banktops and superimposes
another sediment cycle upon the remains of the former. To understand the
geologic record of the last few sealevel rises, and more importantly, to
contribute to the understanding of cyclic limestones worldwide, this project is
focussed on the latest Bahamian depositional cycles and the erosional surfaces
that separate them in both dished interior and ramped margin lagoonal study
sites.