* 8812128
* RUI: Development of a System for Insertional Mutagenesis in Yeast (REU supplement)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Molly Mastrangelo, Allegany Community College
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1992
* USD 44,000.00

A system for inducing mutagenesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by insertion of Ty
elements. Ty elements fused to a GAL1 promoter and marked with the HIS3 gene are
induced to transpose from a plasmid to the genome of the host cell by plating on
galactose. Transposition confers the His phenotype on the his host strain after
loss of the plasmid. Insertion mutations in mating-type genes in MATa cells are
selected by resistance to growth arrest by alpha-mating-type pheromone. Genetic
analysis and Southern hybridization have identified 9 TyHIS sterile mutants,
including one in ste2 and 4 which activate the silent mating-type cassette,
HMLalpha. Unlinked suppressors have appeared in 3 of the HMLalpha- activated
mutants, and will be analyzed in other Ty insertion mutants and in SPT and spt
strains. Further experiments will refine the induction protocol to reduce
insertion of multiple Ty elements, and simplify the process of identifying new
HIS marked mutants by selecting random haploid progeny and screening for the co-
segregation of the His phenotype with the mutant phenotype. Mutagenesis by Ty
insertion to activate cryptic genes in other systems in addition to the mating-
type genes will be attempted. This system, if successfully developed, will
provide a useful tool for scientists in research laboratories. It will also
serve to introduce community college students to state-of- the-art molecular
genetics.