* 8812521
* Parallel Computation of Eigensystems for Symmetric and      non-Symmetric Matrices
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Patricia Eberlein, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1991
* USD 121,380.00

The investigation of Jacobi-type methods for the solution of the algebraic
eigenproblem on parallel architectures is proposed here. Both symmetric and non-
symmetric problems are considered, as is the generalized problem. Interest in
this general area of numerical linear algebra has increased markedly since
parallel machines appeared on the market; these machines already play an
important role in scientific computing, and parallel algorithms present an
important challenge. Jacobi-type algorithms are ideally suited for a parallel
multiprocessor environment; recently they have been found competitive with
standard serial methods on both shared memory multiprocessors and serial vector
machines for the singular value problem. New approaches are shown which lead to
an extension to the eigenvalue problem for both symmetric and non-symmetric
matrices. One-sided Jacobi methods are introduced here, and compared with block
Jacobi implementations. These methods may be regarded as a factored form of a
sequence of similarity transformations which may be extended to non- unitary
transformations. Probably the most important goal of the project is the
experimental comparison of Jacobi methods with other methods which have become
standard for serial computation on both the symmetric and non-symmetric
eigenvalue/vector problems.^R JUSTIFICATION