* 8812191
* Analysis of Functional Regions of a Chloroplast Transit     Peptide
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Catherine Wasmann, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/28/1991
* USD 110,000.00

Previous work focussed on analysis of protein transport into chloroplasts using
the small subunit of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase, pSSU, as the model.
The effects of deletion mutations in the pSSU transit peptide (TP) which is
essential for protein import were studied. Based on those results, mutants will
now be generated with changes in the carboxyterminal and central regions of the
TP. Site-directed mutagenesis will be used to alter a small number of specific
residues previously identified as crucial to protein transport in those regions.
Since functional residues in the aminoterminal region are less well defined,
mutants in this region will be created by random chemical mutagenesis. Mutants
will be analyzed for membrane binding, processing steps, and ATP requirements
for transport. Preproteins, which are either located in the stroma or in the
thylakoid membrane, will be isolated. They will be used to target and isolate
different membrane receptor classes. Synthetic peptides representing functional
regions of TP will be used for the isolation of membrane receptor components,
which will be characterized. The long-term goal is to generate a mechanistic
model of the transport process. The complexity of eucaryotic cells makes it
necessary to target proteins to specific compartments which separate metabolic
pathways. The routes to various major subcellular (and extracellular)
compartments differ in specific ways. Even among different types of cells, the
sorting may differ. For example, while green plants sort proteins destined for
the two distinctly different double-membrane- enclosed intracellular
compartments, mitochondria and for chloroplasts, precisely distinctly, yeast
cells (which lack chloroplasts) will use the "chloroplast import signal" to
target proteins into mitochondria. The mechanism(s) whereby information encoded
in the amino acid sequence of specific proteins is "translated" into specific
translocation into appropriate compartments is a fundamental problem in cell
biology, which is addressed directly in this proposal.