* 8812916
* Toxin Sesitivity and Cytoplasmic Mall Sterility in the TexasCytoplasm of Maizie
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1992
* C. Levings, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 05/31/1992
* USD 298,000.00

Associated with the Texas male-sterile cytoplasm (cms-T) of maize are the
traits, cytoplasmic male sterility (cms) and susceptibility to two leaf
diseases. The mitochondrial genome of cms-T maize contains a unique gene,
urf13-T, that encodes a 13 kDa protein which has been implicated with cms and
disease susceptibility. Helminthosporium maydis, race T, a fungal pathogen
produces a pathotoxin that is responsible for its virulence toward cms-T maize.
cms-T mitochondria are specifically sensitive to the pathotoxin, and the basis
for the sensitivity is a 13 kDa protein encoded by the mitochondrial gene,
urf13-T. We propose to study the mechanism by which the 13 kDa protein confers
toxin sensitivity to mitochondria. Mutational analysis will be used to
characterize the properties of the 13 kDa protein that are important in
conferring toxin sensitivity. Toxin binding, toxin protection experiments and
the effect of the toxin-protein interaction on membranes will be studied.
Previous studies have indicated that cms may be caused by mitochondrial
dysfunction. We propose to investigate the relationship between cms and
mitochondrial function by microscopy, mitochondrial protein expression and
potentiometric dyes. Transformation experiments and other approaches will be
used to evaluate the role of the urf13-T gene in cms. An interesting sequence,
ORF25, will also be studied to determine its function and role in cms. The
inability to separate the two tracts of disease susceptibility and male
sterility has led to the possible belief that both phenotypes could be caused by
the same mitochondrial gene. These experiments should enhance our understanding
of the linkage of the two traits, an understanding which has both basic and
economic ramifications.