* 8812409
* The Geometrical Structure and Physics of Coronal Mass       Ejections
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Hugh Hudson, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 01/31/1991
* USD 130,000.00

Solar disturbances produce major effects on the corona, the solar wind, the
interplanetary medium, and the Earth along with its magnetosphere. New
techniques have been developed for studying plasma disturbances in the inner
heliosphere. This grant will continue an investigation of the physics of these
disturbances, using data from the HELIOS zodiacal-light photometers and a
variety of other coronal instruments. These zodiacal-light photometers (data
coverage from 1974 to 1986) provide the first stereoscopic information about the
heliospheric shapes of these disturbances. The basic research effort includes
modeling techniques to interpret and match the observational data. The HELIOS
imaging combined with other observations provides a unique opportunity to
determine coronal mass-ejection velocities, streamer material velocities,
3-dimensional structures, and total masses in the interplanetary medium. This
can be done with fewer assumptions and to greater accuracies than heretofore
possible. Beside mass ejections, solar disturbances which reach the
interplanetary medium also include coronal streamers, shocks measured in situ
and co-rotating interface regions. It has been possible to view these features
with the zodiacal-light photometers on board the HELIOS spacecraft and this
study will relate near-surface solar structures and the heliospheric current
sheet.