* 8812051
* A Strategic Market Game Approach to General Equilibrium withIncomplete Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Martin Shubik, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1990
* USD 139,517.00

One of the most active and productive areas of research in the last decade is
the development of rigorous microeconomic foundations for macroeconomic models
dealing with such important issues as business cycles, inflation and involuntary
unemployment. This project draws together several different strands of research
for a new approach to the study of the microeconomic foundations of money and
financial institutions. It stays as close as possible to the methodological
premises of microeconomic theorizing as embodied in the Arrow Debreu model of
general equilibrium. But in extending that model to allow for incomplete asset
markets, and by giving a strategic market game model for the process of exchange
it is able to capture the institutional context which is the hallmark of
macroeconomics. Some of the specific features of the economy studied in this
model are rational expectations, bankruptcy, the nature of secured loans,
liquidity, the velocity of circulation, the effects of monetary policy and the
different sources of money rates of interest. This project makes a major
methodological contribution to economic theory by replacing partial equilibrium
with general equilibrium, static with dynamic, and "institution-free" models
with models that incorporate real world institutions. The research should
provide new fundamental insights into the roles played by the different
financial institutions in the U.S. economy.