* 8812118
* RUI:  Varieties of French in the Sous Le Vent Section of    St. Barthelemy French West Indies
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Julianne Maher, Loyola University New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 06/30/1990
* USD 26,448.00

ABSTRACT This is a continuation of a research project begun in 1987 with NSF
support. The Principal Investigator is investigating and documenting the Creole
language of St. Barthelemy Island in the French West Indies. Her previous
fieldwork was in the Au Vent ("Windward", or eastern) side of the island. That
work, combined with existing knowledge about St. Barthelemy Creole (SBC), made
it clear that there are two quite distinct varieties of SBC. The new research
will take place in the Sous Le Vent ("Leeward", or western) side of the island,
where the second variety is spoken. The existence of two distinct dialects on
such a small island (25 sq. km.) is really quite remarkable, and poses a
significant challenge to theories of language contact and creolization. Some
explanations which have been proffered relate to the history of the island's
settlement; these theories imply the existence of a dialect continuum connecting
the two major varieties. Whether such a continuum actually exists is an open
question, however, which will be one focal point of the research project. If
investigation discloses a sharp boundary between the dialect areas, other
explanations will need to be sought. The Principal Investigator will be
attempting to gather relevant social and historical data, as well as linguistic
data, to develop such an explanation.