* 8812965
* Analytical Methods for Modeling of Vibration and Noise of   Ultra High Performance Machine Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1990
* Steven Dubowsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 10/31/1990
* USD 79,135.00

Currently, limitations on the ability to model the dynamic behavior of machine
systems often result in performance reducing dynamic behavior. This project
addresses that limitation and focuses on the development of analytical design
models of the dynamics and vibration of high performance, high productivity
machine systems. It extends previously developed modeling techniques to more
general machine configurations that include supporting structures, machine
enclosures, and several types of clearance connections. The dynamic models will
be formulated to permit the future integration with acoustic analysis techniques
for predicting machine noise. The research examines both simple and complex
dynamic models and concludes with an experimental evaluation of the models. The
baffled impact beam is an example of a simple model. It comprises a beam like
element (representative of a machine link) mounted in clearance connections
attached to a base plate (representing a machine supporting structure). The
plate is supported by elastic members which represent a machine's vibration
isolation supports. The system is excited by forces applied to the beam through
the base plate. This simplified model, although a simplification, contains
representations of all of the essential elements found in a large class of
machine systems. Dynamics modeling of this system is based on the finite element
approach. Its validity will be tested experimentally. The complex modeling
effort is similar to that associated with the simple models but will concentrate
on models which are more representative of realistic machine systems.