* 8812907
* Diagenetic Processes and Authigenic Mineral Formation       in Amazon Shelf Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1994
* Josephine Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/1994
* USD 436,814.00

This research is part of the AmasSeds Project (A Multi- disciplinary Amazon
Shelf Sediment Study), which seeks to understand the physical, chemical and
geological processes that affect, or are affected by, particle fluxes on the
Amazon shelf. High particulate fluxes occur on the Amazon shelf as a result of
the enormous sediment discharge from the Amazon River and the extensive
resuspension of fine-grained shelf sediment by tidal processes. This component
of the research examines Fe and Mn reduction reactions occurring in Amazon inner
shelf muds. The dominance of Fe and Mn reactions over SO4 reactions apparently
results from a favorable balance between low organic C, moderately Fe-rich
particles, and massive nonsteady-state deposition and physical reworking of the
seabed. These properties promote the formation of nonsulfidic authigenic
minerals (Fe-carbonates, Fe, Al-silicates) more typical of low SO4 deposits,
strongly influence export and storage of minor/trace elements during diagenetic
remobilization/ precipitation of Fe carrier phases, inhibit benthic communities
and shell-bearing fauna, and have major consequences for the nature of the
preserved sedimentary record. These characteristics suggest the Amazon shelf may
be an analogue to ancient environments of ironstone or greensand formation.
Relationships between the variables affecting these processes will be
investigated in the Amazon shelf and delta-shelf region. By understanding the
processes by which chemical phases of sediment are deposited in this estuary,
other river/ocean systems can be better characterized. In particular, Fe and Mn
reduction reactions occurring in Amazon inner shelf muds depend upon a balance
between low organic C, inner shelf muds depend upon a balance between low
organic C, moderately Fe-rich particles, massive nonsteady-state deposition and
physical reworking of the seabed. The processes by which in situ precipitates
enter the historical geological record will be investigated in the Amazon shelf
and delta-shelf region.