* 8812720
* SeaMARK II and Seismic Reflection Study of the Southeast    Bahamas-Hispaniola Collision Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Henry Mullins, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/1991
* USD 70,367.00

Accreted shallow-water carbonate terranes are a common feature of many ancient
mountain belts, yet the tectonic history of the majority these terranes remains
poorly understood. In many cases, this is because early deformational structures
associated with initial accretion have been overprinted and obliterated by post-
accretion structural and metamorphic events. In order to fully understand the
mechanism(s) of these shallow- water carbonate terranes, an active collision
zone involving a shallow-water carbonate bank must be studied. A detailed swath
mapping and seismic reflection study of the active collision between the
southeastern Bahamas and the island of Hispaniola will be used. Here, the small,
isolated banks of the Bahamas are colliding obliquely with the northern margin
of Hispaniola, as part of the broad, transpressional North American-Caribbean
Plate boundary. The collisional setting of the southeast Bahamas contrasts
markedly with the tectonically quiescent, passive-margin setting of the
northwest Bahamas, providing an unparalleled opportunity to compare and contrast
the development of shallow-water carbonate banks in widely differing tectonic
regimes. proposed use of the SeaMARC II seafloor mapping system, in conjunction
with digitally recorded single-channel seismic reflection profiles, provides a
system that is ideally suited for our proposed studies, which will focus on
documenting shallow structures and surficial sedimentary features within the
collision zone. %%% Carbonate deposits in mountain belts are commonly associated
with shallow marine sediments that have been thrust onto the continent during
tectonic episodes. This project will study carbonate sediments on the Hispaniola
margin as a modern analog of the type of carbonate terrains that are found in
tectonically active regions. The sedimentology and structural setting will be
examined using a combination of coring, seismic strtigraphy, and side-scan sonar
imaging (SeaMarc II). Results may be used to interpret carbonate sediments in
the many accreted terrains where such deposits are found.