* 8812942
* RUI: Scavenging of Trace Metals from Seawater by HyrothermalPrecipitates
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1989
* John Trefry, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/1989
* USD 45,631.00

Inputs of high-temperature fluids to the oceans along seafloor-spreadings
centers, including the slow-spreading Mid- Atlantic Ridge (MAR), are now
recognized as playing an important role in controlling the composition of
seawater. Preliminary work on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge by Dr. Trefry's research
group and several collaborators suggests that freshly precipitated iron oxides
from high temperature vents serve as quantitatively important scavengers of
vanadium, arsenic and other elements from seawater. If this is indeed occuring
it would influence the global cycling of these elements. Dr. Trefry proposes to
test several hypothese involving the scavenging role of vent-derived iron oxides
on the chemistry of vanadium, arsenic, molybdenum and other oxyanions, as well
as cadmium, copper and manganese in seawater. The study will focus on the TAG
Hydrothermal Field on the MAR and involve collection and analysis of dissolved
and particulate samples from a known vent plume. In addition to the scavenging
study, his research will help address questions relating to the spatial density
of vent sites on the MAR, changes in plume shape and chemistry over time, far-
field transport of metal-rich particles, and the transport and cycling of carbon
and sulfur with vent-related precipitates.