* 8812411
* Satellite and Radiation Studies of the Southwest-East Asian Monsoon
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Eric Smith, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 04/30/1992
* USD 386,200.00

This research addresses the interaction between cloud systems, land surfaces
and radiation within the Southwest-East Asian Monsoon. It represents an ongoing
effort under NSF sponsorship to apply satellite radiance and radiation budget
measurements to current problems in monsoon science involving both interannual
and intraseasonal aspects of monsoon behavior and heat sources and sinks. The
foremost scientific objectives of the proposed research are twofold: A) Utilize
INSAT geosynchronous satellite measurements to determine how the development and
movement of deep organized convection and tropical storms within the Asian
monsoon regulate the amplitude and phase propagation characteristics of
cloudiness anomalies associated with low frequency intraseasonal oscillations.
Investigate how the movement and fluctuations of the predominant heat source
regions within tropical storms controls the dimensions, orientation, and
amplitude of the Indian Ocean-Western Pacific dipole designating the major
source region of low frequency oscillations. Develop medium spectral resolution
radiative transfer models, which incorporate INSAT measurements to prescribe
cloudiness for parameterized cloud calculations. Diagnose the modulation of the
vertical radiative flux divergence profiles fluctuations. Decompose the vertical
structure of the low frequency oscillations in conjunction with these profiles.
B) With the aid of INSAT and AVHRR satellite measurements, and the TIPMEX-86
surface measurements, show how variations in surface boundary conditions
throughout the region of the Tibet Plateau, during the transition into and
throughout the course of the summer monsoon, lead to large diurnally forced
gradients in the radiative flux divergence profiles. Investigate how the
northward penetration of the low frequency monsoon episodes across the Himalayan
barrier diminish the role of surface forcing, replacing it with a cloud forced
radiation profile structure. This research is important because it has the
potential of providing new knowledge of how the Asian monsoon system, the most
energetic regional circulation on earth, is related to other global weather and
climate systems, including those affecting the United States.