* 8812215
* The Determinants and Outcomes of Child Support Awards
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,11/01/1988
* Jay Teachman, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 11/01/1988
* USD 8,854.00

The issue of child support has become increasingly prominent on the policy and
research agenda, as growing numbers of children are raised by single parent
mothers. Underresearched areas have been the nature and distribution of child
support as well as the outcomes, for the mothers involved, of various levels of
child support awards. This study will provide a broad picture of the child
support process, including the identification of subgroups in particular need of
child support assistance. This work is important in that it locates child
support within a larger context, including related decisions made during the
divorce process, other monetary transfers between fathers and mothers, and the
legal environment. The proposed research will use secondary data to examine the
impact of a number of factors on child support outcomes, including the economic
needs of the mothers and children, the resources available to them, the ability
and motivation of the fathers, and the nature of the legal environment. Previous
studies have focused almost exclusively on the characteristics of the mothers.
The impact of child support on subsequent life-course transitions will also be
ascertained, including remarriage, schooling and labor force participation. The
data will be drawn from follow-up surveys of the National Longitudinal Study of
the High School Class of 1972. It has been estimated that 50 percent of children
born recently will experience life in a single-parent family. The increase in
female- headed families is of particular concern, given that such families often
lack the financial resources to be self-sufficient. Child support payments have
been touted as the solution to the financial plight of single-parent families.
This study will illuminate the nature, distribution and consequences of such
support.