* 8812712
* Enhancement of the Long-term Data Base Program at the       University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Field Station
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* David Miller, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 01/31/1991
* USD 9,700.00

Research at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) Field Station was begun
in 1967. Since then the UWM Field Station has grown steadily in research use and
productivity. The attractiveness of the Station for research can be attributed
to the quality of its natural areas and facilities, the baseline information
available, ongoing research, its location, and the level of assistance and on-
site support provided by the staff. Located near Milwaukee, Madison and Chicago,
the 850 ha research area includes one of the finest remaining examples of beech-
maple woods in Wisconsin, nearly all of the predominant wetland vegetation types
found in northwestern North America, old fields and agricultural fields. Long-
range plans for the Field Station research program emphasize: 1) development of
the Station and the Cedarburg Bog as a wetlands research center, 2) maintenance
of its strong program in avian behavioral ecology, and 3) experimental plant
ecology, population biology, and ecological genetics. The Station has an
extensive and diverse long-term data base that has been developed over 20 years.
Expansion of the data base and enhancement of its utility and accessibility are
currently being stressed. This project will support replacement of the Station's
outdated and increasingly unreliable weather station in order to maintain and
improve the quality of the data base and to fulfill research program plans.