* 8812193
* Context and Classification Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Douglas Medin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1990
* USD 70,316.00

This project aims to understand the processes underlying classification
learning and performance. One focus is the question of what makes some
categories natural, easy to learn and use, and other categories unnatural,
difficult to learn, and awkward to use. Aside from relevance to the problem of
how best to teach certain concepts (e.g., scientific concepts), the question of
naturalness is a tool for evaluating categorization theories. That is,
alternative theories make differing predictions about what kinds of concepts are
easy to use and learn. Several of the proposed experiments will test these
predictions by presenting people with different types of category structures to
see how well the theories can predict difficulty of learning. A related question
is how people organize examples when they are free to create their own
categories. Again the idea is to see what principles determine category
construction and to compare these principles with the predictions of alternative
theories. Another major facet of the project will be experiments examining
learning strategies and the idea that there may be distinct modes of learning.
There is some evidence that direct, explicit attempts to learn difficult
category structures may be less effective than indirect or nonanalytic learning.
Several experiments will explore the possibility that nonexplicit learning will
lead to rule-like performance even though people may be unable to verbalize
their knowledge. Finally, the project will examine how people integrate abstract
information about categories and concrete experience with examples. Overall, the
project has the goal of developing better theories for how people learn about,
use, and update concepts and categories.