* 8812828
* Technopoles of Southern California
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1992
* Allen Scott, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 11/30/1992
* USD 223,500.00

The form and location of industrial production in the U.S. and other western
nations has changed dramatically in the last few decades. Traditional methods
consisted of concentrated, assembly-line production with high degrees of
vertical integration among firms (now termed "fordism" in recognition of the
role of the U.S. automobile manufacturer in developing this system early in the
century). This structure has been supplanted by new modes of "flexible
production," in which firms use operational and locational styles to permit
maximum flexibility in response to rapidly changing patterns of international
demand and activity by their competitors. These new modes of production have
been pioneered in newer "high technology" industries, but their impact now is
felt in all industrial sectors. Social scientists have examined various facets
of this change through a variety of case studies, but no comprehensive, cross-
sectoral and cross-locational comparison has been made of the impacts of
changing industrial production on urban systems. This project will identify the
social and economic bases of major concentrations of high-technology industries
in southern California and will investigate the impacts of these concentrations
on the growth and geographic structure of the region. Four specific facets of
high- technology industrial development will be examined in both theoretical and
empirical contexts: the development and innovation of technology, the processes
of industrial organization, labor markets, and locational dynamics. Theoretical
work will result in development of a locational model of high-technology
industries, which will be tested through detailed examination of firms in
southern California. This testing will include an inventory of all high-
technology firms in the region and detailed analyses of electronics and
aerospace industries through the use of surveys and interviews. Analyses will be
made of specific locational issues among and between industries, including the
presence of external economies, the extent of vertical integration, and the
organizational and labor market characteristics of firms. Additional inquiries
will focus on the relationship of industrial development with the demographic
character and educational levels of industrial labor forces, and on the impacts
of industrial change on patterns of regional growth. These empirical analyses
will consist of standard forms of statistical and cartographic analysis of
extensive data from published sources and data gathered in original surveys and
interviews. The benefits of this research will be multi-faceted. The theoretical
bases relating industrial development and urban structure will be enhanced
through both expansion of theory and the rigorous empirical testing of related
hypotheses. Knowledge of the specifics of high-technological developmental also
will be greatly enhanced, greatly extending our understanding of how such
industries grow and function in general and in southern California, where they
have had such profound impacts on one of the nation's largest and most rapidly
growing metropolitan complexes.