* 8812698
* Studies of Middle Latitude Mesoscale Convective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Steven Rutledge, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/1991
* USD 199,900.00

Organized collections of thunderstorms, known as mesoscale convective systems
(MCS), are the major source of rainfall and severe weather in the Spring and
Summer time in the continental United States. A field observational program
(Oklahoma.Kansas Preliminary Regional Experiment for STORM.Central; STORM stands
for Stormscale Operational and Research Meteorology) was conducted in the Spring
of 1985 to study various aspects of MCSs. The Principal Investigator was one of
the planners and participants in this investigation. Previous work by the
Principal Investigator has utilized data from a variety of instruments (e.g.
Doppler radar, aircraft, ground stroke lightning location devices) to study what
has been termed the trailing stratiform region of MCSs. While most rain produced
by MCSs is deposited by convective storm cells, the precipitation that falls
from the stratiform region is almost equally important. In his previous work the
Principal Investigator has discovered that most precipitation in the stratiform
region is produced by growth upon small ice particles that are advected from the
convective region into the stratiform cloud. He found that approximately 20% of
the rainfall from the stratiform region is due to the original particles
advected from the convective region and the remaining 80% from subsequent growth
of these particles. The particles produced in the convective region, therefore,
act as "seed" particles; thus, providing a mechanism for condensate generated by
the mesoscale updraft to be converted efficiently into precipitation. The
Principal Investigator also discovered that positively charged cloud.to.ground
flashes are most concentrated in the stratiform region. He concludes that the
positive ground flashes are due to positive charges carried on small ice
particles advected from the convective cells. The Principal Investigator will
continue to exploit this rich data set by expanding the number of analyzed
cases. He also will enhance his research by adding a more complex modeling
component to assist in physical interpretation of the structure of MCSs.