* 8812763
* Economic Models of Legal Complexity and Liability Rules
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1988,06/30/1990
* Michelle White, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 06/30/1990
* USD 30,115.00

Economic considerations shape the contours of litigation and may serve as
deterrents to negligent behavior which in turn could lead to litigation.
Estimates of the magnitude and probability of gain may be expected to shape
lawyers' preferences for a given level of complexity of legal doctrines. Such
estimates also operate through liability rules to affect incentives to take care
to avoid accidents. Specifically, Dr. White focuses on two topics in the area
where law and economics intersect: 1) modeling the level of complexity of legal
doctrines and 2) re-examining the dominant liability rule in U. S. law, the
comparative negligence rule in accident law, and conducting empirical analysis
of the application of negligence rules using a data set of automobile accidents
in Calfornia. The investigation of the model of legal complexity and how it
affects the behavior of lawyers and litigants and the outcome of cases includes
consideration of the implications of different modes of payment for lawyers and
of cases involving tax law in which the plaintiff is always the IRS, which has
the double objective of maximizing the amount of unpaid taxes collected via
audits or litigations and of minimizing taxpayers' incentives to evade taxes in
the first place. Also, the study draws the important distinction between
substantive and procedural legal complexity. In the specification of a model of
the effects of liability rules on accident avoidance incentives, account is
taken of the possibility that both parties may consider themselves victims, that
courts make errors in deciding liability, that the due care standard used by
courts to determine liabililty may vary widely across cases, and that drivers
themselves may make mistakes. The theoretical and empirical analyses on these
topics promise to illuminate our understanding of the existence of economic
efficiencies and inefficiencies of the law and their impact. Most of the
examinations of the complexity of legal doctrines have assumed it as given. In
contrast, one portion of this study focuses on legal complexity as an element
manipulable by lawyers in their roles as legislators and judges and having an
effect on lawyers in their role as litigators. It examines the patterns of the
relationship between the level of complexity and the predicted outcome of
litigation. The project has the potential to increase our knowledge of the
economic and social implications of legal complexity, particularly by means of
developing a normative model, which considers whether there is any social gain,
that is, any increase in the probability of an accurate verdict, from adopting
legal objectives that are more than minimally complex. The project's empirical
analysis of the application of negligence rules in the context of a
reconsideration of the incentive structure for avoiding accidents will
contribute to our understanding of liability under circumstances where it cannot
be determined in advance who is the injurer and who is the victim.