* 8812858
* Syntactic Processing and Grammatical Intuition
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1993
* Arnold Glass, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1993
* USD 151,901.00

This research derives from the notion that the process by which a sentence is
comprehended requires several steps. One step is to retrieve the meanings of the
words, and another step is to combine the meanings of the individual words into
the meaning of the entire sentence. The mental procedure that performs these
tasks is called the "parser", because it "parses" sentences. How the meanings of
the words are combined is dictated by their inflections and by their order in
the sentence. For example the sentence "Boys like girls." sounds natural because
the words and their inflections form a pattern that induces the parser to
combine the meanings of the words in such a way that we understand "boys" to be
the agent and "girls" to be the recepient of the action "like." However, not all
patterns of words and inflections are recognized by the parser. In this view,
the more dissimilar a pattern is from one recognized by the parser, the more odd
or deviant the string of words sounds. Hence, strings like "Boy like girl." and
"Boys red girl." sound deviant. Such strings are ungrammatical; the process by
which people judge whether a string in the language is natural or odd is known
as grammatical intuition. Several predictions may be derived from this notion
about the role of grammatical intuition in language comprehension. First, it
should be possible to specify what the patterns are that the parser recognizes
and to show that the perceived deviance of a word string increases with its
difference from the pattern most similar to it that the parser recognizes. Also,
deviant word strings should be more difficult to understand than natural ones.
This research project will test these predictions. First, the parsing procedure
for a subset of English will be implemented in a computer program. The
specificity of the program will make it possible to derive precise predictions
about grammaticality and comprehensibility for the sentences recognized by the
program. Then, these predictions will be compared with measures of human
performance; among them, the time college students take to make grammaticality
judgments for the sentences and the time they take to comprehend the sentences.
Regardless of the merits of the initial hypothesis, comparison of the
performance of a computer program with human performance is likely to produce
results that will improve our understanding of human language comprehension and
hence that will be useful in improving the ability of computer programs to
understand human language.