* 8812162
* Topics in Time-Series Econometrics and Applied              Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1991
* Lars Hansen, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 157,080.00

The application of time-series statistical techniques to macroeconomics enables
economists to test for the presence of business cycles and other important
dynamic regularities in macroeconomic data. This project consists of work on
four topics in time-series econometrics and applied macroeconomics. The first
topic is aimed at advancing econometric methods for analyzing models that imply
multi-period conditional moment restrictions. These methods are applied in
analyzing the implications of nonlinear asset pricing models. The second topic
is to build and test structural models of seasonality. This analysis should
enhance our understanding of the sources of the pronounced seasonal components
observed in economic time series. The third topic is to extend the class of
models of durable goods pricing and analyze the quantitative implications of
these models. Particular attention is focused on models in which the
distribution of durable goods influences asset prices. The fourth topic is to
develop econometric methods for analyzing continuous time models of fluctuations
and asset prices. Among other things, these methods and models aid our
understanding of lumpy information flows and the interaction between
aggregation- over-time in measured consumption and local durability in
preferences.