* 8812123
* An Immunological Method for the Study of Predation on MarineMicrozooplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Mark Ohman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1991
* USD 140,558.00

The utilization of microbial organisms as prey by suspension feeding copepods
currently is thought to be a significant part of marine planktonic
trophodynamics. However, experimental evidence for this link is indirect because
soft bodied prey such as ciliate protozoa do not leave visually identifiable
remains in copepod guts or in fecal pellets. Dr. Ohman will use immunological
methods for identifying microzooplankton remains in copepod gut contents. The
work entails several steps, including; 1) the production of antisera to
nonloricate ciliate protozoa; 2) elimination of undesired cross reactions; 3)
determination of assay sensitivity and specificity; 4) determination of gut
residence time of anitgens; 5) calibration of ingestion rates; 6) preliminary
investigation of nearshore copepods for ciliate antigens. Immunoassays will be
done by a dot blot assay (ELISPOT; enzyme-linked immunospot). The concept of a
food web by which organic material is synthesized by plants and redistributed by
grazing processes is similar in both terrestrial and aquatic environments.
However, the nature of the marine food web is distinct in that much of this
trophic activity takes place among microorganisms. It is often difficult to
identify the structure of the food web composed by these small particles, much
less to quantify the extent to which certain organisms are preyed upon by
others. Dr. Ohman will apply techniques developed in molecular biology to
address one of the more problematic predator-prey relationships in plankton
ecology - that of marine protozoans without hard parts and marine zooplankton.
There is presently little information on this potentially important link in the
planktonic food web, and this novel approach may provide a quantitative
technique to analyze the importance of these soft bodied protozoa to larger
maine organisms.