* 8812935
* A Neoinstitutional Theory of Senate Voting on Supreme Court Justices
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Albert Cover, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1990
* USD 60,862.00

Despite the importance of the Senate role in the confirmation of Supreme Court
justices, knowledge of the factors affecting the votes of senators is sparse.
This project attends to this deficiency by developing a theory of roll call
voting that portrays senators as operating primarily in the interests of their
consitutents. Senators, however, have their own personal preferences about the
composition of the Supreme Court. In addition, presidents can bring rewards and
punishments to bear on senators in attempting to influence their vote.
Accordingly, senators must weigh the costs and benefits of 1) supporting the
opposing constituent desires, 2) pursuing their own policy goals, and 3)
supporting or opposing the president's nominee. To assess the weight senators
put on the various actors seeking to influence their vote on confirmation, this
project develops a testable model of how public opinion, the perceived ideology
of the nominee, and the political circumstances surrounding the nomination came
together to influence a senator's vote. Components of the model include the
popularity and power of the president, the ideological preferences of both
senators and their constituents, the ideology and qualifications of the nominee,
and the importance of the open seat on the Court. The theory is tested on the
2,214 individual confirmation votes from Tom Clark (1949) through Anthony
Kennedy (1988). The chief technique used to test the theory is probit analysis,
an approach that permits the estimation of how important various factors are in
determining whether or not a senator votes to confirm a nominee's appointment to
the Court. The research improves on earlier investigations in several respects.
It focuses on a significant period of change for the Court, not just on the
events surrounding a particular nomination. It attempts to explain the votes of
individual senators, not just the Senate as a whole. It casts its net widely to
include not only controversial nominations but noncontroversial ones as well. It
takes seriously the notion that a nominee's ideology and qualifications for the
Court may prove to be major influences on a senator's confirmation vote. In
exploring the role that these factors play as vote determinants, the research
develops measures for perceived ideology and qualifications. The project
assesses these factors through a systematic content analysis of major newspaper
editorials on each nominee. The theory underlying the model tested in the
project - - "principal- agency theory" - - has proved to be useful in numerous
other contexts. The theory has not previously been developed, however, to
explore how institutional and political circumstances actually work to affect a
legislator's voting decision. Thus, the theory itself should be enriched by this
novel extension and application. The research, therefore, has broad theoretical
payoffs as well as helping us understand better the dynamics of a major part of
the confirmation process.