* 8812080
* RUI:  Variability in Styles of Reef Accretion throughout theCaribbean and the Western Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Dennis Hubbard, Fairleigh Dickinson University West Indies Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 01/31/1991
* USD 80,125.00

Frustration expressed by many researchers attempting to compare modern and
ancient reefs is in large part due to critical flaws in present-day models. Most
of these models are based on limited examples from Florida and the Bahamas, and
they generally focus in constructional processes in the shallowest portions of
the reef. Recent studies have shown that patterns of accretion need not mimic
the ability of organisms on the reef surface to produce calcium carbonate.
Secondary processes that break down and constantly reorganize the reef interior
lead to depositional facies that are dominated by detrital fabrics, with
significant accretion occurring in deeper forereef areas. This project will
collect core data from Caribbean reef environments along recognized gradients in
both physical process and surficial character of the reefs. At each locality,
cores collected along the entire shelf profile will provide informaiton on the
overall reef system rather than limitation to the shallow, exposed reef crests
that have been the focus of most studies to date. %%% The internal structure of
modern carbonate reefs in deep water is largely unknown due to the
inaccessibility to precise sampling. This project will use a newly designed
drilling system to recover samples of coral reefs in Caribbean Sea. The samples
will reveal how coral reefs grow, the control of supply and sealevel on that
growth, and extend our knowledge of reef processes from the present
understanding of shallow water to deep water processes.