* 8812180
* Adaptive Plasticity of Fish Locomotory Muscle
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1988,02/29/1992
* George Somero, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 02/29/1992
* USD 402,841.00

The locomotory muscles of fishes have an extraordinary ability to alter their
biochemical, physiological, and performance characteristics in response to
ontogenetic, physiological, and environmental influences. Dr. Somero and his
colleagues will experimentally modify the biochemical properties of white- and
red muscles to establish clearer links between biochemical status and locomotory
capacity. They will vary muscle biochemical state through altered dietary
regimen and, then, quantitate enzymatic activities and swimming performance.
They will determine how variations in transcriptional and translational activity
and in protein turnover establish final concentrations of ATP generating
enzymes. They will swim fishes at different intensities and measure how the
intracellular localization--the compartmentalization-- of enzymes varies.
Measurements of pH and of effectors that influence enzyme compartmentalization
will be made concomitantly. Body size influences the levels of ATP generating
enzymes in muscle and the regulatory mechanisms and will be evaluated. The
regulatory mechanisms responsible for these size-dependent ("scaling") changes
will be studied using techniques to quantify RNA concentrations and to measure
protein synthesis and protein degradation. Deep-sea fish will be maintained in
the laboratory to determine the extent to which the greatly reduced metabolic
rates and swimming capabilites of these fishes are due to intrinsic,
genetically-based factors, on the one hand, and dietary factors, on the other.
They will attempt to bring the muscle biochemical robustness (e.g., enzyme
levels and RNA concentrations) to the highest possible levels in these deep-
living forms to establish their ultimate potential for activity and growth. The
goal is an understanding of the biochemical and physiological basis for
variations in locomotor capacity in fish.