* 8813480
* A STUDY OF SOME CODING PROBLEMS AND ERROR CONTROL TECHNIQUESFOR DATA COMMUNICATIONS
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Shu Lin, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Aubrey M. Bush
* 01/31/1992
* USD 140,356.00

This research topic investigates several fundamental topics in coding theory as
applied to reliable data communication. The major areas of study are: (1) codes
with multi-level error- correcting capabilities, (2) weight distributions of
linear block codes, (3) block coded modulation, and (4) coding techniques for
error control. In the first area, codes are sought which can provide different
levels of error protection for different parts of a message. An example of
application is the broadcast channel where different receivers operate in
different noise environments, hence requiring different levels of protection.
The second research area is motivated by the need for simpler schemes to
evaluate the error control performance of broader classes of codes. The third
area addresses the problem of combined modulation and block coding to achieve
highly reliable and bandwidth-efficient data communication systems. Similar
techniques, but using trellis ( or convolutional) coding rather than block
coding, have emerged as an important application in modern data systems (
especially for voice-band and satellite channels). The final area is the
continued development of the idea of cascaded coding, which is a generalization
of concatenated coding. This concept, in conjunction with the preceding topic,
could lead the way to development of systems with extremely low error
probability with a minimal increase in assigned channel bandwidth. In addition
to suggesting specific solutions to current data transmission problems, this
project is likely to lay the groundwork for future research in coding theory.