* 8813966
* Wetting Properties of Surfactant Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Marc Robert, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1991
* USD 128,041.00

The objective of this proposed research is to study both theoretically and
experimentally the wetting behavior of surfactant systems, with emphasis on
microemulsions. A new thermodynamic theory of wetting transitions will be
developed in which the effects of gravity, which are important in these systems,
will be taken into account. Conditions under which wetting transitions occur, as
related to the structure of the surfactant, will also be undertaken in
conjunction with this study. Experimental methods to be used include novel
titration calorimetry, dynamic contact angle analysis, and enhanced
videomicroscopy. A new theoretical model, based on molecular thermodynamics,
will be developed, which relies only on readily measurable parameters, allowing
a direct comparison of predictions and experimental results. The proposed
research is of both fundamental and practical significance. It will be
beneficial to our fundamental understanding of interfacial phenomena in
surfactant systems as well as the numerous applications in which the properties
of surfactant systems play an important role, such as enhanced oil recovery,
detergency, liquid printing, microelectronics, magnetic recording media, and
novel separations processes. It has recently been observed that, as one moves
away from a critical point in a microemulsion system, a wetting transition can
occur between the microemulsion phase and the excess phases. This phenomenon
occurs only for some surfactants. The proposed work will investigate the role of
surfactant structure in the wetting transition. It will focus on the development
of a theoretical model of microemulsion formation which will deal in a novel
manner with the role of the interphase region in the formation of
microemulsions. Specifically, the structure of the interphase will be related to
the interfacial tension between the phases. As the model will contain only
measurable thermodynamic parameters, the ability of the model to predict a
wetting transition will rigorously test the model. The proposed research is of
both fundamental and practical significance. It will be beneficial to our
fundamental understanding of interfacial phenomena in surfactant systems as well
as to the numerous engineering applications in which the interfacial properties
of surfactant systems play an important role, such as enhanced oil recovery,
detergency, liquid printing, microelectronics, magnetic recording media, and
novel separations processes.