* 8813694
* Solving Non-Linear Models by Parametrizing Expectations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Albert Marcet, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1991
* USD 86,757.00

This project develops a solution technique for economic dynamic models. A
solution procedure of this type makes it possible to simulate models on a
computer. Dynamic models are ones that evolve through time and, thus, they are
most appropriate for economic policy analysis. Simulating a dynamic model on the
computer makes it possible to analyze the properties of the model, and to test
if it is a good description of the real economy. Ultimately, computer
simulations can determine the effect of a particular change in economic policy,
and they can provide guidance in policy-making. In this project a technique for
finding numerical solutions is developed and applied to several models.
Recently, finding numerical solution procedures for dynamic economic models has
become an important issue. The main challenges to these procedures are
computational tractability and accuracy. Computational tractability means that
the algorithms allow for fast computation, so that it is feasible to simulate
interesting models without having to spend too much time and money on the
computer. Also, since all of these methods only approximate the true solution,
it is necessary to make sure that the solution is computed with a reasonable
degree of accuracy. For a class of important models, the method developed in
this project is likely to improve on the existing methods both in terms of
computational speed and in terms of accuracy.