* 8813399
* Boundary Layer Flow and Sediment Transport Dynamics on the  Amazon Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1993
* Richard Sternberg, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/1993
* USD 488,908.00

This project is a continuation of an earlier project that investigated the
accumulation of fine-grained sediment on the continental shelf near the mouth of
the Amazon River. The earliest research proved that sediment was actively
accumulating, and later research identified the sedimentary processes
controlling accumulation. This project will examine in detail the operation of
the processes and how they affect the formation of sedimentary strata. This new
research will be done as the Sedimentology and Stratigraphy portion of AmasSeds
(A Multi-disciplinary Amazon Shelf Sediment Study), which is a cooperative
project between US and Brazilian scientists. The project involves collaboration
of Physical, Chemical, Biological and Geological Sciences. %%% The project will
investigate boundary layer flow and suspended sediment dynamics in the shallow
marine environment. In view of progress to date and the capabilities of the
instrumentation, the next logical step is to extend the work to include wave-
current interactions and the details of shelf sediment transport. The proposed
objectives are divided into four major unresolved issues resulting from prior
Amazon studies: (1) sediment accumulation, (2) physical reworking, (3) dispersal
of river sediment, and (4) origin of fine-scale stratigraphy. The project will
use the shelf tripod GEOPROBE to collect data to address these issues and also
construct a suspended sediment profiling system and use a high frequency echo
sounder to investigate river sediment dispersal budgets and fluid mud properties
respectively. Cooperative field studies are planned for four stages of river
discharge beginning in 1989.