* 8813228
* Materials Research Society International Meeting on         Advanced Materials, Tokyo, Japan, May 30 - June 3, 1988
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1989
* Elton N. Kaufmann, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 10/31/1989
* USD 12,500.00

The grant is to provide funds for travel of several United States scientists to
attend the MRS International Meeting on Advanced Materials (Tokyo, Japan, May 30
through June 3, 1988). This meeting is the first of its kind and will occur as a
result of a new and unique collaborative interchange among materials scientists
from the United States and Japan. Participation by scientists from the United
States in this meeting will enhance the effectiveness of the meeting itself,
will provide the most efficient conduct for transfer of scientific and
technological knowledge from Japan to the United States (as well as from the
United States to Japan), and will establish many contacts for future
collaborative research across international boundaries. The topics of research
being discussed at the meeting include: composites, rapid quenching processing,
powder preparation, superconductivity, superplasticity, joining of ceramics and
metals, multilayer materials, magnetic materials, biomaterials, photoresponsive
polymers, biosensors, advanced ceramics, and calalytic materials. In some of
these topics, the Japanese are more advanced than the United States, and
collaborative research will represent a transfer of knowledge to the United
States. The United States scientists involved are the leaders in their
respective scientific fields.