* 8813857
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Molecular          Recognition in Host-Guest Chemistry: The Design and         Synthesis of Enzyme and Hormone Mimics
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1992
* Carol Venanzi, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1992
* USD 11,029.00

This award supports Carol A. Venanzi of the Department of Chemistry, New Jersey
Institute of Technology, for collaboration with Jean-Luc Fauchere of the
Department of Biotechnology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich and
Michel Vallotton, Division of Endocrinology, University Hospital, Geneva. The
objective of their research is to obtain an understanding of the relative
contributions of the structural and electrostatic components of molecular
recognition to the host-guest complexation process. The model system to be
studied is a cyclic analog of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). This molecule
was chosen because it can act as both a host (enzyme mimic) and a guest (hormone
mimic). The U.S. investigator will use molecular modeling techniques combined
with molecular dynamics simulations to provide information on the molecular
recognition features of the proposed mimic, such as the orientation of the
catalytic components as compared to chymotrypsin and the effect of solvent on
conformation. The Swiss investigators will synthesize and test the biological
activity of the target molecule. The advantage of the collaboration is that the
investigators bring to the project distinctly complementary skills in computer
modelling and experimental research along with an understanding and an
appreciation of each other's methods. The proposed research addresses a
challenging and important area of molecular chemical physics. The results will
contribute to a better understanding of the structure and biocatalytic activity
of enzymes by providing information on the mechanism of substrate recognition at
the enzyme active site, as well as information on the requirements for molecular
recognition at the hormone receptor. The successful synthesis of enzyme and
hormone mimics will contribute greatly to the creation of cheaper and perhaps
better substitutes for these biomaterials.