* 8813918
* Reaction Engineering Aspects of Manufacturing of Finite     Inorganic Fibers
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Vithal Revankar, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1992
* USD 268,330.00

Ceramics are valuable because they can withstand heat and chemical attack. They
have a critical drawback--they are brittle, do not deform under load and
therefore crack or break easily. Flaws in their structure cause this cracking,
therefore much effort in ceramic research is aimed at developing new processing
techniques that minimize microscopic flaws. When the material is produced in the
form of fine fibers, the brittleness properties are greatly improved because the
probability that a sample of material will contain a flaw large enough to cause
brittle failure deceases as the sample size is reduced. Also, if one fiber in a
bundle fails, the crack cannot propagate further and the other fibers remain
intact. Composites harness the fiber's attractive properties and eliminate their
drawbacks by imbedding them in the matrix of another material. For use in high
temperature applications, these fibers are often imbedded in metal matrices
along with the temperature resistance, reinforcing fiber and the metal's
ductility lends added usefulness to the composite. Light metals--aluminum,
magnesium and titanium--are common matrices. Silicon carbide (SiC) fibers are
promising for reinforcing because of their high intrinsic strength, stiffness,
high temperature stability, and excellent oxidation resistance. Boron carbide
(B4C), titanium-diboride (TiB2), titanium carbide (TiC), and titanium bromide
(TiB) fibers also have potential to use chemical vapor deposition (CVD) to
manufacture SiC, B4C, TiC and TiB fibers. The CVD process involves the
information of a solid by a heated substrate. Typically, a small-diameter
substrate wire is run through a glass reaction tube, and suitable gases are
introduced. The substrate is resistance heated causing the gas to react and
deposit in the heating wore. A key problem of efficient manufacturing batch to
continuous flow systems, scale-up of the laboratory continuous system to a pilot
plant unit, modeling and simulation of the CVD reactions and securing cheap
sources of precursors necessary for the CVD process. The PI will do both
experimental and modeling work to study the effect of: (1) Pretreatment of the
substrate fiber by hydrogen, steam and nitric acid on deposition rate, strength,
toughness and adhesivity. (2) The purity of the material on the mechanical
quality of the fiber. (3) Gas flow rate on the rate of deposition. (4) Hydrogen
to silane ratio and temperature on the formation of stoichiometric SiC. (5)
BC13, hydrocarbon (CH4/CC14) and H2 concentrations on the deposition of B4C. (6)
The ratio of C to Ti fed for production of TiC. Detailed kinetic study
experiments will be carried out in a batch reactor to determine kinetic
parameters such as reaction control regimes, activation energy, etc. This will
be used in the design of the larger scale continuous units.