* 8813272
* Engineering Approaches to Enhancing Secondary Metabolite    Production in Plant Tissue Culture
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Arthur Humphrey, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 02/29/1992
* USD 124,055.00

This study will utilize a two stage plant tissue culture system to study the
effect of various environmental factors on the control of secondary metabolite
production. The model system chosen for this purpose is the production of
rosmarinic acid (an antiedema drug) by species of Coleus blumei and/or Salvia
officinalis. The environmental factors to be investigated include dissolved
oxygen/carbondioxide, shear, and mass transfer. These latter two factors involve
the effects of agitation and cell aggregation on secondary metabolite
production. The importance of this study is two-fold. First, not only will it be
useful to the engineer in obtaining scale-up data for plant suspension cell
systems to have a simple model system with which to work, but also the plant
physiologist and geneticist prefer plant suspension cultures rather than field
crops in which to carry out their experiments. Secondly, experience in working
with and scaling up plant cell systems for the production of important chemicals
and drugs will become necessary as population growth and its associated housing
needs encroaches on land use for agriculture production. Plant cell growth in
bioreactors, which can expand in a third dimension compared with only two
dimensions for field crops, offers an alternative means of production,
particularly of valuable drugs.