* 8813020
* Enthalpy and Phase Behavior of a Non-Ideal Ternary System atElevated Temperatures and Pressures
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1988,12/31/1991
* Victor Yesavage, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1991
* USD 128,425.00

In this project it is proposed to study the enthalpy and phase behavior of a
model system, methanol (which is hydrogen bonding) /n-pentane (non-
polar)/acetone (polar), that is representative of interactions present in
mixtures containing a non-polar, a polar and a hydrogen bonding compound.
Studies will be conducted at elevated temperatures (375 to 700 degrees K) and
pressures (0.1 to 10MPa) including the critical and supercritical regions.
Primary measurements will be made in a Freon 11 reference fluid boil-off
calorimeter, and an equilibrium flash vaporization apparatus, which have already
been developed. Additional measurements will be made in the critical region
using a new automated flow calorimeter. This system is studied in part because
some phase behavior data are available for this system at lower temperatures.
Enthalpy and phase behavior measurements will also be made for the three pure
compounds, the three binary mixtures, and selected compositions of the ternary.
This set of data will be used as a standard for correlation of equations of
state applicable for both phase behavior and enthalpy predictions of such highly
non-ideal mixtures. Experimental results at subcritical conditions have recently
been obtained for a different ternary system--tetralin/quinoline/m- cresol.
Comparison of these results with correlations has shown that present equation of
state methods cannot be used to predict both phase behavior and enthalpy of
binary and ternary systems, containing polar associating compounds. Therefore,
equation of state development will continue, emphasizing perturbed hard body
equations, with the objective of developing equation of state methods that are
applicable to non-ideal ternary mixtures that can serve as models of the complex
systems often encountered in industrial practice.