* 8813206
* Deduction of Quaternary Bottom Water Paleotemperatures from Epimerization Rate Changes in AMS Dated Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1988,03/31/1991
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 03/31/1991
* USD 64,750.00

Glacial-Holocene changes in bottom water temperature will be calculated by
measuring changes in the rate of amino acid diagenesis (isoleucine
epimerization) in radiocarbon dated, planktonic foraminifera from equatorial
Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Ocean cores. The extent of epimerization in a
sample is a function of the time elapsed, and the integrated thermal history,
since death of the organism. By constraining the age of our samples using
existing accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) 14c dated core samples, we will
obtain precise determinations of epimerization reaction rates. The temperature
dependence of the reaction for individual taxa will be calibrated by laboratory
heating experiments and by analysis of Holocene samples from the major ocean
basins, and from marginal seas where the bottom water temperatures are elevated.
The results of the study will, for the first time, provide a measurement of
bottom water temperature that is independent of an analysis of the oxygen
isotope record. This will contribute to an improved understanding of the 180
record, allowing us to explicitly calculate ice volume (sea level) and watermass
salinity values, and to test theories calling for changes in bottom water
temperature during the last glacial cycle, or for floating ice shelves in the
northern and/or southern hemispheres. %%% This project will determine the change
in the temperature of bottom-water in the worlds ocean from the peak of the last
ice age to present. The data will be generated from the rate of amino acid
diagenesis in foraminifera from sedimentary cores which have been dated by AMS
carbon-14 techniques. This will be the first time glacial bottom-water
temperature have been determined independently of the oxygen isotope technique,
and will allow greater accuracy of the paleotemperature method. These results
will be important in quantifying climatic parameters so that models of glacial
climates may be refined.