* 8813971
* Troposphere-Stratosphere Coupling Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1994
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 10/31/1994
* USD 593,346.00

Among the most challenging global environmental problems is the threat that
chemical pollution may cause significant depletion of the stratospheric ozone
layer during the next century. Because of the complex chemical, radiative, and
dynamical processes that together determine the global budget of ozone, many
physical mechanisms must be understood before a comprehensive model can be
developed for prediction of the evolution of the ozone layer. The budget of
stratospheric ozone is strongly influenced by global transport within the
stratosphere and by transfer of various trace chemicals between the troposphere
and stratosphere. Thus an understanding of the mechanisms and global
distribution of troposphere.stratosphere coupling is essential for an
understanding of the global circulation of the stratosphere, and its influence
on the ozone layer. Cumulonimbus convective storms can contribute to
troposphere.stratosphere coupling through production of vertically propagating
wave motions that transfer momentum from the troposphere to the stratosphere,
and through transfer of chemical trace constituents into the stratosphere by
convective overshooting of individual cloud turrets, followed by turbulent
mixing. Professors Holton and Durran will study these processes with the aid of
a numerical model designed to simulate the dynamical, microphysical, and
radiative properties of cumulonimbus cloud systems in the tropics. Observations
from recent field experiments will be used to help specify initial conditions,
and to validate the model results. Professors Holton and Durran will also
evaluate the possible role of high altitude cirrus anvil clouds formed by
cumulonimbus convection in dehydrating the stratosphere through radiative
destabilization and resultant ice particle growth and fallout.