* 8813185
* Improvement of Light Microscope Capabilities and Multi-User Phytoplankton Culture Facilities at the Bigelow Laboratory  for Ocean Sciences
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Robert Guillard, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 01/31/1991
* USD 59,600.00

Bigelow Laboratory is a private, non-profit research laboratory with
approximately twenty principal investigators, all involved in marine biological
research. All disciplines of the field are applied to answer fundamental
questions about the world's marine environment. Bigelow Laboratory is respected
for its high quality research atmosphere, but much of the equipment is not
state-of- the-art. This project concerns areas of research in which Bigelow has
demonstrated leadership: phytoplankton productivity; the biology of the smallest
photosynthetic marine organisms both eukaryotic and prokaryotic, including their
identification by various techniques including analysis of pigments and of
immune reactions, their enumeration and distribution in nature, their structure,
and contribution to marine production and the global sulfur cycle; the
oceanography of the Gulf of Maine; the biology of local fish populations and
certain invertebrates. The project will provide microscopic equipment
(brightfield, phase contrast, epi-illumination, epifluorescence, and
stereoscopic), and algal culture boxes for experimental purposes. These items
will increase the utilization of the Center for Culture of Marine Phytoplankton
and the Flow Cytometry and Cell Separation facilities housed at the Bigelow
Laboratory.