* 8813263
* Combined Two-Dimensional Parameter and Function Estimation  in Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1991
* James Beck, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tammi Owens
* 08/31/1991
* USD 55,010.00

The research is primarily experimental but it utilizes advanced analysis
techniques for determining parameters and functions from transient measurements.
Two different types of transient heat transfer experiments are to be performed
and both are multi- dimensional. The first type of experiments involves the
simultaneous determination of directional thermal conductivities in a fiber-
epoxy composite material and its density-specific heat product. The second type
involves quenching of heated spheres in cooling baths. This has application to
processing of materials to improve hardness and other metallurgical properties.
Both of these experiments are to be analyzed using two-dimensional inverse
computer programs developed at Michigan State University; these programs
incorporate a general, direct heat conduction problem solver, TOPAZ, which was
developed at Lawrence Livermore Research Laboratory. Fiber-filled epoxy
composites are very important advanced materials. They have special properties
that make them uniquely suited for aerospace and aeronautical applications. One
of the special characteristics is their strongly directional properties,
including thermal conductivity. This research is to use previously-developed
parameter and function estimation techniques in the analysis of two-dimensional
experiments for the measurement of directional thermal conductivities. This
research is important because the thermal conductivity values are needed in the
intelligent curing and processing and the design of components using these
materials. Directional-dependent thermal conductivity can be difficult to
measure in the usual one-dimensional experiments because the specimens are
frequently restricted to being quite thin for thermal testing purposes. Two-
dimensional transient experiments do not have the same restrictions. Furthermore
the new combined analysis and experimental techniques have the capability to
open new possibilities in such tests, including in situ tests, biological
materials, and advanced directional materials such as fiber-based composites and
the new superconductivity materials. Some quenching experiments are also to be
performed. The various experiments have the potential of advancing the theory of
combined parameters and function estimation because the estimation techniques
depend critically upon the measurement accuracy and errors.