* 8813102
* Multiuser Facilities for Molecular Marine Biology and       Biotechnology
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1988,05/31/1991
* David Epel, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 05/31/1991
* USD 300,000.00

The Hopkins Marine Station (HMS) of Stanford University was founded in 1892 and
has been in continuous operation as a year- round facility with resident faculty
since 1917. It is located in Pacific Grove, California, 90 miles from the
Stanford campus. Its site consists of 11 acres with one mile of shoreline that
preserves one of the richest pieces of intertidal environment on the California
coast. The Station has seven resident faculty and six other faculty members from
the main campus also maintain labs at HMS. A major new effort at HMS, to be
supported by erection of a large new building currently in the planning stage,
is the application of modern molecular techniques to address fundamental
questions in marine biology and biological oceanography. The resident and non-
resident faculty of HMS are leaders in this new research frontier. This award
will purchase some essential equipment (ultracentrifuges, gel boxes,
microscopes, etc.) for use in marine biotechnological research. Stanford will
commit at least $700,000 in matching funds to ensure that this exciting new
adventure succeeds. Moreover, Stanford has earmarked substantial funds in future
years for new faculty positions, set-up funds, laboratory renovations and
technical support for the facilities at HMS.