* 8813980
* Collaborative Research: Hydrologic-Nutrient Cycle           Interaction in Small Undisturbed and Man-Manipulated        Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1993
* F.Herbert Bormann, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 04/30/1993
* USD 151,378.00

This research will continue investigations of air-land-plant- water-human
interactions in aggrading and disturbed northern hardwood forest ecosystems.
Historically, the Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study has coupled long-term
investigation of ecosystem biogeochemistry and forest growth with detailed
experimentation, including laboratory and plot-level studies, whole ecosystem
manipulations, as well as the development and application of computer models.
Studies of precipitation inputs, ecosystem pools and stream outflow will be
continued. This long-term biogeochemical research will be integrated with
ongoing and proposed process-level studies through the development of proton
budgets and analysis of element cycle interactions. The research includes two
new initiatives. First plot- and watershed-level chemical manipulations using
(NH4)2SO4, H2SO4, Na2SO4 and CaSO4 will investigate present-day,
anthropogenically-induced changes in hydrogen ion, sulfur, nitrogen and metallic
cation cycles. Second, the research will test a new hypothesis relating the
timing of plant growth and physiological processes to regulation of hydrological
and nutrient export. Research on northern hardwood forest ecosystems at Hubbard
Brook is a multi- investigator-/multi-institutional effort. Most work will be
conducted at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, NH, yet the concepts and
processes to be investigated are generally applicable to many types of
ecosystems. This research will, as in the past, contribute to the fundamental
understanding of forest ecosystems and yield information useful to the better
management of their valuable natural resources. The project team is excellent
and comprises proven collaborative performers. USDA/Forest Service collaboration
is quite positive. Institutional accommodations are first-rate. The Ecosystem
Studies Program confidently recommends that this collaborative, four-year
continuing award be made.