* 8813748
* Fault Detection and Board-Level Diagnosis by Signature Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Mark Karpovsky, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 06/30/1991
* USD 124,906.00

This is a collaborative effort between Professors M. Karpovsky at
BostonUniversity and D. Pradhan at the University of Massachusetts. The
proposedinvestigations are two.fold. The first concerns fault detection by
acompression of test responses. Errors (manifestations of faults) are definedas
the component.wise exclusive OR between actual test responses and fault.free
responses. Faults are masked if the observed signature (compressed test
response) is equal to the reference. Thus, depending on the statistics of
theerrors, an optimal compressor is the compressor that minimizes a
probabilitythat the test responses are compressed into the reference. The design
ofoptimal compressors when the distribution of ones contained in error sequences
is known for a given circuit under test is being investigated. This work isalso
based on single error correcting codes over a finite field. Second isboard .
level diagnosis by signature analysis. The objective is to analyzetradeoffs
between the hardware complexity of the redundant chips on the boardand test
time. Two techniques, based on compression of test responses, arebeing pursued.
These are; space . time compression of test responses, anextension of previous
research in space compressors; and board diagnosis byHamming codes over a finite
field. Professors Karpovsky and Pradhan, are outstanding researchers with
solidrecords of accomplishment over the past decade, and that they are very
likelyto continue first class research. The research topic, test response
analysis, is important to industry, and is a high.priority category within the
Design,Tools and Test Program.