* 8813413
* Structure, Evolutionary Significance, and Developmental     Expression of the Sea Urchin Bindin Gene
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1991
* Eric Davidson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Brady
* 09/30/1991
* USD 310,000.00

The species specificity of fertilization between the sea urchins
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus and S. franciscanus is controlled by the specific
interaction of a sperm acrosomal protein, bindin, with its receptor. This
interaction is currently responsible for maintaining the species-isolating
barrier between these two species, whose geographic ranges and reproductive
seasons overlap. Comparisons of complete protein sequences from cDNA clones for
S. purpuratus and S. franciscanus are being used to define protein sequences
that have changed between the two species and may therefore be responsible for
the species-specific binding. Synthetic peptides covering these regions will be
used in in vitro binding assays and as competitors in fertilization in order to
determine which altered sequences are responsible for the change in binding
activity. Analysis of genomic clones from these two species and comparison to a
third species, Lytechinus variegatus, will show the mechanism and direction of
change for the important sequences. The bindin cDNA clones are also being used
as a marker for testis development in juvenile sea urchins. The coordinate
control of bindin and another testis specific gene, testis-specific sperm
histone H2B, will be studied by comparing their promoter sequences and by
determining the extent to which they share promoter DNA binding proteins. %%% In
nature species are maintained due to infertility across species. Dr. Davidson
has shown that the sperm protein is responsible for this barrier between two
species of sea urchins who share a habitat. They can not interbreed due to the
inability of the sperm to fertilize the egg of the other species and this
inability is due to a species specific sperm protein. Dr. Davidson proposes a
molecular investigation of this protein from the two species to determine
precisely what is responsible for the incompatibility. The two species are close
relatives and this protein has apparently diverged during evolution. The study
of the molecular defect here will provide information that will lead to
knowledge of the normal process of sperm-egg adhesion, a key event in
fertilization in all species.