* 8813688
* Approximate Algebraic Methods in Computer Aided Geometric   Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1992
* Thomas Sederberg, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1992
* USD 184,760.00

This research is to investigate fundamental algorithms for computer aided
geometric design based on algebraic methods operating in a finite precision
computing environment. This proposal is motivated by the basic intersection
problems in computer aided geometric design: curve-curve intersection, curve-
surface intersection, and surface-surface intersection. The investigators plan
to explore efficient and robust methods for computing the points of intersection
between two nonplanar rational curves, the points of intersection between a
rational curve and a rational surface, and the curve of intersection between two
rational surface patches. Several other basic and supporting problems will also
be addressed. These problems include: finding a tight upper bound on the number
of intersection points between two non-planar rational curves of known degrees,
determining if a rational surface patch is improperly parametrized, deciding how
base points affect the degree of a parametric patch in floating point
arithmetic, and developing exact global and approximate local implicitization
algorithms for rational surface patches. The research will also investigate
numerically stable alternatives to Euclid's Greatest Common Division algorithm
for floating point arithmetic. This will also involve a combination of
theoretical, empirical, and practical work. The investigators plan first to
develop the mathematical theory, then to test this theory on curves and surfaces
used in industrial applications, and finally to code the algorithms into
practical software.