* 8813884
* Experimental/Correlational Proposal to Relate NMR           Measureables with Macroscopic Thermodynamic & Transport     Properties & Directly with Corresponding States Para
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Riki Kobayashi, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/28/1991
* USD 139,790.00

The objectives of this proposal are: to use a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
technique to measure the spin densities and the spin-lattice and spin-spin
relaxation times of normal fluids and mixtures of normal fluids including carbon
dioxide at moderate to advanced pressures; and to correlate the resulting
measurements with macroscopic thermodynamic and transport properties and with
corresponding states parameters. The proposed objectives constitute a
significant extension from a recently developed corresponding states correlation
for the relaxation times of pure liquid alkanes at near-normal pressures. The
relaxation times can be correlated directly with corresponding states
parameters, indicating that the Debye and Stokes-Einstein assumptions need not
be invoked to relate the relaxation time to transport properties. The
significance of being able to relate NMR measurables both to transport
coefficients and to state variables is evident, e.g. in quantitative NMR
imaging. The relationship amongst NMR measurables, such as transport properties,
and corresponding states parameters suggests that multiple pathways exist from
NMR measurables to macroscopic thermodynamic and transport coefficients. In
recent years, a significant advance has been made by relating NMR measurables to
corresponding state values for pure liquids. If these relationships can be
extended to liquid mixtures, as proposed, and then demonstrated to be accurately
observed in porous media, the results can have direct and important application
in petroleum production studies. Industry is in need of a rapid, continuous, and
accurate system for following the effects of diffusion and dispersion in the
transition region when one fluid displaces a second liquid from a core by
miscibility difference phenomena. Being able to observe what occurs (and how
rapidly it happens) within a reservoir rock for example, would greatly
facilitate transfer of new miscible oil recovery processes from the laboratory
to the field.