* 8813841
* Quantum Dynamics of State Preparation, Intramolecular       Relaxation, and Unimolecular Reaction of Highly             Vibrationally Excited Molecules
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* John Hutchinson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* David M. Stanbury
* 01/31/1992
* USD 129,100.00

This project in the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program concerns
exact quantum theoretical calculations of the dynamics, spectroscopy and
photochemistry of highly excited molecules. These studies will be of direct
importance in relating experimental observables to detailed molecular
properties, including the accurate description of high energy vibrational modes,
the assignment of vibrational spectra in terms of these modes, the analysis of
predissociative spectra in terms of state-specific unimolecular reaction, and
the preparation of excited molecules with ultrafast pulsed lasers. Vibrational
modes of high energy will be studied both by simple approximate methods such as
self-consistent field techniques and by exact variational calculations. Extended
versions of the complex coordinate method will be used to study vibrational
predissociative resonances for determination of the molecular couplings and
dynamics whcih govern the unimolecular lifetime. Intramolecular vibrational
resonances in molecules with high state densities will be studied by an optical
potential technique to characterize the high energy states prepared by pulsed
lasers. The dynamics of such states will also be calculated to reveal the
spectroscopic consequences of the competition of state preparation with
unimolecular dynamics.