* 8813037
* Elucidation of Polymer Microstructures
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1989,08/01/1989
* William Starnes, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* None
* 08/01/1989
* USD 49,600.00

This research will contribute to a detailed understanding of the molecular
microstructures and polymerization mechanisms of two synthetic polymers having
great technological significance. These polymers are poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC)
and poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAC). The information to be obtained should facilitate
the construction of correlations between the structures of these substances and
their useful properties. Also, it should suggest synthetic procedures for
tailoring the structures so as to achieve desired results. The work will involve
the reductive conversion of the polymers into hydrocarbons whose molecular
structures will be established by state-of-the-art 113C NMR. Knowledge of the
reduction chemistries will then allow the structures of the starting polymers to
be determined from those of the reduced materials. This approach, coupled with
parallel studies involving deuterated reducing agents and/or deuterated
polymers, will establish the formation mechanisms of various structural defects
(branches, chain ends, etc.) in the polymers of interest. The research with PVC
should provide conclusive answers to most of the remaining questions about the
effects of structure on the thermal and oxidative stability of this polymer.
Moreover, in the case of PVAC, the work should yield much information about the
structure of another useful polymer, poly(vinyl alcohol), which is made from
PVAC.