* 8813722
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Molecular Basis for Nickel Catalysis in Organic Chemistry
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1993
* John Eisch, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1993
* USD 13,666.00

This award supports Dr. John J. Eisch of the Chemistry Department, SUNY at
Binghamton, for collaboration in research with Dr. Carl Krueger of the Max
Planck Institute for Coal Research in Muelheim, FRG. They are studying how
nickel is able to catalyze chemical reactions in hydrocarbons. By measuring both
the speed of certain well defined catalytic nickel compounds and the variations
in their molecular structure, they hope to identify what features in the nickel
catalyst structure have an accelerating or retarding influence on the speed of
the hydrocarbon reactions it helps to catalyze. The German laboratory offers
highly sophisticated facilities for structure determination, especially electron
density maps, and for molecular calculations. The U.S. group has much experience
in the kinetics of organometallic reactions and the detection of catalytic
intermediates. The catalytic action of transition metals, such as nickel and
iron, on unsaturated hydrocarbons has been found to lead to a versatile array of
valuable organic chemicals. However, little is known about how transition metals
are able to effect these extraordinary chemical reactions on a molecular basis.
This research should provide a rational basis for predicting catalytic activity
of nickel compounds.