* 8813600
* Soviet Economic Performance During Period of New Economic   Policy, 1921-1928
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Paul Gregory, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 01/31/1991
* USD 89,223.00

The reform-minded Soviet leadership is in the process of devising a new system
of economic reforms, generally referred to as "perestroika". In the Soviet
Union, proposed changes in the economic system require ideological
justification. An important case in point is the Soviet experiment with a mixed
economy, called the New Economic Policy, or NEP, from March of 1921 to the
adoption of the first five year plan in 1928. The new Soviet leadership has made
references to the NEP period as a possible model for combining market and plan.
Of particular interest to the contemporary modelers of Soviet economic reform
was NEP's effort to combine private ownership in agriculture, private retail
trade, and state ownership of the so-called commanding heights of industry and
transportation. Recently Gorbachev rehabilitated Bukharin, the chief advocate of
a mixed NEP-type economy, particularly in agriculture and trade. The successes
of the Chinese experiment with market forces in agriculture, likewise, are known
by the Soviets, and changes in resource- allocation arrangements are a logical
feature of the general reform package. This research will reexamine the NEP
economy. It will provide estimates of Soviet economic growth during the NEP
period which, it is hoped, will resolve the controversy in the literature over
the extent of the recovery of the Soviet economy on the eve of the first five
year plan. A second task will be the development of econometric models of
peasant marketing behavior during the 1920's - a key issue of the
collectivization debate of that time. Regional and time series data will be used
to estimate the effects of relative prices and taxes on peasant marketings of
various agriculture products. The most time-consuming and difficult part of the
projected research will be the data gathering stage. On the one hand, there is
almost too much data available, both Tsarist and Soviet. On the other hand, each
data set has its flaws. Improvement of our understanding of the various data
sources and the quality of estimates based thereon is a primary goal of the
study.