* 8813581
* Statistical Goodness-of-Fit Test Based on Graphical         Representation--U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1990
* Edward Dudewicz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1990
* USD 12,250.00

Abstract Narrative Description: This project supports the collaboration of Dr.
Aydin Ozturk, Professor of Applied Statistics, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey, in
a project directed by Dr. Edward J. Dudewicz, Professor of Mathematics, in his
laboratory at Syracuse, University. The research is to study probability
plotting to the end of developing an efficient procedure based on computer
graphics to test distributional assumptions and to study the properties of the
procedure developed. This research will be followed by the preparation of a
computer program to provide practicing statisticians with an analysis of
families of distributions, the characteristic of different distributions, point
estimations and confidence intervals. Scope: This project will allow an
association started by the two investigators in 1983 at King Saud University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and followed by both scientists serving in offical
positions in the First International Conference on Statistical Computing held in
Turkey in 1987, to continue and develop the close collaboration in an area of
science having great interest to the statistical community. The project funding
will be used to support the scientific collaboration of Dr. Ozturk at Syracuse
University. The scientific knowledge expected to be developed through this joint
research will not only benefit the researchers, but also the scientific
communities of both countries. This proposal fulfills an objective of the
Science in Developing Countries Program through exchange and transfer of
scientific knowledge.