* 8813612
* Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of a Peptide Export System
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1988,09/01/1991
* Rachel Skvirsky, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 09/01/1991
* USD 148,016.00

The objective of the experiments proposed is to elucidate mechanisms of peptide
and protein export in bacteria. Specifically, the system to be used is the
export of Microcin B17 (MccB17), a peptide antibiotic produced by E. coli. Six
genes, mcbB through mcbG, are necessary for production of and immunity to
MccB17, itself the product of mcbA. The antibiotic acts on sensitive enteric
bacterial cells to block DNA replication. The mcbE and mcbF gene products appear
to mediate export of MccB17; mutations in mcbE and mcbF and extragenic
suppressors thereof will delineate the roles, interactions, and functional
domains of these components of the MccB17 export machinery. Intracellular and
extracellular MccB17 will be characterized by biochemical and cell fractionation
studies and by electron microscopy. Mutations in the MccB17 molecule that
prevent its export will identify functional domains for transport; extragenic
suppressors of these mutations that allow export of the altered peptide will
identify interactions between the exported peptide and the proteins necessary
for its export.%%% Dr. Skvirsky is establishing herself as an independent
investigator through this Research Opportunities for Women Research Initiation
award. The work promises to be interesting because export of proteins to the
exterior of the cell is rare in the bacterium E.coli. The information obtained
in these studies will have numerous possible practical applications to the
commercial production of products of cloned genes in bacteria.***//