* 8813630
* Estimation Methods for LDV Models with Unrestricted         Correlations in the Unobservables to Analyze Three Classes  of Economic Problems
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Vassilis Hajivassiliou, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 07/31/1991
* USD 64,692.00

Limited dependent variables (LDV) models derived from economic theory frequently
do not impose theoretically justifiable restrictions on correlations among the
unobservables. At present, however, classical estimation of LDV models with
freely correlated unobservables is generally infeasible because it requires the
evaluation of multi-dimensional integrals. Of particular interest are such
problems that arise in panel LDV models and LDV models with measurement errors.
This project develops and implements simulation methods for numerical
integration and implementation to facilitate solution of the previously
intractable computational problems. This is achieved by developments along three
directions: First, the EM algorithm of Hartley (1958) is combined with
simulation methods to overcome discontinuity problems in estimators studied.
Second, techniques are provided to simulate directly from conditional densities.
These techniques are important for the implementation of the Method of Simulated
Moments (McFadden, 1988). Third, new simulation estimators are devised that are
continuous in the unknown parameter vector. These econometric methods are
employed to analyze three classes of economic problems. First, determinants of
incidence and duration of external debt crises and IMF conditionality programs
in LDC's are studied using panel dynamic LDV models. New solutions to the long-
standing problem of "initial values" are provided by estimating the conditional
distribution of the initial values. Second, collective bargaining models are
used to study the occurrence of strikes. These issues are analyzed
econometrically by LDV models with imperfectly measured qualitative and
continuous variables. Finally, game-theoretic models of tacitly collusive
behavior are tested through econometrically similar methods. These working
practical models will illustrate the utility and tractability of the new methods
employed.