* 8813675
* Wave Induced Instability of Submarine Pipes in Open Trenches
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Robert Grace, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Norman Caplan
* 04/30/1991
* USD 81,046.00

Submarine pipelines are used worldwide for a variety of purposes. They carry oil
and gas from offshore fields and are used in offloading tankers and transporting
liquid obtained offshore. They transport to sea, for disposal, sewage and in
some cases sludge from metropolitan areas, wastewaters from industrial
complexes, and heated cooling water from power plants or water to be used in
Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) plants or acquaria. This proposal is for
experimental research to study the forces imposed by waste-induced water motion
on a test pipe set at various locations within an open trench of different
shapes and dimensions. In practice, problems can arise in this context when
large waves arrive before a pipe trench can be naturally or artificially
backfilled. In the research, a 12.75-inch-dimeter test pipe will be configured
for this experiment. This system will be installed offshore from Honolulu within
a prepared 5.0- ft-deep seabed trench of adjustable cross-section. The
approximate water depth at the site will be 37 ft. Wave-induced water motion
will be perpendicular to the pipe and will be generated by 12- to 16-second
swells arriving during the period April-August. Judging from past observations,
wave heights to 12 ft. are virtually certain. Horizontal and vertical force data
on the pipe's central test section, as well as water motion information from a
nearby current sensor, will be recorded on the project boat anchored over the
site. All data will be processed and anlayzed to yield Morison equation wave
force coefficients as well as maximum force coefficients. Plots displaying
variations in these coefficients with trench/pipe details and wave
characteristics will add to the research information base and should be of
considerable benefit to submarine pipe designers.