* 8813351
* US-Norway Cooperative Research: Energetic Nuclear Collisions
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* George Fai, Kent State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1992
* USD 15,770.00

This award supports Professor George Fai of the Department of Physics, Kent
State University, and Dr. Joergen Randrup of the Nuclear Science Division of
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, in a research collaboration with Professors Laszlo
P. Csernai and Jan S. Vaagen, of the Physics Department, University of Bergen,
Norway. The general aim of their research is to achieve a theoretical
understanding of relativistic nuclear collisions, with emphasis on the general
properties of excited nuclear matter and possible phase transitions. They will
carry out several closely related theoretical investigations of the collective
properties of nuclear matter as they appear in relativistic heavy ion
collisions. More specifically, they are seeking to improve realistic
microcanonical simulation models of nuclear disassembly by including the
attractive nuclear interactions and Coulomb interactions among the fragments.
They will also study the dynamics of intermediate energy heavy ion collisions
via classical simulation models, the properties of collective transverse flow
and the dynamics of final fragmentation. In addition, they are interested in the
dynamics of ultrarelativistic nuclear collisions and of quark-gluon plasma (QGP)
formation. These and other types of models will be used to examine the
properties of nuclear matter at two basic energy regions: the highest energies
now under experimental investigation at CERN and Brookhaven National Laboratory,
and intermediate energy reactions where nuclear multifragmentation and liquid-
vapor phase transition can be studied. The U.S. investigators have developed one
of the most detailed statistical fragmentation models at medium energies and
will provide expertise in this area, while the Norwegian participants have
worked in fluid dynamics at several energies and also bring expertise related to
nucleus-nucleus interaction at low energy. Advances in the field of nuclear
physics are made possible by the continuing interaction between theory and
experiment. The theoretical results of this collaboration will provide useful
tools for analyzing experimental data and designing new experiments. Since
statistical methods are used extensively, the research can provide insight in
the statistics of small systems, using nuclei as a proving ground.