* 8813115
* Investigation of Optical Scanning Holography &amp; Real-Time    Two-Pupil Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Ting-Chung Poon, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 10/31/1992
* USD 94,350.00

An acousto-optic approach to two-pupil synthesis in a pupil interaction regime
has been proposed to synthesize bipolar point spread functions (PSFs) in
incoherent image processing. The method consists of simultaneously scanning the
input with the impulse responses corresponding to the two pupils which are
offset in temporal frequency via acousto-optic diffraction. Subsequent
heterodyne detection demodulates the synthesized PSF. It has been pointed out
that, when the processor is operated in an out-of-focus mode, i.e., the scanning
beam is not focused onto the input exactly, the applications of the processor
can be extended to include holographic recording, somewhat reminiscent of side-
looking radar. In the project proposed here, this novel approach to optical
scanning holography is investigated. Also, the potential applications of the
processor, while operated in the out-of-focus regime, are investigated further
in the context of two-pupil processing. The potential significant applications
of such a processor are in the area of optical holography for large-scale
objects as well as that of television transmission of a hologram for two-
dimensional objects. The results of this work could also lead to better 3-D
information processing.