* 8813656
* International Workshop on "Lasers in Science and Technology"at the University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan, March 1989,     Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Charles Clark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1991
* USD 27,000.00

Description: This project provides partial funding for an international workshop
on "Lasers in Science and Technology" at the University of Jordan, Amman.
Participants will include U.S., Middle Eastern, and Indian scientists. Two main
objectives are sought: To stimulate scientific collaboration between U.S. and
Middle Eastern research groups; And to discuss proposals for an
interdisciplinary regional Laser Research Center in the Middle East. The topics
to be considered in the week-long meeting will include: Basic atomic, molecular
and optical physics; Atomic spectroscopy; Molecular spectroscopy; Laser-induced
reactive and non-reactive Chemistry; Laser Chemical analysis; Laser-produced
plasmas; Laser surface interactions; Small accelerator physics; and Biomedical
application of lasers. The proposed Laser Research Center to be discussed would
have a program for these activities: conducting experimental research in
physics, chemistry, biology, as well as medicine, agriculture and engineering;
sponsor visits by scientists from abroad; training; and provide a central source
of information about laser-based research. Scope: The workshop has received
commitment for financial support from various organizations of the Government of
Jordan, the UNESCO, the Royal Jordanian Scientific Society and from the
International Center for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) in Trieste. NSF support will
be primarily for the cost of travel and per diem of U.S. scientists, and for
travel of Indian scientists, as well as publication costs. The project has the
endorsement and backing of the Jordanian Higher Council of Science and
Technology and the University of Jordan. It is likely to lead to the enhancement
of laser-based research in Jordan and other countries in the region and to
increased collaboration with the U.S.