* 8813517
* Mobility of Proteins Adsorbed at Solid-Liquid Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Channing Robertson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/1991
* USD 104,000.00

The primary objective of this work is to characterize the mobility of proteins
adsorbed at solid-liquid interfaces. This research represents a shift in the
emphasis of protein adsorption studies towards a molecular understanding of the
complex behavior of adsorbed proteins. It is hoped to quantify the mobility of
adsorbed proteins, characterize the factors governing mobility, identify the
mechanism of adsorbed protein translation, and measure the extent of self-
assembly of proteins into surface islands. Using a combination of total internal
reflection fluorescence and fluorescence recovery after pattern photobleaching,
the research will determine protein surface diffusion coefficients and the
fraction of adsorbed proteins that are mobile. Mobility will be quantified as a
function of shear rate, surface coverage, and surface residence time in order to
identify the governing factors. Understanding the mobility of adsorbed proteins,
as well as the related issues of protein structure and organization will aid the
development of effective processes to manufacture protein and polypeptide
materials. The utility of these materials is increasing, not only as
pharmaceuticals, but also as novel means of organic catalysis, and as the active
agent in biosensors for chemical analysis. Protein or polypeptide adsorption to
solid surfaces is inevitable in all processes to manufacture, modify, or purify
these materials. This is particularly important to protein and polypeptide
manufacture in that an adsorbed protein layer can influence the biological
activity of the cells it contacts, including the genetically engineered
microorganisms commonly employed in industry. In addition, the proper function
of a protein or polypeptide depends on the preservation of the correct
structure. Adsorption to a solid surface can alter that structure.