* 8813331
* U.S.-Finland Cooperative Research on Dynamics and Control ofVolterra Integrodifferential Equations
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Robert Wheeler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1992
* USD 17,680.00

This award supports Robert L. Wheeler and others of the Department of
Mathematics, Virginia Tech, for collaboration with Stig-Olof Londen and others
of the Institute of Mathematics, Helsinki University of Techology, Espoo,
Finland. Their research concerns the dynamics of Volterra integro-partial
differential equations, functional differential equations and abstract Volterra
equations, and also control and stabilization problems for systems governed by
such equations. Through collaboration, a variety of techniques will be applied
to investigate these problems including: 1) classical analysis methods which
combine techniques developed for finite dimensional Volterra equations with
techniques for hyperbolic differential equations; 2) abstract methods including
those from semigroup theory and nonlinear functional analysis; and 3) semigroup
and duality methods whereby an infinite dimensional abstract equation is
approximated by finite dimensional systems, and numerical studies based on such
approximations. The expertise of the Finnish investigators in harmonic analysis
and energy methods developed for the study of qualitative properties of Volterra
equations should commplement the strengths of the U.S. investigators in
functional differential equations, control theory and other subjects relevant to
the proposed research topics. The six collaborating investigators have
outstanding reputations for expertise and productivity in this area of applied
mathematics. Previous interactions among three of them were fruitful.
Significant contributions to mathematics can be expected from expanded
collaboration between the two research groups.