* 8813429
* Synthesis and Study of Templates for Nucleation of alpha-   Helices
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Daniel Kemp, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 05/31/1992
* USD 286,079.00

This research is being supported by the Organic Synthesis Program. The synthesis
of the complex polypeptides and proteins that occur in natural systems requires
an understanding of how nature controls the structure and properties of these
complex molecules. This work should help to clarify these factors and lead to
the design of new biologically active compounds to be used in agriculture and
medicine. Most theories of protein folding postulate that local regions of the
protein's amino acid sequence have a higher than average tendency to fold or
coil to assume sheet or helical structures that can then act as nucleation sites
for later folding steps involving nonlocal interactions. Hitherto, studies of
helix formation have been hampered by the failure of most short polypeptides to
assume detectible sheet or helix structure. In the work, helix nucleation sites
in the form of rigid groupings of three amides or amide surrogates are to be
synthesized and bonded to short polypeptide sequences. With these hybrids, the
role of chain length, amino acid composition, charge at the nucleation site, and
solvation will be followed by a variety of high field proton nuclear magnetic
resonance techniques and by circular dichroism. In addition to the N-terminal
helix nucleating template that has been developed during the preceding project
period, C-terminal nucleation templates will be synthesized and studied, and the
geometry of the N-terminal template will be refined. The aims of these studies
include estimation of the stabilizing effect of the template on adjacent helical
polypeptide, determining the geometrical features of the growth of short
helices, and the degree to which the helix-forming tendency of amino acid
residues is independent of enviroment. The long range objective of this study is
the design of protein analogs with predictable folding properties, using the
concurrently developed thiol capture method for protein synthesis to generate
`chimeric' small proteins that contain covalently incorporated nucleation
templates.