* 8813931
* Collaborative Research on the Implementation and Effects    of the 1965 Voting Rights Act
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* F Davidson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 01/31/1991
* USD 44,796.00

Although the 1965 Voting Rights Act has been hailed as perhaps the most
successful piece of policy legislation enacted in the post-WWII era, scientific
work examining its influence and consequences has been remarkably absent. While
there are views about the Act's impact and a literature dealing with impact and
implementation in a host of other legislative domains, most of the best
scholarship dealing with the Act has been legal and constitutional despite the
scope and importance of this piece of legislation. With some recent and
important exceptions, most empirical work to date has been anecdotal or at a
relatively low level of conceptualization and methodological sophistication.
Drs. Grofman and Davidson along with a team of cooperating investigators seek to
remedy this situation through undertaking a systematic, multi-site project. The
design includes each of the seven states in the deep South originally covered by
the Act and selected other states in the Midwest and Northeast with substantial
black and Hispanic populations and in the Southwest with significant Mexican-
American, Native American, or black populations. A minimum of four data bases
will be formed: (1) a before and after data base for all jurisdictions which
have shifted from at-large to a single-member district or mixed system, (2) a
longitudinal data base on changes in minority representation in a random sample
of jurisdictions continually using at-large elections, (3) a data base for all
single-member and at-large districts identifying minority population size and
electoral outcomes, and (4) a data base for a sample of all elected minority
officials, identifying election type and other relevant characteristics of the
jurisdiction. Data will be gathered at the city, county, school board, and state
legislative level. To facilitate comparative longitudinal analysis, data from
different levels of government will be aggregated at the county level. This
major effort can be expected to produce equally major contributions. At a
theoretical level, the work holds substantial promise of adding to our
understanding of the consequences of voting systems, the impact of law on social
change, and the dynamics underlying implementation. At a substantive level, this
study will produce knowledge about race relations in America and one of the most
important and far reaching federal laws to be enacted in the twentieth century.
Further, beyond what will be accomplished by this team of investigators, the
project will also yield a substantial data base appropriate for the analytic
purposes of other scholars.