* 8813720
* Econometric Estimation of the Ruble Value of Soviet         Privileges
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Irwin Collier, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 07/31/1990
* USD 17,782.00

Money in a centrally planned economy differs in fundamental respects from money
in a market economy. Whereas command of purchasing power (money) is virtually
synonymous with the power to acquire goods and services or other assests in a
capitalist economy, money matters much less in a socialist economy characterized
by pervasive shortage and non-market processes of allocation and distribution.
Instead of the familiar household budget constraint from microeconomic theory of
market systems, consumer choice under socialism is typically limited by a budget
constraint as well as a host of quantity constraints. Furthermore, non-monetary
benefits associated with a job or political position (e.g. connections or
privilege) can constitute a very significant addition to a household's real
income. Exploration of these differences in the nature of household constraints
and of sources of non-market income and wealth in socialist economies is the
central concern of the proposed research. The specific purpose of the project is
to derive estimates of the ruble value of certain privileges in the USSR. The
distribution of economic welfare (real income) in the Soviet Union, as well as
in other countries where markets play a secondary role in resource allocation
and the distribution of income, is known to depend heavily upon the distribution
of such non-monetary forms of wealth. The ultimate purpose of such estimates is
for adjusting conventional measures of the distribution of monetary income to
reflect the distribution of real income. The data to be used on the project come
from the General Survey of the Soviet Interview Project (SIP). The particular
privileges for which information is available are 1) access to closed shops or
special rations, 2) use of an official car, and 3) access to closed medical
clinics. Preliminary analysis by the principal investigator has found that an
ordered probit model using the SIP respondent's assessment of own relative
material well-being together with income and privilege variables generates
plausible estimates for the ruble value of these privileges. The major extension
of that work planned in this project will be to incorporate measures of human
capital and other household wealth into the specification and estimation of the
model.