* 8813664
* Stable Isotope Enrichment of Arid Zone Irrigation Waters in The Eastern Delta of The Nile River in Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1994
* Harry Simpson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1994
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This project supports a collaborative study by Drs. H.J. Simpson
and J.W.C. White of the Geochemistry Division of Lamont-Doherty Geological
Observatory, Columbia University and Dr. M.S. Hamza of the Atomic Energy
Establishment in Cairo, Egypt. The objective of the study is to obtain
indications of the ratio of irrigation water losses through the two important
mechanisms of transpiration and evaporation by observation of heavy isotopes
(deuteruim and oxygen-18) in residual water. Samples will be taken in Egypt in
the Eastern Delta of the Nile River from two separate areas, one where the net
groundwater flow is from shallow soils into deeper groundwaters and the second
where the net vertical flow is the opposite. The study is hoped to develop a
practical empirical approach to estimating evaporation losses from large
irrigation networks, independent of estimates of evaporation plus transpiration
based on discharge gaging data. The study is expected also to help understand
atmospheric water budgets in arid zones with extensive irrigation networks.
Scope: The collaboration in this project is beneficial to the U.S. and to Egypt.
The project links Egyptian and U.S. scientists of varied experiences that mesh
well to provide the necessary skills and knowledge for its success. The
information gained through this research could be useful to many countries in
arid or semi-arid regions with large irrigation systems.