* 8813426
* US-Netherlands Cooperative Research On Ultra High-ResolutionLaser Spectroscopy in Molecular Beams:  The Transition from Order to Chaos.
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1993
* David Pratt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1993
* USD 12,450.00

This award supports Professor David W. Pratt of the University of Pittsburgh to
pursue research collaboratively with Dr. W. L. Meerts of the Physics Department
of the Catholic University of Nijmegen. They are carrying out ultra high-
resolution laser experiments to examine a variety of dynamical phenomena
occurring in the electronically excited states of large molecules, including
benzophenone, napthalene, quinoline, pyrimidine, pyrazine, methyl salicylate and
several organic molecule/rare gas solvent clusters. The phenomena under study
include intramolecular vibrational relaxation, internal conversion, intersystem
crossing, cluster formation, and chemical reactions. Their experiments will
utilize state-of-the-art continuous wave dye lasers operating in the
ultraviolet, molecular beams, and on-line data acquisition systems. The U.S. and
Dutch groups bring complementary expertise and approaches in high resolution
spectroscopy and chemical dynamics to this joint research. Although they now
have similar equipment, the Dutch group is the acknowledged leader in this area
of molecular spectroscopy. Their prior collaboration made possible the design
and fabrication of a new generation of "laser spectrograph" at the University of
Pittsburgh. The absorption of light by a molecule creates an electronically
excited state. It is the properties of this state, rather than the ground state,
that dictate the chemical and physical behavior of the system. The sophisticated
techniques being used in this collaborative research will reveal molecular
eigenstate structures of several compounds of biological and chemical interest
for the first time. This knowledge will make it possible to control chemical
bond breaking and forming mechanisms, and thus permit the control of chemical
reactions with light.