* 8813958
* Anaerobic Transformation of Homocyclic and Heterocyclic     Aromatic Hydrocarbons and the Implications to Contaminated  Ground Water Aquifers
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Dunja Grbic-Galic, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 02/28/1993
* USD 400,971.00

The objective of this project is to study anaerobic microbial transformation of
aromatic hydrocarbons in laboratory microcosms derived from subsurface material.
The substrates to be used in this research are homocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(mononuclear and binuclear), and nitrogen, sulfur, and oxygen heterocycles. The
main thrust of the research is on studying the rates and extent of
transformation of the model compounds (as single substrates, or in mixtures)
under denitrifying, sulfate-reducing, fermentative, and transient
aerobic/anaerobic conditions. The experiments will be carried out in batch and
semicontinuously fed column microcosms derived from subsurface material.
Pathways of transformations will also be followed, and for this purpose
chromatographic-mass spectrometric techniques and radioactive carbon labeling of
the substrates will be used. Routes and kinetics of anaerobic transformation
with different electron acceptors will be investigated in the context of
changing environmental conditions; varying pH, nutrients, presence and absence
of other organic carbon and energy sources, and influence of other aromatic
hydrocarbons in mixtures. Biodegradation of compounds to be studied in this
project are generally possible under aerobic conditions. It is not always
feasible to introduce sufficient aeration into contaminated sites, and the
degree of anaerobicity usually increases with the degree of pollution by
degradable organic matter. Results of this project may provide the basis for an
alternative process to decontaminate aquifers that are contaminated by aromatic
hydrocarbons.