* 8813353
* RUI:  Organic Acids in Coastal North Carolina Rainwater
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Joan Willey, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 12/31/1990
* USD 39,867.00

Acid rain and acid deposition have become major scientific and political
concerns. Rain has a natural acidity due to dissolved carbon dioxide. Although
the acidity of rain can be made even greater by the emission of certain gases
from human endeavors, other natural sources may contribute as well. Among these
natural sources is vegetation which is presumably a source of natural organic
acids such as acetic and formic acids. An understanding of the role of organic
acids, their origin, and the influence of ecosystems in their origin is relevant
to a more complete understanding of processes leading to the formation of acid
rain. A primary goal of this project is to establish concentration ranges of
formic and acetic acid in rainwater from two distinct but nearby coastal North
Carolina environments, a salt marsh and a forest, to evaluate whether an
ecosystem can influence the composition of the precipitation that it receives.
Rainwater will be collected on an storm event basis during growing and non-
growing seasons. The rainwater samples will be analyzed by ion chromatography
for chloride, sulfate, nitrate, ammonium, formic acid, and formic acid. The
acidity (pH) of the rainwater will be measured as well. A secondary goal is to
determine the effect of sampling procedure on the measured concentrations of
formic and acetic acids.