* 8813624
* RUI:  "Trading and Portfolios in Behavioral Economics"
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1991
* Harold Shefrin, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 06/30/1991
* USD 97,953.00

Investors lacking inside information know that insiders trade in the stock
market. So, why do those lacking this information bother to trade? Even money
managers seem unable to "beat the market". So, why do they continue to try, and
why do their clients continue to pay for their services? Further, how do
individuals structure their portfolios and why are portfolios typically not
fully diversified? Why do investors prefer particular positions such as covered
call-options? These are some of the central questions in the area of behavioral
finance that this project will address. The standard theory in finance is based
on the assumption of the "rational man" who attempts to maximize expected
utility as he chooses among investment alternatives. However, standard finance-
theory offers no compelling answers to these questions. This project will
develop and test a finance model which incorporates psychological factors and
provides a clearer understanding of individual investment and financial-market
behavior. The model will include errors of cognition, regret, and the framing of
choices. The functioning of securities markets has been the focus of much debate
recently. A major issue is the role of government in regulating these markets.
Should laws prohibiting insider trading be strengthened or abolished? Should the
small investor have special protection and if so, how could this be done? This
project is important because it will shed light on this issue.