* 8813343
* U.S.-China Joint Seminar on Social Science Research in      Support of the International Geosphere/Biosphere Program    (May 1988, Beijing)
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1988,09/30/1989
* Harold Jacobson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 09/30/1989
* USD 40,554.00

This award supports the participation of nine US researchers in a joint seminar
with Beijing University on a social science research program for the
International Geosphere/Biosphere Program (IGBP). The IGBP is an effort of the
International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) to "describe and understand
the interactive physical, chemical, and biological processes that regulate the
total Earth system, the unique environment that it provides for life, the
changes that are occurring in this system, and the manner in which they are
influenced by human actions." This seminar will focus on the development of a
social science research program to complement the IGBP. The social processes
that account for change in human activities are less well understood than many
important natural phenomena and modeling of them is even more limited. The joint
efforts of China and the US to contribute to the definition of a research
program in the social sciences to contribute to the IGBP could be one of the
first steps toward definition of an international research program which is
responsive to the needs of all countries, both developed and developing, as well
as to the specific national needs of China and the US. This seminar is being
supported jointly by NSF and the Chinese State Education Commission under the
Protocol on Cooperation in Basic Sciences.