* 8813514
* Expedited Award for Novel Research:  Self-Organizing        Microstructures (Chiral Hollow Molecular Cylinders)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Richard Weiss, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 01/31/1990
* USD 30,000.00

This project deals with the creation of molecular scale tubules with special
properties. The investigator proposes to convert special columnar liquid
crystals with disk-like components into stable multi-molecular hollow cylinders
which have hydrophobic exteriors and hydrophilic interiors. The size and shape
and mirror image selectivity of the holes in the cylinders can be varied to
allow a wide variety of ions and enantiomers to be complexed and separated. The
special columns are stabilized by polymerizing appropriate groups which are
introduced into their alkyl chains. The type and location of the groups on the
chains will allow intracolumnar (vertical) and/or intercolumnar (horizontal)
polymerization to occur selectively. Following the above processes, the template
saccharide units are removed, leaving hollow microcylinders. If successful, this
approach will allow a wide variety of robust molecular aggregates to be employed
as selective membranes and complexing agents. Since the template core groups of
the hollow cylinders can be a variety of cyclic saccharides, diverse sizes and
shapes of guest molecules can be included in the hollow cylinders to the
exclusion of their relatives. It is anticipated that this approach could lead to
development of membranes which can be engineered, as specific needs arise, by
selecting an appropriate precursor saccharide from the shelf. The possible
applications for the proposed devises are manifold. In the drug industry, they
can be used to remove deleterious side products or to isolate small quantities
of beneficial species in the presence of large excesses of other compounds. If
the precursor columnar liquid crystals can be oriented with magnetic or
electrical fields, the polymerized cylinders may be sufficiently long to serve
as molecular light pipes or one-dimensional, single electron wires. Though
fabrication of these devices is outside the scope of this project, the objective
of the project is to discern the feasibility of an approach which could
eventually lead to such novel devices.