* 8813355
* Value Issues in the Transfer of Technology to Developing    Countries
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Halina Brown, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1991
* USD 175,906.00

A central focus for studies in science, technology and society is the
development and management of complex technologies. These efforts raise
correspondingly complex ethical and value concerns which must be confronted and
reconciled in the process. This project addresses key value issues -- those
concerning development and those affecting health and safety -- involved in
siting potentially hazardous technology in developing countries, by
multinational corporations. The research team -- composed of U.S. researchers
and cooperating scientists from the developing countries -- will conduct a
detailed analysis of two to four cases involving the location of industrial
plants overseas. An advisory panel will oversee the research process. The
research plan has several parts: content and document analysis; selection of
cases; study of the cases from the perspectives of the various stakeholders;
identification and analysis of values issues; testing of hypotheses and
development of a model of the decision process; and critique of policies, plans,
and codes of conduct on the basis of what has been learned. A major book and a
number of scholarly articles will summarize the findings of the project. Results
will also be made available in appropriate international forums and in summaries
and reports to the stakeholders. This complex project addresses some very
important issues. The research team is uniquely qualified, by virtue of past
research and international experience, to undertake it. The advisory group is
appropriate; institutional support is very good. The project is designed well
and plans for the dissemination of results are good. It is likely that follow-
on efforts will continue after the period of this award. First year support in
the amount of $93,338 is recommended. Upon receipt of a satisfactory report on
progress, the remaining support will be granted.