* 8813307
* Reconstructing the Glacial Thermocline at Little Bahama Bank
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1991
* George Lohmann, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 04/30/1991
* USD 123,864.00

As a primary feature of ocean circulation and key component of the global
carbon cycle, changes in the thermocline must be accounted for if we are to
understand the processes involved in Quaternary climatic fluctuation.
Preliminary results, based on the benthic foraminiferal 018 and 13c records in
cores from the mid-and lower-thermocline at Little Bahama Bank, suggest the
glacial thermocline at about 540 meters wataer depth was approximately 2oC
cooler and more 13c enriched that it is today. The objective for this project is
to determine how bathymetric profiles of nutrients and physical properties
within the thermocline have evolved from the last glacial maximum to the
present. The goal is to relate thermocline evolution in the North Atlantic
subtropical gyre to glacial- interglacial changes of physical forcing factors,
the global carbon budget/atmospheric pCO2 and intermediate/deep water
circulation. In order to accomplish this goal, a suite of cores from the well-
sedimented southern flank of Little Bahama Bank will be collected Over the depth
range 400 to 1700 meters. %%% A primary feature of ocean circulation is the
depth of the thermocline where warm, well-mixed surface water lies on top of
colder deep water. the depth to this fundamental boundary must be known for
glacial periods in order to reconstruct the history of oceans during the last
glacial maximum. This project will use oxygen and carbon iosotopes in benthic
foraminifera found in sedimentary cores from the flanks of Little Bahama Bank to
document the fluctuations of the thermocline during fluctuations of the climate.
The evolution of patterns in theromcline thickness, temperature, and nutrient
supply will be determined for the first time in an open ocean environment where
local coastal effects will be absent.