* 8813242
* U.S.-Indonesia Cooperative Research:  A Quasi-Three         Dimensional Groundwater Optimization Model of the Jakarta   Basin
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* Brad Finney, Humboldt State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 09/30/1991
* USD 20,798.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Drs. Brad A. Finney, and Robert Willis,
Department of Environmental Resources Engineering, Humboldt State University, to
pursue with Professor Idris Maxdoni Kamil, Institute of Technology, Bandung,
Indonesia, and scientists/engineers at BPPT (Agency for the Assessment and
Application of Technology), Jakarta, for a period of 24 months, a program of
cooperative research to develop a quasi-three dimensional ground water
optimization model of the Jakarta groundwater basin. The optimization model will
be used to (1) identify pumping and recharge schedules to satisfy water targets
and control salinity intrusion and (2) determine the cost and environmental
trade-offs associated with additional ground water development in the basin. The
research will explore the use of quasilinearization, projected Lagrangian
methods, and differential dynamic programming methods for solution of the
optimal control model. The Indonesian scientists will be responsible for the
development of a ground water data base for the basin and a ground water
monitoring program. The U.S. scientists will develop a discrete time optimal
control model of the Jakarta aquifer system. The principal water supply of
Jakarta, Indonesia's capital and largest city, is ground water which provides
more than 80% of the daily water demand for the region's 6.5 million residents.
The overdevelopment of ground water in this region over the past decade has
produced declining water levels and degraded the water quality of shallow
aquifers in the Jakarta coastal plain. The research will develop new techniques
and tools for the optimal management of the system and will be used to
investigate the field performance of a large scale ground water optimization
model. The collaborators are highly respected scientists in the field of this
research. The present project will allow them to combine their talents and
interests for mutual benefit. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in
developing countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.