* 8813028
* Nonlinear Optical Properties of Small Grain Composites      (Joint Research Effort)
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Joseph Haus, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 10/31/1992
* USD 263,594.00

A three year theoretical program to study nonlinear optical properites of nobel
metal grains (gold, silver and copper) and semiconductor grains (Cd SexS1-x)
embedded in glasses or suspended in colloidal solutions is proposed. The
research will also focus on size dispersion, shape variations and polymeric
coatings on the particles to enhance the optical nonlinearities. The project
involves the theoretical formulation of the dynamic properties of quantum
confined carriers in these grains and the calculation of the dielectric
function. A generalized effective medium theory will be developed to obtain the
overall dielectric response of the composite material which includes the metal
or semiconductor grains and the dielectric host material. The generalized
effective medium theory will be tested by numerical simulation of the composite
medium. The resultant dielectric functions will be used to study the spatial
propagation of electromagnetic waves in the medium. Our description will include
transverse modes and forward- and backward-wave propagation to obtain realistic
analysis of the materials. The investigators will study absorption and
reflection of the electromagnetic waves, as well as, multiwave mixing.
Experimental data on these materials will be analyzed in terms of these
dielectric functions. The phenomena of optical bistability and optical phase
conjugation will also be investigated in the composite materials. This project
is expected to lead to a realistic assessment of the application of these
materials for nonlinear optical devices.