* 8813594
* A Comparative Study of the Atmospheric Sulfur Budget in     Different Natural Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/1988,03/31/1992
* Harald Berresheim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 03/31/1992
* USD 253,300.00

Sulfur is one of the major elements which is essential for metabolic processes
in all forms of biological organisms on our planet. Sulfur in its various
chemical forms continuously cycled between the biosphere and other terrestrial
reservoirs, such as the hydrosphere and the atmosphere. Natural sources emit a
considerable number of organic and inorganic sulfur compounds into the
atmosphere. These sulfur compounds are chemically transformed under atmospheric
conditions into other sulfur species which are eventually removed from the
atmosphere and led back to the biosphere and other reservoirs via dry and wet
deposition processes. This cycle counteracts a build-up of toxic levels of
sulfur in the atmosphere and, at the same time, supplies the biosphere with
critical life-supporting sulfur compounds. Although emissions of man-made sulfur
compounds are reasonably well documented, a major uncertainty in assessing the
anthropogenic impact to the environment (such as acid rain and visibility) is
the lack of understanding of the natural sulfur cycle. This project will develop
measurement techniques for the major sulfur compounds in the natural atmosphere,
including those in aerosol particles and cloudwater. The program is aimed at
elucidating the relative importance of various natural environments with respect
to the global atmospheric sulfur cycle. The sampling and analytical techniques
developed in this work will be critically examined through intercomparisions.
The result of this project should aid in laying a foundation for future
comprehensive field experiments dedicated to a quantitative determination of the
major chemical pathways of sulfur in the atmosphere and to an accurate
assessment of natural verses anthropogenic contributions to the global
atmospheric sulfur budget.