* 8813175
* Grassland Research Facilities at Cedar Point                Biological Station
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Anthony Joern, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 01/31/1991
* USD 28,476.00

Cedar Point Biological Station is a significant protected natural area which
supports high quality research on grassland ecosystems. A key resource
associated with Cedar Point is Arapaho Prairie, a controlled access, regulated
research site in the unique Nebraska Sandhills ecosystem. Arapaho Prairie is
owned by the Nature Conservancy and managed through a long-term lease agreement
by Cedar Point Biological Station to provide logistical support for manipulative
research. Two key facilities will be constructed with funds received from the
present project. These will greatly facilitate accurate and effective site
management and database development/maintenance as well as support and encourage
highly productive research enterprises into the dynamics of grassland processes.
Facilities to be constructed include: (1) a small preparatory building to
provide protected, on-site workspace to support fieldwork. Sophisticated
electronic and physiological equipment required by many studies can be more
effectively employed with the availability of such a facility. (2) Arapaho
Prairie will be gridded with permanent reference points and key biotic and
abiotic features mapped. These features will then be synthesized in a Geographic
Information System (GIS) which provides a computerized method for storing and
referencing spatial relationships among these key attributes. Future retrieval
of known patterns as well as detection of presently unrecognized patterns for a
variety of central, biologically relevant features of the site will then be
possible. The construction of this GIS will prove immediately valuable for
preserving, mananging, providing access to, and fostering research at this
nationally important research site.