* 8813157
* Solar Imaging Vector Magnetograph for MAX '91
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Richard Canfield, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 01/31/1992
* USD 232,200.00

In the MAX91 report Flare Research at the Next Solar Maximum, six fundamental
questions identify the highest priority flare research during solar cycle 22: 1.
How and where is flare energy stored? 2. What causes flare energy release? 3.
What are the mechanisms of flare energy release? 4. How are energetic particles
accelerated? 5. What are the mechanisms of flare energy transport? 6. How do
flare effects propagate to Earth? None of these questions can be answered in a
satisfactory manner without vector magnetic field measurements. Such
observations are as important to understanding solar flares as are y-ray, X-ray,
or microwave observations. The collective research experience during the last
two solar cycles has shown that only through coordinated multispectral sets of
observations can we hope to understand how and why solar flares occur. Dedicated
observations with a high-performace imaging vector magnetograph at Mees Solar
Observatory (Haleakala, Maui) will maximize the continuity, frequency, and
reliability of vector magnetic field measurements of solar flares and active
regions during the MAX91 time period (1991-1994). This instrument will provide
solar vector magnetic field data that are necessary: (1) to understand the
relationship between the coronal structure and evolution of vector magnetic
fields, X-rays, and particle acceleration; (2) to measure the variation of
magnetic free energy of active regions and its relationship to major solar
flares; (3) to map photospheric electrical currents and relate them to coronal
X-ray structures and the sites of energetic particle precipitation. The
instrument will obtain the required narrow-band polarimetric images using a
rotating quarter-wave plate, Fabry-Perot etalon, and acousto-optic tunable
filter, building on experience with these components at the telescopes of the
University of Hawaii. Its benefits to solar research during MAX91 will accrue
from its high spatial, spectral, and temporal resolution, spectral agility, and
on-line data reduction capabilities.