* 8813519
* User Modifiable Interfaces:  A Field-Experimental           Assessment of Effects
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1992
* Tora Bikson, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 07/31/1992
* USD 199,435.00

In recent years interactive computer technology has significantly expanded the
possibilities for users to control interfaces to group systems through
individual or group modifications. Adapting the interface to individual work
styles potentially enhances the ability of information workers to exploit more
fully their substantive expertise and to enhance their job performance. However,
user modifiability options have not been widely implemented, in part because of
fears about impacts on organization.wide system integrity and manageability.
This project conducts a controlled field experiment to study what happens to
organizations, work groups, and individuals when users are allowed to modify
system interfaces. About eight work groups of 15.20 people in two or more
organizations are studied over eight months as they use electronic mail. Half
the groups have a range of modification options; the others operate with
unmodifiable systems. Effects at individual and group levels are studied using a
combination of system.logged indicators, behavioral methods, and self reports.
Analysis focuses on short and long.range performance effects, structural and
communication effects, and the tradeoffs observed among outcomes. The study also
characterizes the processes of implementation of modifiability options, and the
diffusion of user.generated interface variations. The result sought is a more
systematic picture of how user modifiability affects the implementation and use
of information technology, as well as of the consequences for individual, group
and organizational performance.