* 8813439
* Copepod Production in the Skagerrak in Relation to          Hydrography, Primary Production and Bacterial Production
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1990
* William Peterson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1990
* USD 10,250.00

This award supports William T. Peterson and a graduate student from SUNY at
Stony Brook to collaborate with Thomas Kiorboe and others of the Danish
Institute for Fisheries and Marine Research in a study of marine plankton
ecology off the Danish coast. The Danish group is carrying out studies to
measure what proportion of the primary production by phytoplankton passes
through copepods to fish (the classical food web) and what proportion passes
through bacteria and heterotrophic flagellates (the microbial loop.) They are
also trying to establish whether there are predictable relationships between
vertical mixing, phytoplankton taxonomic composition and the proportion of
primary production passing through each of the two food webs. Dr. Peterson has
been invited to participate and direct the work on copepod production,
specifically by comparing and contrasting copepod production in three
hydrographic regimes (mixed, stratified, and frontal water columns in the
Skagerrak) and comparing total secondary production to rates of primary
production in the three areas. This study represents one of the first attempts
at the simultaneous measurement of biomass and production of all the components
of the first two trophic levels of a food web in the sea. As such, this study
will lead to a fuller understanding of the factors controlling transfer
coefficients and food chain efficiency, and could lead to a re-evaluation of the
role of copepods in marine food webs.