* 8813196
* Effects of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivators on Worker     Performance:  A Longitudinal Field Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1992
* Jean Latting, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 12/31/1992
* USD 225,440.00

The purpose of this award is to study the effects of intrinsic motivation (e.g.
goal setting with performance feedback and participation) and extrinsic
motivation (e.g. bonuses) on performance. The study involves a longitudinal
field experiment. It will span three years and will be conducted within a multi-
site social services agency. The study uses a replicated time series design and
involves an extensive data collection effort of baseline measures
postintervention and follow up data from agency records, questionnaire
responses, and indepth interviews. The results will have important implications
for management practice affecting the design of performance evaluation and
reward systems as well as for the validation of certain issues in motivation
theory. This is an ambitious field experiment involving a study of central
theoretical issues on the effect of intrinsic and extrinsic motivators on
performance. It is also of central interest to practitioners concerned with the
design of performance evaluation and reward systems in organizations.
Specifically, the purposes of the study are to determine (1) whether an
intrinsic motivation system improves the performance and attitudes of employees;
(2) whether the addition of extrinsic rewards to the intrinsic system results in
gains or losses in performance; and (3) whether these gains or losses are
mediated by adjustments in the intrinsic system. Most prior work on this issue
has been done in the laboratory or over short time horizons. In addition to the
validation and extension of theory and the implication for management practice
the research will also contribute to the methodology of field experimentation in
live organizations which is still in early stages of formalization.