* 8813562
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research: Investigation of InterfacialPhenomena by Ellipsometry, Acoustic Shear, and Electro-     chemical Techniques
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1993
* David Paul, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1993
* USD 10,892.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. David Paul,
University of Arkansas, and Professor Ingemar Lundstrom, Department of Physics
and Measurement Technology, Linkoping University, Sweden. The objectives of this
research are to clarify how the piezoelectric crystal (quartz crystal
microbalance) functions as a sensor in the liquid phase. In addition, the
investigators will study how the microviscosity of the sensor/solution interface
is affected by conformation changes in large protein molecules next to the
surface. If the potentially useful piezoelectric sensor is to be used to analyze
important biological molecules, fundamental questions regarding protein
interactions with the surface of the sensor must be answered. It is proposed
that the interaction of "simple" proteins with the mechanically oscillating
surface of the sensor can be completely described with the data collected from
combined ellipsometric and electrochemical experiments. This joint effort will
bring together Swedish expertise in ellipsometry with U.S. expertise in
piezoelectric sensors to examine this question. The results of this research
should provide new insights into the use of piezoelectric crystals for sensors
and add to the information on how solvents and proteins interact with metal
surfaces. Discovering which variables in the sensor surface/solution interface
cause a frequency shift should be beneficial in applying the sensor to practical
systems. In addition, measurements from the piezoelectric sensor can also
provide information on how the microviscosity of the liquid in contact with the
protein is affected by conformational changes of the protein. This data may then
be used to further develop practical applications of the piezoelectric sensor in
the liquid phase. Potential applications are in the areas of biotechnology,
clinical analysis, and genetic engineering.