* 8813867
* U.S.-Finland Cooperative Research:  Theory of Josephson     Effects in Superfluid Helium-3
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1988,03/31/1991
* James Sauls, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1991
* USD 17,566.00

This award supports Professor James A. Sauls of Northwestern University in a
research collaboration with Professor Juhani Kurkijarvi of the Abo Academy, Abo,
Finland. They are carrying out a theoretical study of the Josephson effect in
superfluid helium-3, with the goal of understanding the crossover from
dissipative behavior to non-dissipative superflow in weak links. Calculations
will be done of the Josephson current-phase relation and the maximum critical
current that can be supported by a weak link in superfluid helium-3. This work
should provide a sufficiently realistic description of the superfluid to be a
valuable guideline for the design of experiments to measure the Josephson
effect. Both investigators have substantial experience in the quasiclassical
theory of superconductivity and in numerical solutions of the quasiclassical
equations. Dr. Kurkijarvi has particular expertise in the theory of
superconducting Josephson devices, while Dr. Sauls is an expert on the
properties of superfluids. As a team they have outstanding qualifications for
the proposed work, which should produce the theoretical basis needed to advance
understanding of the physics of quantum effects. The discovery of
superconductivity in the heavy fermion metals has generated considerable
interest from theorists and experimentalists working in low temperature physics.
Quantitative calculations of the properties of superconductors with strong
spatial variations, e.g., weak links and tunnel junctions, are among the hardest
theoretical problems to solve in the field of superconductivity. The
quantitative calculations of the properties of weak links in superfluid helium-3
that will result from this collaborative research should provide qualitative
insights into weak links connecting unconventional superconductors and lead to
more successful devices based upon the Josephson effect.