* 8813593
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research:  Synthesis of High       Performance Ceramic Fibers by Chemical Vapor Deposition for Advanced Metallics Reinforcing.
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Vladimir Hlavacek, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1990
* USD 8,991.00

This award supports Dr. Vladimir Hlavacek of the Laboratory for Reaction and
Ceramic Engineering of the State University of New York at Buffalo (SUNY/B) in a
research collaboration on metal matrix composites with Dr. B.F. Lux of the
Institute for Inorganic Materials Technology of the Technical University of
Vienna. The ultimate goal of the collaboration between these two laboratories is
to develop a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process for manufacturing of
ceramic fibers with good mechanical properties and high values of thermal
expansion coefficients. Current work by the SUNY/B group on CVD of titanium
diboride, titanium carbide or boron carbide on a carbon core is one of the
promising routes to manufacture an inorganic fiber with such properties. They
are now interested in extending this work to include beryllium compounds. Basic
engineering research is needed to develop highly controlled processing
operations and conditions that will produce consistently high fiber strengths
over long length and with minimal coating defects. SUNY/B has experience with
CVD and excellent facilities and experience working with various core materials
to synthesize continuous monofilaments of different diameters, while the
Austrian Institute has unusual expertise in CVD processes and in working with
ceramic materials including the beryllides. The ever increasing performance
requirements of aerospace systems and other classes of vehicles and machinery
call for materials with low weight, high strength, high stiffness and high
temperature capabilities. Metal matrix composites appear to offer these
characteristics, but production of such advanced materials requires substantial
basic information about factors that control ductility and strength,
environmental effects, and interactions between fiber and matrix in composites.
The proposed collaboration offers the interdisciplinary mix of complementary
skills and knowledge that is needed to make progress in this strategically
important field.