* 8813889
* Thermophilic Systems for Production of Ethanol and Other    Neutral Products from Lignocellulose
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Lee Lynd, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Dov Jaron
* 02/28/1991
* USD 99,506.00

This research is directed toward using thermophilic bacteria to convert
lignocellulosic materials into ethanol and other neutral products. Two tasks are
considered, each based on original analyses and/or concepts. These tasks address
critical factors which limit the application of thermophilic solvent production,
and are also expected to contribute to fundamental understanding relevant to
several topics in biochemical engineering and applied microbiology and
biochemistry. The first task uses continuous pure cultures to investigate the
influence of product manipulation on end product metabolism in order to evaluate
both the applied potential of this approach and also theoretical models for
metabolic regulation. The second task extends experimental and theoretical
investigation of product manipulation to undefined mixed cultures. Biological
conversion of lignocellulose to ethanol and other solvents is a versatile
process which could be used in various applications to replace petroleum. The
amount of lignocellulose available in the U.S. is much greater than the amounts
of corn and other agricultural crops, and is sufficiently large that
transportation fuel requirements could be met from this resource. Thermophilic
bacteria are attractive for solvent production because they can ferment all of
the carbohydrate components in biomass. This feature has a very favorable impact
on process economics, and distinguishes thermophiles from other biological
agents which have been considered for solvent production. This research
addresses one of the main limitations of thermophiles for solvent production:
The production of organic acids. Biochemical considerations suggest
modifications of the fermentor environment to favor solvent production, and
bioreactor designs to achieve these modifications. Experiments to investigate
effects of environmental factors on solvent production will be carried out with
both pure and undefined mixed cultures. The study of solvent production by
undefined mixed cultures could result in a new process having many of the
advantages of anaerobic digestion but producing solvents in lieu of less
valuable methane. Dilute-acid pretreated hardwood and xylose will be the major
substrates studied.