* 8813655
* Petrology and Geochemistry of Economic Minerals and Their   Host Rocks in the Besham Area of Northern Pakistan
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1990
* John Shervais, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1990
* USD 11,550.00

Description: This project supports geological field research in Pakistan by the
P.I. Dr. John W. Shervais and his Pakistani doctoral student, M. Tahir Shah; and
laboratory research by Mr. Shah in the laboratory of Dr. M. Ikramuddin at
Eastern Washington University. The research objectives include: 1) assessment of
the distribution of gold and silver within and adjacent to the base metal lead-
zinc ore bodies and the correlation between precious metal concentrations and
base metal ore grades; 2) assessment of the usefullness of pathfinder elements
in locating volcanogenic ore deposits in high grade metamorphic terrains, and 3)
evaluation of the origin of the lead-zinc deposits in the Besham area of
Pakistan in light of the new geochemical data. Mr. Shah will collect samples in
Pakistan in two areas that represent a single primary ore body that has been
offset structurally, the Lahore and the Pazang lead-zinc sulfide deposits. He
will conduct geochemical analysis of these samples at Eastern Washington
University under supervision of Dr. Ikramuddin. Scope: The research will bring
together, in addition to the Pakistan graduate student, scientists from the
University of South Carolina, and Eastern Washington University, and geologists
from the University of Peshwar in Pakistan who have extensive experience in the
geology of Pakistan. The work is likely to lead to improvement in the
understanding of the geochemistry of minerals of economic value, and to enhance
the scientific capabilities of the Pakistani graduate student and his potential
to contribute to the technical and economic development of his country.