* 8813492
* US-Austria Cooperative Research:  Production and Stability  (Unimolecular Decay) of Singly and Multiply Charged vdW     Cluster Ions
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* A. Castleman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1992
* USD 14,800.00

This award supports Professor A. W. Castleman, Jr., of the Pennsylvania State
University, for continued collaboration with Professor T. D. Maerk of the
University of Innsbruck, Austria, to enhance his ongoing domestic research in
chemical physics. These investigators share an interest in understanding the
formation and chemistry of aerosols in the atmosphere. The focus of their
collaboration is a study of the production, stability and reactivity of cluster
ions of a wide variety of chemical systems produced by various techniques. The
Austrian experiment uses electron impact ionization to produce cluster ions and
can identify sequential decay processes, while the American lab uses
photoionization and can investigate dissociation over a longer time. The
American group employs time-of-flight mass spectrometric techniques, while the
Austrian group uses a double focussing sector field mass spectrometer to study
similar phenomena. The techniques are complementary and furnish different
capabilities that result in a more complete description of the processes under
consideration. Gas phase clusters comprised of weakly bound aggregates of either
atoms and/or molecules often display properties that lie between the gas and
condensed state. Studies of clusters are not only of value in terms of bridging
the gas and condensed phase, but are also interesting since they comprise a new
state of matter in which there is intense and growing interest from a
fundamental point of view. Furthermore, they are also important due to their
potential role in many fields of application and technology. This new and
rapidly growing field requires and benefits from the application of a wide
variety of experimental tools and the interaction of scientists coming from
different disciplines. The proposed collaboration provides unique opportunities
in both regards, as amply demonstrated by the productivity of their previous
collaboration.