* 8814548
* Perovskite Electrodes for Zirconia Electrolytic Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Angelica Stacy, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Farley Fisher
* 05/31/1992
* USD 59,855.00

Solid-oixide electrolytes offer the prospect of conducting electrochemistry at
high temperatures and in reactive environments; one present application is for
monitoring oxygen levels in combustion exhaust streams. Existing systems use
porous metallic films deposited on solid electrolytes; while functional, such
systems have low effeciency, apparently because only the three-phase (metal,
electrolyte, gas) boundary is active. This study seeks to overcome this problem
by use of metal oxides that exhibit conductivity for both electrons and oxygen
ions. Specifically, the kinetics of oxygen exchange between the gas phase and a
family of electrolytes with the perovskite structure, lanthanum-doped calcium
manganate (LaxCa1-xMn03), is investigated. Electronic and ionic properties can
be varied by changing the doping level. Techniques for preparing these materials
in useful forms will be perfected. Electrochemical kinetics are measured using
steady-state and transient electrochemical techniques; conductivities are
measured using AC impedance methods; and surface chemistry is probed using
temperature-programmed desorption and Auger election spectroscopy. This study
could have very wide impact. The most immediate impact will be in systems using
oxygen sensors including control systems for automotive carburetion and exhaust
control, and for incineration. This work should reduce the size, extend the
useful temperature range, and improve the sensitivity of these sensors. Similar
electrodes should be useful in fuel cells, electrolyzers, and other
electrochemical devices. The work is also applicable to other high-performance
ceramics, notably the closely related "defect perovskite superconductors."