* 8814070
* Organizational Response to Legal Change
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Lauren Edelman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 08/31/1991
* USD 134,350.00

How organizations respond to legal change and shape the meaning of such change
is crucial to understanding social and economic life in complex, modern
societies. Despite the importance of this issue, much of contemporary scientific
research focuses on individual behavior and the individual as the unit of
analysis even when institutional context is being considered. Only recently are
scholars turning their attention to examining organizations in relation to their
social, political, and legal environments and the functioning of organizations
as entities of social control and social regulation. Dr. Edelman's study of
institutional responses to civil rights laws offers an innovative approach to
illuminating the role of organizations as a mediating instrument between law and
its implementation. Dr. Edelman examines the establishment of Equal Employment
Opportunity and Affirmative Action offices in organizations, along with their
consequences for the handling of grievances and the diffusion of norms, as an
institutionalization process. The design of the research calls for six detailed
case studies and nationwide telephone/mail surveys to key informants in 300
companies (200 proprietary firms, 50 federal agencies, and 50 colleges and
universities), stratified by size, age, and industry. The analysis includes use
of event history methods to model rates of adoption of EEO structures and
grievance procedures. Dr. Edelman seeks to explain such issues as variation in
the autonomy of such structures in organizations, whether internal dispute
resolution procedures divert complaints from the courts, and the extent to which
such procedures lead to the development of formal rules governing hiring and
promotion. This work is especially promising. Substantively it will break new
ground in our understanding of organizations' compliance with equal
opportunity/affirmative action regulations. Theoretically, it integrates legal
theory with organization theory and the literature on organizational compliance.
As valuably, it focuses on the important, but often neglected, issue of the
impact of ceremonially adopted innovations on organizational practice.
Methodologically, the use of event history models to study organizational
adaptation is innovative and their application in this context especially apt.