* 8814804
* Research Workshop: Environmental Issues Related to Industrial Competitiveness
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,12/31/1990
* William Anderson, American Academy of Environmental Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 12/31/1990
* USD 58,740.00

The objective of this project is to provide support for the American Academy of
Environmental Engineers to conduct a conference/workshop to determine the
environmental engineering research needed to assist the United States in
becoming more competitive than it now is with other industrialized countries
that do not have the relatively high costs associated with meeting environmental
quality goals as are prevalent in the United States. The American Academy of
Environmental Engineers is an organization that certifies persons who are
determined to be qualified in air pollution control, general environmental
engineering, hazardous waste management, industrial hygiene, radiation
protection, solid waste management, water supply and wastewater and in sanitary
engineering. The academy is sponsored by the Air Pollution Control Association,
the American Institute of Chemical Engineers, the American Public Health
Association, the American Public Works Association, the American Society for
Engineering Education, the American Society of Civil Engineers, the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, the American Water Works Association, the
Association of Environmental Engineering Professors, the National Society of
Professional Engineers, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. The Academy
plans to hold this conference/workshop in the metropolitan Washington, D.C. area
late in October or in November of 1988. Topics planned for consideration include
modeling for engineering practice to determine the location of pollution
abatement systems; innovative concepts, processes and systems for treatment of
water to meet use- requirements and treatment of wastes to reduce their
pollutional effect on the environment; detoxification of hazardous organic
substances; and process modifications to reduce or eliminate production of
wastes. Current environmental quality standards in the United States are aimed
at safeguarding the quality of life in the nation. Improvements in ability to
meet existing and future standards at lower cost could have a significant effect
on improvement of the ability of the United States to compete more successfully
than it now does with other industrial countries.