* 8814554
* Extragalactic Research at the Owens Valley Radio Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Marshall Cohen, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 05/31/1992
* USD 1,814,300.00

Active galaxies will be studied primarily through high resolution radio
observations by Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) techniques. Detailed
studies of a few individual objects and studies of well-defined samples of
objects, suitable for statistical analyses will be carried out. A large program
of high resolution radio observations using VLBI techniques, lower resolution
radio observations from the Very Large Array (VLA), and data on optical spectra
taken on the Palomar 200-Inch Telescope will be done. The proposed observations
should provide a powerful discriminant between various "unified" theories of
active galaxies and between rival theories of superluminal motion. Specific
problems that should yield astrophysically important answers within the next
three years will be the main emphasis of the research. The successful execution
of the planned scientific program constitute an important step toward
understanding active galaxies. Partial support of the operations costs of the 40
meter telescope at the Owens Valley Radio Observatory are provided. The data
from VLBI observations made around the earth are reduced at the California
Institute of Technology in Pasadena and support for the operational cost of the
correlator used to reduce the data is included in the grant These facilities are
cornerstones of the world-wide VLBI effort.