* 8814244
* Construction Innovations in Slipforming Concrete Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Roozbeh Kangari, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 02/28/1990
* USD 30,000.00

This expedited award for novel research is to investigate construction and
design problems of concrete core slipforming with a cross-disciplinary approach.
Slipforming is a method of rapidly forming and placing concrete using hydraulic
jacking units to raise a custom-made form. It has revolutionized the
construction of bridge piers, silos, and building cores. Major problems are: to
keep the form level; precise elevation measurements are required; thicker walls
pose a stripping problem; construction problems due to the uneven rate of
hardening of the concrete itself; precisely locating many different shaped
penetrations; and another major construction problem is caused by the fact that
the tolerances of the concrete core and steel frame are not compatible. The
following ideas will be explored: a) the use of tapered fiberglass block-outs;
b) application of vertical and horizontal lasers will be investigated; c)
thermocouples embedded in the concrete of winter-constructed slipforms to
constantly monitor concrete temperature for curing; d) the effect of varying the
forces exerted by each jacks and changing the amount of steel rebar on the top
deck to steer the core straight; and e) new ideas for designing embed plates for
out of placement of horizontal and vertical directions will be tested. This
research is expected to stimulate more creative and innovative construction
researches by exploring new methodologies for automation of construction
processes. The research activity is not merely a general academic study of core
slipforming. The Sundt Corp., which has built the IBM Tower Core, in Atlanta, GA
has expressed a strong interest in this research, and has agreed to provide an
opportunity to the investigator to study these problems during the next few
months, and to explore innovative ideas in the field to maintain the
competitiveness of the U.S. slipforming construction in international and
domestic markets.