* 8814493
* Hydrology of Meteoric Diagenesis - Holocene Calcarenites of Ocean Bight, Great Exuma Island, Bahamas
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Robert Ginsburg, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1989
* USD 14,920.00

This Science in Developing Countries Program award will support a group of U.S.
researchers headed by Professor Robert Ginsburg of the University of Miami to
collaborate with a group of Bahamian scientists headed by Dr. R. V. Cant, Chief
Hydrologist of the Bahamian government. The purpose of the proposed research is
to provide a detailed case study of the meteoric diagenesis of a Holocene
sediment deposit. This sand body occurs as a large pocket-beach strandline
deposit that abuts against Pleistocene limestones at Great Exuma Island,
Bahamas. The research will document all relevant aspects of the hydrogeology,
hydrogeochemistry and petrography of the sand body. The proposed study will
contribute to our understanding of the relationship between early meteoric
carbonate diagenesis and the physical and chemical hydrology of ocean islands.
The hydrogeologic aspects of the study will be applied to define the quantity
and quality of a potentially important water resource of immediate interest to
the Bahamian government. By bringing together a team of geologists with
interests in sedimentology, geochemistry and hydrogeology, and allowing them to
collaborate with Bahamian water-resources scientists who best know the
occurrence of fresh ground water and the hydrogeologic framework of the
islands,this award fulfills the objectives of the Science in Developing
Countries Program.