* 8814760
* A Structured Synthesis Strategy for Mechanical Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* James Rinderle, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 327,746.00

Good mechanical designs are often composed of highly- integrated, tightly-
coupled components where the interactions among the components are essential to
the function and economic execution of the design. This assertion runs counter
to design methodologies in other engineering fields, such as software design and
circuit design, that advocate designs in which each component fulfills a single
function with minimal interaction. Because of the geometry, weight, and cost of
mechanical components, converting a single functional requirement into a single
component is often both impractical and infeasible. Each component may
contribute to the performance of more than one function, and the performance of
each function may be distributed over many components. In fact, most mechanical
components perform not only the desired function, but also many additional,
unintended functions. In good mechanical designs, these additional functions
often are exploited. A formal methodology for mechanical design for transforming
the system functional requirements into a description of a realizable physical
system is proposed. It is the hypothesis that, by creating a formal description
of the function of a limited set of mechanical designs and a corresponding
description of physical components, a description of a physical system that
takes advantage of the multiple functions of its components can be generated.