* 8814934
* Analytical and Numerical Studies of Diffusion Equation in   Multidimensional Heterogeneous Bodies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1988,12/31/1991
* A. Haji-Sheikh, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tammi Owens
* 12/31/1991
* USD 64,969.00

The proposed method for the solution of steady-state and transient temperature
distributions in three-dimensional heterogeneous bodies uses a Galerkin-based
integral solution incorporating heat-flux-conserving (HFC) basis functions and
Green's function solutions. These basis functions exactly satisfy the boundary
conditions along the boundary of inclusions; hence, eliminating the tedious task
of numerically matching the heat flux and temperature jump at the boundary of
the inclusion. A Galerkin solution using the HFC basis functions is a powerful
tool to accommodate parabolic and elliptic partial differential equations in
complex heterogeneous boundary conditions. The Green's function solution method
is used to deal with nonhomogeneous boundary conditions and to obtain patched
solutions for complex, three-dimensional bodies. This solution method has many
applications to advanced technologies. For example, one of the challenges faced
by engineers is electronic cooling where the removal of an immense amount of
heat from very small electronic devices is essential to prevent overheating
which can result in device failure. These small electronic devices are comprised
of many layers with many inclusions and can be classified as heterogeneous
bodies. This solution method can be extended to other areas of research such as
the curing of composite materials used in the aerospace industry, to evaluate
the load carrying capability of composite materials, and to bio-engineering
research.