* 8814095
* US-Austria Cooperative Research:  Surface Chemistry         Catalytic Properties and Support Effects on Pt/Ni and Pt/Co Bimetallic Catalysts
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Gary Haller, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1992
* USD 8,791.00

This award supports Gary L. Haller of the Department of Chemical Engineering,
Yale University, in a research collaboration with Johannes A. Lercher, Institute
for Physical Chemistry, Technical University of Vienna, Austria. These
scientists share an interest in the surface chemistry of bimetallic catalysts,
particularly platinum/nickel and platinum/cobalt which vary significantly in
their catalytic and other chemical properties. The goal of their collaborative
research is to understand the role of support effects on stabilization of non-
zero valent metal species and on hydrogen absorption-desorption equilibrium.
Several supports will be used. Catalysts will be characterized by chemical
methods and by physical methods such as x-ray diffraction, extended x-ray
absorption fine structure (EXAFS) analysis, time resolved Fourier transform
infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, etc. The rates of hydrogen absorption/desorption,
the equilibrium isotherm and several hydrogenation reactions will be used as
chemical probes. The collaborative arrangement expedites this work by bringing
to bear complementary expertise in physical characterization (EXAFS on the US
side and time resolved FTIR spectroscopy on the Austrian side) as well as a
division of labor in carrying out different reaction studies on the same
catalysts in the two laboratories. Although transition metals are among the most
frequently used catalysts for hydrogenation reactions, the reasons for their
high activity and for particular selectivities in hydrogenation of more complex
organic molecules are, at best, only qualitatively understood. Numerous concepts
have been proposed to explain their selectivity, including work carried out
independently by these collaborating scientists which showed that support
effects on hydrogen absorption equilibrium and the presence of non-zero valent
metal sites may greatly affect the selectivity of hydrogenation reactions. One
of the objectives of the joint research is to establish the relative importance
of these two factors. Understanding and manipulating these properties may lead
to significant improvements in the activity and selectivity of the hydrogenation
reactions.