* 8814443
* Modeling of Flare Physics for the MAX '91 Program
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/1988,09/11/1989
* Richard Steinolfson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joelee Joyce
* 09/11/1989
* USD 4,100.00

The physical understanding of the process of magnetic energy buildup, storage,
and release in solar flares, as well as that of other processes related to the
field evolution (particle acceleration, heating, etc.), improved substantially
during the last solar maximum. However, improvements in instrumentation (largely
in temporal and spatial resolution) since the last maximum now allow us to
address some of the most fundamental issues of flare physics. The MAX91 Program
requires simultaneous development of analytic and numerical studies as an aid in
developing a complete physically realistic picture of the processes involved.
Although the start of high solar activity during the next cycle is not
anticipated until 1990, this grant for numerical modeling is supported now in
order to carry out some preliminary studies that may influence, or provide
guides for, some of the observations. For instance, specific observations may be
identified which would provide clues as to the validity of a particular theory.
In addition, although most of the numerical codes to be used in this work
already exist and have been well checked out, some modifications and code
development are necessary in order that the results can be directly compared to
the observed quantities. With regard to this latter issue of data-theory
compatibility, as part of this early start-up a significant effort will be made
to interact with the applicable observation teams to better identify how the
modeling effort can support the observations and vice-versa. The suggestion
being that not only is it necessary to coordinate the observations, as noted in
the MAX91 Report, but that a coordination of the observations and modeling and
theory efforts would also greatly improve the scientific outcome during the next
maximum. The theoretical and numerical research described in this grant has
direct application to some of the generally recognized outstanding problems of
solar flares. The primary processes that will be investigated are: (1) the
energy release mechanism responsible for initiating and driving the solar flare
and associated phenomena, (2) magnetic reconnection and its potential role in
energy conversion, heating and particle acceleration, and (3) particle
acceleration by nonlinear travelling waves. Numerical modeling forms the core of
the theoretical approach to be used in studying these topics, although some
analytic studies will be used for the second and third topics. A primary
objective will be to relate the results to applicable observations. In
particular, the results of the first study will be directly compared to
observations from white- light coronagraphs, as well as to x-ray and H() data.
The latter two studies have applications to x-ray, EUV, and H() data and to
observations with particle detectors.