* 8814540
* US-UK Cooperative Research: Operational Water Quality       Control for River Basin Management
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Brad Finney, Humboldt State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1991
* USD 11,300.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Brad Finney, Humboldt
State University and Dr. Bruce Beck, Imperial College of Science and Technology,
University of London. The investigators will carry out a joint study on the
viability of using operational control for river basin water quality management
with the Bedford Ouse river (U.K.) serving as a case study. The Bedford Ouse is
the major river in one of the largest river basins in England. The river
currently has a potentially serious nitrate problem, with observed
concentrations frequently exceeding the World Health Organization standard for
potable water use. This situation may be aggravated by the wastewater discharge
from the new city of Milton Keynes at the headwaters of the catchment. A dynamic
river basin simulation model will be completed that includes influent to the
treatment plant, treatment plant operation, nonpoint catchment runoff to the
river, river water quality simulation and potable water treatment plant
performance. System identification and parameter estimation will be addressed
using recent advances in recursive time series algorithms. The simulation model
will be used to identify and examine operational strategies for reducing the
effect of the treatment plant on downstream water users. The model will provide
a practical working tool for improved management of the Bedford Ouse. The study
will produce improved methodologies for river water quality basin management,
will result in increased undrstanding of the use of system identification
procedures, and will examine how a river basin institutional structure much
different than that practiced in the U. S. can encourage more efficient river
water quality management.