* 8814286
* U.S.-United Kingdom Cooperative Research:  Energy Absorbing Structures Containing Tubular Elements
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1993
* John Carney, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1993
* USD 11,250.00

This award will support collaborative research to be carried out by Dr. John
Carney, Vanderbilt University, Dr. William Stronge, University of Cambridge, and
Dr. S. R. Reid University of Manchester, Institute of Science and Technology
(UMIST). The proposed research program will involve an experimental and
analytical investigation of the quasi-static and impact energy dissipation
characteristics of structural systems containing metallic tubes as energy
dissipating elements. The objectives of the proposed research include four
specific tasks. In Task 1, the energy dissipation characteristics of clusters of
unstiffened and stiffened tubular assemblies will be optimized with respect to
their intertubular boundary conditions, their radius to wall thickness ratios,
and their strain-hardening and strain-rate properties. The behavior of composite
(foam filled) metallic tubes under axial and lateral loading conditions and
large deformations will be investigated in Task 2. Task 3 is concerned with the
generalization of one-dimensional shock theory to model the impact response of
two-dimensional tubular arrays. Finally, Task 4 will involve the development of
an expert system which will optimize the design of impact attenuation devices
employed in highway safety operations. The impact mechanics laboratory at
Vanderbilt University, the University of Cambridge and UMIST have unique
experimental facilities, the sharing of which will greatly enhance the
productivity of the researchers involved. Results of this joint project should
contribute to basic research efforts in the important area of impact mechanics.