* 8814862
* Chemical Synthesis and Reactions of Mono- and Di-functional Heteronuclear Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1988,08/08/1989
* William Hersh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 08/08/1989
* USD 13,000.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program supports
research in the area of organometallic catalysis. In this project William H.
Hersh of the University of California at Los Angeles will investigate the
chemical synthesis and reactivity of mono- and di-functional metal clusters.
These cluster molecules are potential catalysts for carbon-carbon bond formation
which is an important process in organic synthesis and especially in the
production of petrochemicals from non-petroleum feedstocks. In addition the
clusters may serve as model compounds for understanding the mechanisms of
reactions at the surface of metals. Heteronuclear bi- and tri-metallic cluster
molecules containing either molybdenum and iron or manganese and iron will be
synthesized, using bridging carbyne or acyl groups and ancillary ligands such as
cyclopentadienide and carbon monoxide. The reactions of these clusters will be
studied, including the isomerization of a bridging methoxycarbyne to a bridging
acyl via methyl migration to one of the metal atoms of the cluster. Difunctional
clusters will also be synthesized, and reactions in which two organic
substituents on different metals of the cluster join via carbon-carbon bond
formation will be investigated. Special emphasis will be placed on the kinetics
and mechanisms of these reactions. studied.