* 8814479
* US-United Kingdom Cooperative Research:  Role of Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide in Pig Thydoid
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Cary Cooper, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 05/31/1992
* USD 6,190.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Cary Cooper,
University of Texas Medical Branch, and Dr. Anthony Care, University of Leeds,
England. The investigators propose to study the role of calcitonin gene-related
peptide (CGRP) as a potential secretagogue of calcitonen (CT) and other
secretory products in the pig thyroid gland. CGRP is an alternative product of
the calcitonin gene and is expressed widely in the body by neuronal cells. CGRP
appears to exert important neuromodulator actions to control nerve function and
vascular tone, but whether it exerts endocrine regulatory effects remains
unknown. Drs. Cooper and Care will examine the hypothesis that CGRP can regulate
the secretion of CT from the pig thyroid gland. At the University of Leeds, they
will perfuse the surgically isolated pig thyroid gland with CGRP and related
peptides via the thyroid artery. Secretion of CT and other thyroid secretory
products will be measured by radioimmunoassay in thyroid venous plasma. At the
University of Texas Medical Branch, most of the assays will be conducted, and
the investigators will examine pig thyroid gland plasma membranes for the
presence of CGRP receptors. Radiolabeled CGRP will be used to study the
receptors by classical ligand binding techniques in order to a) verify their
presence, b) estimate their density, c) examine the kinetics of binding and
their specificity, and d) examine whether perfusion of the thyroid with CGRP
leads to their down-regulation. They will also examine receptor-containing
thyroid membranes to determine whether CGRP alters adenylate or guanylate
cyclase in an attempt to identify putative second messengers mediating the CGRP
effect on CT secretion. The findings should shed light on the mechanisms by
which this new peptide, CGRP, may regulate thyroid function.