* 8814153
* Economic and Social Aspects of the Transformtion of a Rural-Based Religious Movement to an Urban Organization
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1990
* Victoria Ebin, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 12/31/1990
* USD 16,850.00

Economic and Social Aspects of the Transformation of a Rural-Based Religious
Movement to an Urban Organization. This award recommendation is made under the
Program for Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The
program is designed to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term
research abroad at research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide
opportunities for the conduct of joint research and the utilization of unique or
complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign
countries. Awards are selected on the basis of scientific criteria relevant to
the applicant's field of science, the prospective potential of the applicant for
professional growth, as well as criteria relevant to the furthering of
international cooperation in science and engineering. The program is
particularly directed to scientists and engineers who are embarking on their
research careers. The proposed research will trace the development of the
Mouride Islamic brotherhood from its origins as an anti-colonial movement in
Senegal to its present position as an international organization with followers
in cities in Europe, America, and Africa. The project will be based in Paris,
the European center of the Mouride migration, and will examine the
transformation of a rural-based religious movement to an urban organization
which provides an economic, social and spiritual framework for immigrants from
many countries. The project is under the direction of Dr. Victoria Ebin,
Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York, 10012, in cooperation with Dr. Gerard Althabe, Director, Equipe de
Recherche en Anthropologie Urbaine et Industrielle, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en
Sciences Sociales, 44, rue de la Tour, 70015 Paris, France. The award
recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international travel,
local travel abroad, stipend, dependents allowance, if applicable, language
training, if required, and a flat administrative allowance of $250.00 for the
U.S. home institution.