* 8814951
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Theoretical Investigation of the Lattice Dynamics of Clean Surfaces and Surfaces with Adsorbates
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1991
* Alexei Maradudin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/1991
* USD 7,698.00

This award will support Professors Richard Wallis and Alexei Maradudin of the
University of California at Irvine in a research collaboration with Professor
Virginio Bortolani of the University of Modena, Italy. The investigators intend
to focus on surface phonons, whose dispersion curves have been measured for a
wide variety of metals, insulators, and semiconductors by the inelastic helium
atom scattering technique. They intend to carry out a concerted theoretical and
computational effort to provide values for the surface phonon linewidths as
functions of temperature for copper, silver, and gold surfaces. The required
anharmonic parameters will be determined from the known third order elastic
constants. The researchers also intend to carry out calculations of surface
phonon dispersion curves and eigenvectors for surfaces of noble metals and face-
centered-cubic transition metals. Much progress has been made in recent years in
the experimental determination of surface phonon dispersion curves of a broad
fange of crystal surfaces, using inelastic electron scattering and inelastic
helium atom scattering. The latter technique has been applied with great success
to a wide range of materials and keeps providing new insights into the study of
surface dynamics. The proposed collaboration will enable the U.S. investigators
to benefit from the expertise of the Italian investigators in calculating
accurate phonon frequencies and eigenvectors for noble metal surfaces. The
U.S.side will contribute in turn its expertise in calculating the linewidths of
surface phonons, which stems from their comprehensive program studying
anharmonic effects at crystal surfaces.