* 8814913
*  Numerical Simulation and Analysis of Convective Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1988,05/31/1992
* William Cotton, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/1992
* USD 808,408.00

During the Spring and Summer months, mesoscale convective systems account for
most beneficial rainfall as well as economically disruptive and life-threatening
phenomena such as tornadoes, hail, flash floods and high winds. Mesoscale
convective systems are collections of thunderstorms that cover areas several
hundreds of kilometers in typical dimension and have lifetimes of more than one
day. The Principal Investigator proposes a joint observational analysis and
numerical simulation approach in furthering knowledge of mesoscale convective
systems. Observational data to be used are those that have been collected during
previous experiments sponsored by the National Science Foundation. Among the
research goals are: 1. Analysis and simulation of mesoscale convective systems
which exhibit random patterns of thunderstorms. The objective is to determine
why some of these systems develop these random precipitation patterns while
others exhibit a line structure. 2. Use radar reflectivity fields to identify
pulsations in volumetric rainfall rates and other morphological characteristics
of mesoscale convective systems over their lifetimes. 3. It has been noted that
some mesoscale convective systems tend to produce severe wind storms with most
of the damage occurring on the north side of synoptic-scale warm fronts. The
Principal Investigator will use a combination of numerical simulation and
observational analyses to determine what combination of convective- scale and
meso/synoptic scale features lead to severe winds. 4. Using advanced numerical
techniques, the Principal Investigator will investigate the dynamical
interactions between the synoptic, meso-alpha and meso-beta scale.