* 8814620
* REU: Genetic Structure within Oak Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Victoria Sork, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 12/31/1992
* USD 213,720.00

The genetic structure of populations can range from one large interbreeding
population with genetic variation distributed throughout to a series of small
interbreeding subpopulations which are genetically differentiated from each
other. The genetic structure of populations results from the interactions of
gene flow, natural selection, and genetic drift and also influences how these
evolutionary forces will affect that population. The proposed research will
determine whether natural selection can cause genetic differentiation within
forest tree populations by measuring mating system (i.e. the degree of
outcrossing), local selection due to microhabitat, and population genetic
structure of two oak species, white oak (Quercus alba) and red oak (Q. rubra).
This study will be conducted over a three year period in an oak-hickory forest
in central eastern Missouri. Most of the research will be conducted within a 4
ha study plot which contains four types of microhabitat: north- facing slope,
southwest-facing slope, west-facing slope, and bottom land. Genetic structure
will be described with F- statistics and other appropriate measures using enzyme
genetic markers identified through starch gel electrophoresis. The mating system
for each species will be measured each year also using enzyme genetic markers.
Local selection due to microhabitat will be studied using a reciprocal
transplant experiment. The project addresses significant questions for
evolutionary biologists about the potential of local selection to influence
population structure in angiosperm tree species which may have high outcrossing
rates. This study will also provide useful genetic information on an
ecologically and economically significant genus in North American forests. Oaks
are a valuable commodity for lumber and they provide crucial resources for
wildlife. Understanding the distribution of genetic variation within a forest
species will help in determining sampling schemes for forest management. In
addition, such information will help us understand the ability of increasingly
fragmented forest tree populations to respond to natural and human-induced
stress.