* 8814271
* Fundamental Research on Net Shaping of New Products, Award  in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,05/31/1992
* George Krauss, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1992
* USD 331,032.00

Description: This award supports cooperative research between U.S. and Indian
investigators on projects devoted to fundamental research on net shaping of
steel and new steel products. The U.S. work will be coordinated by Dr. George
Krauss of the Colorado School of Mines (CSM) and the Indian work will be
coordinated by Dr. V. Ramaswamy of the Research and Development Center, Steel
Authority of India Limited (SAIL) in Ranchi, India. Most of the specimen
preparations, processing and testing on a bench scale as well as some pilot
plant processing will be performed in India. The U.S. investigators will
concentrate on special analysis and interpretation of results. The projects and
the cooperating scientists are: 1. Direct Casting of Thin Strips: D. Apelain,
Drexel Univ., and N.S. Mishra, SAIL. 2. New Alloy Steel Products: G. Thomas,U.
Calif. Berkeley, and V.S. Dwivedi, SAIL. 3. Chip Formation and Surface Finish:
G. Krauss, CSM, and A.K. Sengupta, SAIL. 4. Texture of Deep Drawing and
Electrical Steels: H. Hu, Univ. of Pittsburgh, and S. Mishra, SAIL. 5. Laser
Surface Modification: J. Mazumder, Univ. of Illinois, and S.K. Choudhuri, SAIL.
6. Hydrogen Induced Cracking and Stress corrosion: G.R. St.Pierre, Ohio State
Univ., and B.D. Tripathi, SAIL. 7. Ferritic Ship Steels: B.B. Rath, Naval Res.
Lab, and L.K. Singhal, SAIL. 8. TMT Rolling and Controlled Cooling of Strip and
Plate Steel: A.J. DeArdo, U. of Pittsburgh, and S. Mishra, SAIL. 9. Microalloyed
Forged and Controlled Rolled Steel: G. Krauss, CSM, and A.K.. Sengupta, SAIL.
10. Weldable Rail Steels: G.R. Speich, Illinois Inst. Tech., and S. Banerjee,
National Metallurgical Lab. 11. Rolling Model by FEM for Predicting Phase
Transformation: A.J. DeArdo, U.of Pittsburgh, and S.Mishra, SAIL. Scope: The
projects to be supported are of great interest to U.S. and Indian scientists for
understanding the mechanics of production of better steel materials for various
applications. They were developed during and following an Indo-U.S. workshop on
Steel Research held in India in January 1986. Funding: The projects are being
funded under two grants. INT8814271 to CSM INT8818781 to SAIL FY88 US$80,000 +
$74,000 (Ind.Rs.) $112,923 (Ind.Rs.) FY89 US$80,000 (Incl.$40,000 from MSME)
FY90 US$80,000 (Incl. $40,000 from MSME)