* 8814258
* International Conference on Laser Applications to           Spectroscopy and Nonlinear Optics, January 4-9, 1989, MadrasIndia, Group Travel Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1989
* M. George, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1989
* USD 33,000.00

Description: This project provides travel support for 12 U.S. scientists to
participate in the International Conference on Laser Applications in
Spectroscopy and Nonlinear Optics to be held January 4-9 at the Indian Institute
of Technology, Madras, India. The Indian Co-organizer of the conference is Dr.
Radhakrishma of IIT, Madras who also is representing the Committee on Science
and Technology in Developing Countries (COSTED) of UNESCO. The conference will
deal with (1) linear and nonlinear spectroscopy, (2) optical phase conjugation,
(3) nonlinear processes, (4) material processing by lasers, (5) laser imaging
and holography, and (6) laser systems and devices. A conference proceedings is
expected to be published by COSTED. In addition to U.S. and Indian participants,
some 30 scientists from other countries are expected to give talks and present
research papers. Scope: Both U.S. and India have scientists who are very active
in the field of spectroscopy, and laser applications in spectroscopy and in
optics. In addition to providing a forum for them to exchange views and
interact, this conference will have the added benefit of providing opportunities
for scientists from developing countries and from other western nations to
exchange information on latest advances in the field, resources, problems and
techniques in this area of high technology.