* 8814367
* MAX '91 Coordination and Studies of Solar Activity on       Timescales of Milliseconds to Years
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* George Dulk, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 02/29/1992
* USD 152,614.00

MAX91 is an observational program to study solar activity in the 1990's with
emphasis on coordination of observations from existing facilities and also from
new balloon, rocket and ground- based instrumentation. Accordingly, the program
requires the early appointment of a solar physicist to act as the "MAX91
Coordinator." One component of this grant is for a solar physicist to assume the
role of MAX91 Coordinator. The grant will effect efficient MAX91 operation by
establishing reliable one-way, and modern two-way, computer-based lines of
communications to the solar physics community. The Coordinator will also work
closely with a solar forecaster (specifically associated with MAX91) to optimize
scientific output of campaigns in response to real-time solar conditions. Three
studies which encompass varying aspects of solar activity on timescales that
vary over eleven orders of magnitude are also planned: Milliseconds - Seconds
Three year observational program with a newly developed, high speed digital
camera system. This system can observe simultaneously at three optical
wavelengths with high temporal and spatial resolution: From comparisons with
X-ray data, it is expected to resolve important time-of-flight effects of
accelerated electrons in solar flares; this addresses fundamental properties of
energy release in flares. Seconds - Hours Investigation of temporal and spectral
signatures of "impulsive" and "gradual" hard X-ray bursts: This study will
analyze over 4,500 hard X-ray flares to quantify the characteristic differences
between the two principal types of flare behavior: impulsive and gradual. Hours
- Years Investigation of an apparent 152-158 day periodicity in solar activity
first discovered in gamma-ray flare production rates: From new analyses of
databases which extend from 10 to 120 years in the past, it is intended to
either establish or to discredit this "periodicity" as a fundamental physical
property of solar activity.