* 8814043
* Conference:  "Bicarbonate, Chloride and Proton Tranport     Systems;  January 19-21, 1989;  New York City, NY"
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1990
* John Durham, New York Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 06/30/1990
* USD 5,000.00

This conference, entitled "Bicarbonate, Chloride, and Proton Transport System"
is an international basic science conference sponsored by the New York Academy
of Sciences. The conference is focused on the roles of the movement of
bicarbonate, chloride and hydrogen ions across and into cells in controlling
cell acidity, volume and organ function and the manner by which these movements
occur in animal and plant systems. The biophysics, physiology and molecular
biology involved in these processes will be presented and discussed. The
importance of these processes in maintaining acid and electrolyte homeostasis
has been increasingly recognized, and this timely conference will provide a
unique opportunity for the gathering of investigators who are working in diverse
systems to exchange and present their work to one another. The recognition by
animal physiologists of the general importance of anion transport processes is
relatively recent compared to that of cations transport. This situation in part
arises from the fact that cation transport was first found to be important in
neural transmission, and because cations are technically more easily studied. As
a result anion and proton transport were generally considered to occur
secondarily to that of cation movement. Recent discoveries have emphasized the
importance of anion transport as exemplified by the involvement of C1-conductive
channels in cystic fibrosis, as well as ocular and gastro-intestinal tissues.
Also in recent years, the involvement of C1-HCO3 exchange in the overall
processes of gastric and renal acid excretion has received new attention, as
well as the role of anion transport in cell volume regulation. Research in the
area of anion and proton transport has also recently branched into the
structural and molecular aspects of the transmembrane movement of these ions and
several important advancements have been made in the 10 years. The intent of
this conference is to provide a forum for researchers in the transmembrane,
structural, enzymatic and transepithelial areas of anion and proton transport in
both animals and plants. A previous conference on this subject in 1979 was
successful and well attended, and we believe that in the past ten years,
sufficient advances both in the technical and scientific areas have been made to
warrant the presently proposed conference.