* 8814013
* Interfacial Morphology of Polymer Thin Films for Computer   Memory Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1988,02/29/1992
* David Soane, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/29/1992
* USD 135,026.00

This project involves the processing of liquid crystals dispersed in amorphous
polymers that can be used for reversible optical data storage. The working
principle is based on the competitive processes of phase separation and
vitrification. Such liquid crystal doped polymer mixtures are spin-coated on
substrates to form thin films, whose interfacial morphology is strongly
controlled by their transient thermal histories. Both modeling and experimental
studies are carried out to establish a firm understanding of this program.
Current thin films used in the computer industry are primarily inorganic in
nature. Transition metal/rare earth alloys suffer from ease of corrosion and
expensive vacuum deposition processes. The organic based material being
developed in this project enjoys the advantage of formation by simple spin
coating and long-term stability. The use of liquid crystals in amorphous
matrices exploits the strong tendency of the liquid crystals to self- assemble
and the rigid, amorphous matrices to trap the transient morphology upon
vitrification. Subtle differences in the thin film interfacial morphology can
lead to large, easily discernible light scattering patterns, yielding high
signal-to-noise ratios. In addition, the preliminary work performed to date on
this novel liquid-crystal-in-polymer system indicates that fast data recording
and erasure can be achieved.