* 8814731
* Indo-U.S. Workshop on Bayesian Analysis in Statistics and   Econometrics, Bangalore, India, December 19-23, 1988        Award In Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Prem Goel, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1990
* USD 50,620.00

Description: This project provides for participation by 20 U.S. scientists in an
Indo-U.S. workshop on Bayesian analysis in statistics and econometrics to be
held at the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI), Bangalore, India between
December 19 and 23, 1988. The U.S. organizer is Dr. Prem Goel of Ohio State
University, and the Indian co-organizer is Dr. N.S. Iyengar, head of the
economic analysis unit at ISI, and president of the Indian Econometric Society.
Topics to be covered are: Econometric modeling and forecasting; Bayesian
computing; Reliability and process control; Foundation and decision theory;
Hierarchical models and robust Bayes analysis; and Bayes and empirical Bayes
inferences. The proceedings are expected to be published. Scope: Indian
statisticians have been very active in India, and many Indians who work in the
U.S. have contributed greatly to the field. The proposed workshop is to impart
the relatively new Bayesian approach to statistics and decision analysis, to the
Indian Community of young statisticians who mostly emphasize the classic
approach to the same problems. This interaction is likely to make a large impact
on the future research in statistics in general and in its applications to
India, by stimulating interest in this modern aspect of statistics research and
in modernization of statistical education.