* 8814059
* US- France Cooperative Research: Systematics of Late Cretaceous (Maestrichtian) Land Mammals in Bolivia
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Larry Marshall, Institute of Human Origins
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 11/30/1991
* USD 6,750.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Larry G. Marshall
Institute of Human Origins, Berkeley, California and Dr. Christian de Muizon of
the Institute of Paleontology, National Museum of Natural History, Paris,
France. Drs. Marshall and de Muizon have worked together successfully in the
past in the collection of mammals and other vertebrates from the Late Cretaceous
age El Molino Formation in Bolivia. The investigators now propose to prepare two
monographs on some the most important species in the oldest mammalian faunas of
South America. Monograph 1 will be on specimens of Alcidedorbignya inopinata--
the _______________ _________ earliest, smallest, and most generalized member of
the order Pantodonta known. Monograph 2 will be on specimens (including complete
skulls and nearly complete associated skeletons) of the didelphid marsupial
Pucadelphys andinus. A. inopinata is the most ___________ _______ _ _________
abundant placental, and P. andinus is the most abundant marsupial _ _______ in
the Tiupampa fauna. Preparation of both monographs will involve: 1) assessment
of dental variation within each species; 2) assessment of possible sexual
dimorphism within each species; 3) detailed descriptions of all dental, skull,
and postcranial elements; 4) comparative descriptions and assessment of
phyogenetic affinity with other taxa; 5) assess functional aspects of the
skeletons of Pucadelphys; 6) make photographs for study and ___________
publication; and 7) discuss the evolutionary and biogeographic importance of
each species. The results of this work should be of great interest to scholars
of mammalian evolution.