* 8814578
* US-Netherlands Cooperative Research:  Fast Methods for ImageSequence Identification and Restoration
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1993
* John Woods, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1993
* USD 11,170.00

This award supports Professors Howard Kaufman and John W. Woods of Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute to collaborate in research in computer image processing
with Professor Jan Biemond of the Department of Electrical Engineering of the
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands. The objective of their
collaboration is to evaluate various image sequence restoration techniques in
terms of their effectiveness and efficiency on different parallel computer
architectures. In particular, Professor Biemond will use iterative based
procedures and an AP500 array processor, while Professors Kaufman and Woods will
use recursive based procedures and a Sequent Balance 8000 multiprocessor system.
Identification of the spatial and temporal image dynamics will be considered by
both investigators. Another important aspect of the cooperative research will be
in algorithm design. It is important that a good cross-section of procedures be
used to give all processors the chance to perform in their own domains. At the
same time, the methods of implementation have to be closely analyzed to make
sure that the measurements on the architecture's power are fair. The area of
fast restoration of distorted image sequences is one of growing importance, for
which effective techniques are needed. Real-time image enhancement is becoming
increasingly more feasible due to recent hardware advances, such as DSP chips
and parallel architectures. Image restoration is usually more computationally
intensive and is more difficult to achieve at high speeds. The goals of this
collaboration are ambitious, but the expected result of meaningful comparisons
of different methodologies will be very worthwhile.