* 8814641
* Theoretical and Experimental Studies of Thermal Motions in  Liquids and Polymer Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1992
* Robert Pecora, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 05/31/1992
* USD 343,319.00

Professor Robert Pecora is supported by a grant from The Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program to continue his theoretical and experimental studies of the
dynamics of molecules in complex liquid systems. Professor Pecora is studying
the motions of polymeric materials, oligonucleotides, and DNA restriction
fragments. The main areas of complex liquids to be studied over the next three
year period include: 1) reorientation, translation,and structure of small
rodlike molecules both in solution with similarly sized solvent molecules and
mixed with polymeric materials. Particular systems include solutions of a
homologous series of double helical oligonucleotides, and motion of a series of
rodlike probes in amorphous and glassy polymethylmethacrolate. 2) dynamics of
single semirigid rodlike polymer chains including theoretical and experimental
studies of a homologous series of monodisperse DNA restriction fragments
prepared using genetic engineering techniques. 3) motions of rigid and semirigid
molecules in nondilute solutions including studies of oligonucleotides and DNA
restriction fragments and ternary solutions containing solvent, and rodlike
macromolecules mixed with either coils or coated silica spheres. A broad range
of experimental techniques are used in these experiments including: transient
electric birefringence, light scattering, interferometry, photon correlation
spectroscopy, and force Rayleigh scattering. Theoretical techniques include both
analytical modeling and computer simulations.