* 8814790
* Interactive Acquisition of User Knowledge for Document      Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1991
* W. Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 07/31/1991
* USD 124,000.00

One of the most successful techniques developed for document retrieval is
relevance feedback. The effectiveness of this technique can be attributed to the
fact that it provides a simple method for interactively acquiring knowledge from
the user that is not available from the query. In systems that use knowledge-
based and natural language processing techniques, the ability to interactively
acquire domain and linguistic knowledge from users becomes crucial. This is
because, in any real application, this knowledge will be incomplete or missing
entirely. This research involves experiments explicitly designed to test the
hypothesis hat users of an information systems can interactively provide
knowledge that will improve retrieval effectiveness. The experiments will
address the acquisition of three types of knowledge: (1) Query knowledge such as
the relative importance of words and phrase, (2) Domain knowledge such as
concepts that are related to the query concepts, and (3) Linguistic knowledge
that allows the system to understand compound nouns. The interfaces that are
used to acquire this knowledge will be constructed using the document retrieval
system built at the University of Massachusetts. The structure of the linguistic
knowledge that is acquired will be based on the representation language REST
that is part of the ADRENAL project at the University of Massachusetts.