* 8814895
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Numerical Methods for     Multidimensional Compressible Flows
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Bernard Grossman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 10,710.00

This award will support Professor Bernard Grossman in a research collaboration
with Professor Michele Napolitano of the University of Bari, Italy. The aim of
the collaboration is to develop numerical procedures for multi-dimensional
compressible flows, with very high levels of accuracy in smooth regions of the
flow and capable of modelling complex shock patterns and other discontinuities.
More specifically, numerical procedures will be developed using a highly
accurate upwind scheme in regions of smooth flow and a very robust flux-vector/
difference-splitting method in regions containing and immediately surrounding
shocks and other discrepancies. Approximate factorization and line/plane
relaxation implicit schemes will be used to solve the discrete equation sets and
a multigrid strategy may be necessary to accelerate convergence to a steady
state. The joint work will combine the expertise of the U.S. side in flux-
vector/difference-splitting methods with that of the Italian side on numerical
methods using the so-called lambda formulation, which relies on a
nonconservation form of the governing equations. The new methodology will be
applied to solve external as well as internal compressible flows containing
complex shock configurations and requiring exceptionally high levels of
accuracy, such as flows with chemical reactions or flows inside highly-curved
turbomachinery passages as in advanced aircraft and propulsion systems.