* 8814202
* The Impact of the Bakke Decision on Minority Enrollment
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Susan Welch, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 10/31/1990
* USD 59,364.00

A decade ago, in Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, the U.S.
Supreme Court invalidated the admissions plan of the medical school at the
University of California, Davis. The plan reserved sixteen of 100 places in each
year's entering class for racial minorities. The ruling generally has been
interpreted to mean that schools cannot use quotas but can practice affirmative
action. The Bakke case became almost a household word before the decision was
reached. In the public's view, the case would go a long way toward symbolically
setting the tone and determining the speed of affirmative action in American
society. In addition, it would determine the validity of many professional
schools' admissions plans and, therefore, the composition of these professional
schools' classes in the future. Surprisingly, despite its status as one of the
most celebrated cases in many years, the actual impact of Bakke is unknown. No
serious scientific study has attempted to determine if Bakke had a significant
effect on the crucial path to upward mobility-- professional schools. Drs. Welch
and Gruhl will attempt to remedy this gap by assessing the impact of the Bakke
decision on minority enrollments in medical and law schools. They will assemble
three data sets: (1) aggregate national data on minority enrollments in the
first year classes of law and medical schools from 1964 to 1986; (2) time series
data on individual medical and law schools; and (3) survey data from admissions
officers. Multivariate and interrupted time series analyses will be used to test
the general hypotheses that the Court's decision striking down quotas made a
significant change in the admissions patterns of several institutions, but that
the Court's policy allowing affirmative action made less of a visible change.
Not only is this research important because it is the first empirical inquiry
into the effects of the widely discussed and controversial Bakke case, but also
the Bakke decision offers a relatively rare opportunity to examine
systematically the impact of an important Court decision nationwide on both
public and private officials. Often, judicial scholars are forced by
circumstances to look at only a small portion of those agencies that implement
the Court's decision (police departments or schools, for example). This study
will examine every law and medical school affected by the decision and will be
able to shed light on important theoretical questions about the role courts play
as policy makers, the impact court decisions have on behavior nationwide, and
how different types of organizations respond to a court decision.