* 8814055
* Object-Based Concurrent Programming:  A Workshop Proposal   Submitted to the NSF to be held Sept 25-26, 1988 in San     Diego, California
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1989
* Gul Agha, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 06/30/1989
* USD 6,250.00

The problem of designing systems for concurrent programming is an important area
of research in computer science. In sequential computers, software engineering
considerations, such as the need for abstraction and program modularity, have
led to a recent increase in the popularity of object-based programming. Because
parallelism is a natural consequence of distributed objects, the development of
systems for concurrent object-based programming (OBCP) is likely to prove
fruitful in providing good software support for a new generation of concurrent
computers. Research in OBCP has progressed in different areas of computer
science rather independently. A number of new programming languages, systems,
architectures and applications have been developed in the last few years. Two
foundational models of concurrency, namely the actor model and Flat Guarded Horn
Clauses, can be used to provide a hardware platform for object-based concurrent
programming. A number of on-going projects are developing object-based systems
to support concurrent applications in areas such as distributed database,
distributed simulation, and office information systems. Finally, work on topics
such s transactions, type theory, computational reflection and program
transformation has important ramifications for OBCP. The workshop will provide
the first opportunity to assess the state of the art in research and development
of OBCP. It will also permit an exchange of ideas on the development of common
goals and the integration of the area as a unified field of research. Finally,
the publication of papers presented at the workshop will make the work easily
available to researchers.