* 8814695
* Performance-Optimized Reliability Analysis of Structural    Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Ross Corotis, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 11/30/1991
* USD 165,138.00

The objective is to develop practical procedures whereby characterization of
limit state consequences can be incorporated into an analysis for reliability-
constrained structural system optimization. Multiobjective mathematical
programming will be used to identify the limit state surface for multiple,
independently varying loads. The identification of consequence for each region
of the limit surface, rather than simply the traditional "failure" or "success,"
will permit the performance/reliability tradeoff to be studied. For a ductile
frame with randomness in both loads and moment capacities, a linear program
efficiently produces failure mode characteristics. For this case, it is possible
to associate discrete load space regions with individual failure modes, and to
assess the extent of structural distress for each mode. Efficient methods of
combining Monte Carlo directional simulation with mathematical programming, and
especially linear programming, will be utilized to permit a comprehensive
assessment of structural system reliability. The procedures developed in this
project will permit improved safety and economy of structures by considering
design of the structural system as an entire entity. Powerful mathematical
techniques now accessible to structural engineers can be used to optimize the
structure as a whole, taking into account the reliability of performance and
limit state consequences.