* 8814927
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  Biochemical Basis and  Function of Stress-Induced Betaine Accumulation in Maize
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Andrew Hanson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/1991
* USD 16,603.00

This award will support Professors Andrew Hanson of Michigan State University
(MSU) and David Rhodes of Purdue University in a research collaboration with
Professor Claudia Lerma Ortiz of the Instituto Politecnico Nacional (IPN) in
Mexico City, Mexico and researchers at the Mexican International Maize and Wheat
Improvement Center (CIMMYT). The investigators intend to test the hypothesis
that betaine synthesis in grasses is necessary for adjustment of plant tissues
to water stress, either as a result of drought or salinity. Betaine is
synthesized and accumulated in grasses and chenopods (spinach and beets as well
as many weeds) under salt or drought stress conditions. In chenopods, the
enzymes of betaine synthesis have been identified and betaine seems to be
central to osmoregulation and stress adaptation. Among grasses, high betaine-
accumulating capacity has been shown to be broadly correlated with adaptation to
saline or dry conditions, but neither the biosynthetic path nor the
physiological function of betaine is known. The investigators intend to use
maize in parallel studies of a) betaine biosynthesis and b) the relation of
betaine accumulation to overall osmoregulation in a grass. The choice of maize
is dictated by two factors: 1) genetic variation for both betaine level and
ability to osmoregulate is available in maize; 2) maize has relatively low salt-
and drought tolerance which could be associated with the low betaine levels
found in this crop. Work on betaine biosynthetic enzymes will be carried out at
MSU and at the IPN, with synthesis of labeled compounds and fast atom
bombardment mass spectrometry (FABMS) analysis at Purdue University. Work
relating betaine accumulation to osmoregulation will be conducted at INP in
collaboration with researchers at CIMMYT. The proposed work will increase our
understanding of plant acclimation to low-water situations, while at the same
time it is likely to provide a sensible pathway to further advances in the
genetic engineering of high salt- and drought tolerant plants.