* 8814911
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Avian Orientation; Use    of Olfactory Cues
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Charles Walcott, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1990
* USD 1,309.00

This award will support collaborative work between Prof. Charles Walcott of
Cornell University and Prof. Floriano Papi of the University of Pisa, Italy. The
investigators intend to investigate the roles that geomagnetic and olfactory
cues play in avian orientation. It is well-known that homing pigeons can return
to their lofts when released hundreds of miles away in unfamiliar territory.
While it is generally agreed that they can use the sun or the earth's magnetic
field as a compass reference, no agreement has been reached on the sensory basis
of their ability to determine their position relative to home. The Italian
investigators report that their birds use odors to find their way; however, some
experiments in both Germany and the U.S. suggest that pigeons there can orient
without olfactory information. It may be that the cues birds use depend on the
environment in which they are raised or, perhaps, on their own genetic stock. To
examine these hypotheses, the investigators plan to establish a pigeon loft in
Florida where the general topography is similar to that of Pisa, Italy, and test
whether Italian and U.S. birds will make use of olfactory cues in Florida. If
pigeons in different places use different cues for navigation, it means that
their navigational system is much more complex than had been thought. It would
also suggest that other animals might have similar flexibility in their use of
different cues and that some of the differences in bird orientation behavior
reported in the literature may reflect environmental differences. In any case,
the proposed work should be of great value in helping to resolve the scientific
controversy over the role of olfactory cues in the homing orientation of
pigeons.