* 8814809
* Emergency Investigation of Nobles Pond: An Early Paleo-     Indian Site in Stark County, Ohio
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1990
* Mark Seeman, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1990
* USD 5,583.00

The Nobles Pond site, located in Stark County Ohio, is an early Paleo-Indian
habitation site which, based on recovered stone artifacts, dates to the period
10,500 -11,500 B.P. (before the present). Work by amateur archaeologists over
many years has demonstrated the presence not only of numerous stone tools but
also shown that these are grouped into several clusters which indicate either
house floors or specific activity areas. Because the site is slated for housing
development and will be destroyed within the next year, Dr. Mark Seeman will
conduct emergency excavation. Working with students and groups of amateurs, he
will carry out careful excavation to define these clusters and recover material
from them. The cultural artifacts recovered will be analyzed and curated. Most
information on these earliest inhabitants of the Americas has come from sites
located in the Western United States. While it is clear that Paleo-Indian
peoples inhabited a number of distinct environments, this sampling bias has
prevented archaeologists from gaining an understanding of their broader
subsistence and social adaptations. Because very few sites are known from the
mid-West, the Nobles Pond site is particularly important. It is also interesting
because it is located near no major flint source. Many Paleo Indian sites are
and were involved in mining activities. Thus a second factor also biases site
representation. This research is important because it will recover information
which would otherwise will soon be destroyed. It will increase our understanding
of United States prehistory and the development of Native American cultures. It
will also shed new light on human subsistence adaptations.