* 8814226
* Intelligent Systems for Malfunction Diagnosis and Response
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1988,02/29/1992
* Mark Kramer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/29/1992
* USD 291,549.00

In an operating chemical plant, product quality is maintained by monitoring
process variables and controlling their fluctuations within a desired range.
When operating conditions vary outside these design limits, not only is the
product quality in jeopardy, but if left uncorrected, these variations could
result in a catastrophic event such as an explosion, fire, or the release of
toxic chemicals. The objective of this project is research leading to the
development of computer-based systems for on-line diagnosis of process
malfunctions to be used by plant operators. Computer-automated diagnosis has
been studied in many domains. However, several features distinguish the chemical
plant diagnosis problem: (1) the state description involves time-dependent
continues and discrete variables, (2) there are complex stream topologies with
feedback and feedforward flows of material, energy and information, (3) complex
dynamics are associated with malfunction response, (4) malfunctions include
chemical effects such as side reactions, mechanical faults such as valves
sticking and blockages in pipes, and information processing faults such as
sensor vary, possibly producing a family of response types for the same
malfunction, (6) the diagnosis is based on on-line measurements with fallible
sensors, parameters are measured. This research will create new mechanisms for
joining plant-specific and general behavioral knowledge with diagnostic
methodology. The PI plans to do research in four subareas: (1) Create and refine
formal representation of the objects involved in diagnosis and operator
advising, including: a. Physical entities such as plant units, b. Abstract
objects such as constraints on normal behavior and system intended functions,
and c. Conceptual objects such as malfunction hypotheses, inferred malfunctions,
abnormal events, and explanations. (2) Based on these representations, develop a
library of unit operation models and a mechanism to link these components to
form models of the causal topology and intended functions of specific plants.
(3) Develop a mechanism for interpreting the basic flowsheet model and
identifying potentially significant real-time events, their causes and
relationships. (4) Conduct research on dynamic reasoning leading to the
development of a general inference mechanism for interpreting real-time event
sequences. Dynamic mathematical models of process plants incorporating realistic
features and a board range of malfunctions will be developed. This will permit
testing of the representations and methodologies, and the investigation of
process/model mismatch, the effects of noise and of out-of-order alarms.
Architecture will be created into which plant- specific knowledge can be
incorporated by industrial design engineers.