* 8814033
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Rheology of Liquid        Crystalline Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Donald Baird, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1991
* USD 6,454.00

This U.S.-Italy award will support a research collaboration between Professor
Donald G. Baird of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University and
Professor Giuseppe Marrucci of the University of Naples. The investigators plan
to evaluate an existing molecular theory for describing the flow behavior of
liquid crystalline polymers (LCP's) and to develop an alternative approach, if
necessary. More specifically, the investigators plan to: (1) evaluate and test a
theory first proposed by Doi, comparing theoretical predictions with
experimental results for both lyotropic and thermo-tropic systems; (2) carry out
simultaneous rheological experiments and structural measurements in order to
develop relations between stress (deformation) and fluid structure; and (3)
determine possible directions for developing constitutive theories reflecting
the structure found in LCP's. There is considerable interest in the high
aromatic polyestesters and polyamides that exhibit liquid crystalline order.
High modulus fibers and films, and in some cases injection-molded parts, can be
produced with these polymers. During the processing of these polymers, structure
and orientation are generated during flow to a degree not found in flexible
chain polymers. Consequently, in order to design processes for liquid
crystalline polymers, it is necessary to establish the relation between stress
and flow generated structure. By combining the experimental expertise of the
U.S. side in understanding the rheology of LCP's with the theoretical strengths
of the University of Naples group, the researchers should be able to provide
deeper insights into the relation between deformation and structure for LCP's.