* 8814368
* Particle/Wall and Partical/Boundary-Layer Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Massoud Kaviany, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tammi Owens
* 02/29/1992
* USD 187,168.00

Two phenomena occurring in particulate flows, namely, heat transfer during
collisions between particles and surfaces, and the interaction of the particles
with the momentum and thermal boundary layers will be studied. Experiments will
be performed using particle diameters between 1 to 10 mm, low and high thermal
conductivity particles, and laminar and turbulent flows. Flow visualization,
particle tracing, and Laser Doppler Anemometry will be used for the velocity
measurements. The rate of change of sensible heat of a collector (particle/wall
interaction) and the change in local rate of surface heat transfer
(particle/boundary-layer interaction) will be measured in the heat transfer
experiments. In addition, analytical/numerical study of the elastic impact will
be made by allowing for variable surface areas, heat transfer through the
surrounding gas (gap contribution), material property differences between the
particle and the surface, particle spin, and surface roughness. These studies
will determine the role of particles in heat transfer from dilute particulate
flows (such as in drying and the freeboard portion of the fluidized beds) and
will supply the fundamental knowledge needed for understanding and prediction of
dense phase systems. Many particle systems, such as dryers, fluidized beds and
particle processing (mechanical or chemical loops) require transfer of heat
between fluid/particle mixtures and confining or submerged surfaces. Two of the
major heat transfer mechanisms are the direct transfer of heat between the
particles and these surfaces (conduction), and direct heat between the fluid and
the surfaces. The latter is influenced by the motion of the particles.
Presently, the conduction contribution is not known for practical cases where
the particle surface is not smooth, and when the particle undergoes a spin and
arrives at the surface obliquely. The extent of the disturbances caused in the
flow field, by the motion of the particles, is also not yet known. This study
aims at furnishing these needed fundamental data on the influence of particles
on surface heat transfer rates.