* 8814280
* U.S.-Australia Joint Seminar: Dynamics of Complex Inter-    connected Biological Systems / Albany, Western Australia /  January 1989.
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1989
* Thomas Vincent, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Carole Ganz
* 12/31/1989
* USD 17,610.00

This award will support a seminar, "Dynamics of Complex Interconnected
Biological Systems", organized jointly by Prof. Thomas L. Vincent of the
University of Arizona, Tucson, and Prof. A.I. Mees of the University of Western
Australia. Participants will meet in Albany, Western Australia, in January 1989
to identify and begin to address problems in the modeling of complex
interconnected biological systems. This seminar will bring together experts in
game theory and chaos theory, both of which are playing an increasingly
important role in the understanding of evolutionary processes in interconnected
systems, in an attempt to take advantage of the synergy of interdis- ciplinary
overlap. Recent developments in both game theory and chaos theory have led to an
improved understanding of dynamical systems; while game theory is ideal for
understanding interconnected systems, chaos theory is leading to a complementary
understanding of complex systems. Biological systems, which are generally both
complex and intercon- nected, are a suitable arena in which to bring the two
disciplines together to resolve fundamental problems existing in biological
modeling. The University of Western Australia is the home of an active dynamical
systems group and this workshop will also take advantage of already-existing
research ties between the Australian and U.S. participants.