* 8814549
* Fundamental Studies of Polymerization Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* W. Harmon Ray, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/1992
* USD 284,018.00

Traditionally, manufacture of polymers was done in batch reactors with little
fundamental understanding of the interaction of kinetics and transport
phenomena. With the growth of demand for polymers and increased price
competition, more efficient polymerization methods are being developed.
Manufacturers of high volume commodity polymers now have fewer product lines and
have moved to the use of continuous reactors. Producers of relatively low
volume, high quality (and value) polymers are finding that their competitive
edge comes from a deeper understanding of the relationship between
polymerization conditions and product quality. Through his research efforts, the
PI expects to design and control reactors capable of producing a more uniform
and higher quality polymer. One crucial aspect of new, controllable reactor
designs is the requirement for improved understanding of the dynamics of
polymerization reactors. Polymerization is often characterized by large heat
release, high viscosity, and difficult heat removal--all of which contribute to
difficulties in controlling the dynamic behavior of the reactor. A second area
of particular importance in polymerization reaction engineering is the
development of continuous liquid and gas phase processes for polyolefin
production (e.g., polyethylene, polypropylene, and copolymers). A third area
with great potential for process improvements is in developing new processes for
polymers made by polycondensation. This class of polymers encompasses many
fibers and engineering plastics. In this project the PI will pursue research on
these problems through both experimental and quantitative theoretical studies of
continuous polymerization reactors. He plans to develop a quantitative
understanding of the governing chemical and physical phenomena (i.e., through
detailed mathematical models comfirmed by experimental data) and to use this new
understanding (i) To devise improved reactor designs which provide better
control of polymer properties and also minimize difficult dynamics. By
quantitatively determining the ranges of operating conditions and system
parameters for which oscillations and stability problems arise, he expects to
provide design procedures which satisfy the polymer product specifications and
have good economics but which avoid those parameter combinations leading to
difficult dynamic behavior. (ii) To develop new types of on-line sensors for the
reactor and polymer particles which allow closer quality control of the product
and to combine these new on-line polymer property sensors with feedback
strategies to provide control schemes which lead to safe dynamic operation and
close control of product quality. (iii) To devise new reactor designs for
existing and emerging classes of polymer products. * * * //