* 8814876
* Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies of Organometalloids
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1993
* Hans Reich, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 11/30/1993
* USD 489,024.00

The Organic Synthesis Program will provide support to Dr. Hans J. Reich in the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin in Madison. The work will
develop the synthetic potential of the main group by unraveling the nature of
some of the intermediates and applying this knowledge to develop greater
synthetic control. The synthesis of the complex molecules utilized by modern
agriculture and medicine requires highly sophisticated synthetic methodology.
This research is in several areas of main group organometalloid and
organometallic chemistry. Specifically, experiments aimed at elucidating the
mechanism of some important metathesis reactions of organolithium reagents, the
metal-halogen exchange and the transmetallation reaction of organotin compounds,
are described. Since these reactions are widely used in preparative organic
chemistry it is important to understand them mechanistically. The experiments
described will clarify the role that ate complexes play in the chemistry of
organolithium reagents, and will establish whether the complexes themselves are
useful carbanion donors. A new technique for determining geometry of
nucleophilic attack at non-stereogenic centers (divalent tellurium) will be
examined. An exploratory study will establish whether a dynamic NMR technique
which has provided detailed information concerning the mechanism of the
degenerate Li/I exchange between phenyllithium and iodobenzene, can also be used
to study enolate reactions. The second part concerns the design of a chiral
electrophilic selenenylation agent. The reagent is designed to utilize the
geometry of hypervalent organoselenium species thought to be intermediates in
the electrophilic addition of R-Se+ species to olefins. The process, if
successful, would provide a method for asymmetric oxidation of olefins to
nonracemic allyl alcohols or lactones. A third part involves the continuation of
ongoing research to investigate the potential of using silyl ketones as
precursors to carbonyl ylides.