* 8814570
* Improvement of the Texas A&amp;M University Insect Collection
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Horace Burke, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 07/31/1992
* USD 86,459.00

The largest and most rapidly growing insect collection in the southwestern
United States, most of the southern United States, and northern Mexico is
located at Texas A&amp;M University. The collection contains approximately
1,000,000 specimens representing all insect orders, and it is particularly
strong in holdings of Coleoptera, Hemiptera, Hymenoptera, and cyclorraphous
Diptera. A substantial portion of this material is from the southwestern U.S.
and Mexico, a large geographic area from which comprehensive collections of
insects are scarce. The collection is known for the quality of its specimens and
it is widely used as a source of material for systematics research. Texas
A&amp;M University and the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station have supported
systematics research in general and the collection in particular for many years.
However, increased insect systematics research at Texas A&amp;M and extensive
collecting activities in recent years have strained the capacity of local
support to maintain momentum in the growth of the collection. This project will
provide funding to assist in processing a large backlog of valuable material,
for storage cabinets to provide space needed for improved curation of existing
holdings, and for assistance in sorting and determining already prepared
specimens. In combination with support to be provided form the Texas A&amp;M
University System, these additional resources will enable continued growth and
utilization of this valuable systematics resource.