* 8814311
* Transport, Dynamics, and High Tc
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1992
* Philip Allen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/1992
* USD 208,600.00

The conduction of heat and electricity in condensed matter will be studied
theoretically in four diverse situations. Two of these, diffusive electrical
transport in highly disordered alloys, and heat transport in insulating glasses,
will be assisted by large scale computer evaluations of "exact" Kubo formulas
designed both to test simpler approximations and to elucidate mechanisms of
transport. The alloy problem uses the conventional independent electron model,
and the Kubo-Greenwood formula. The glass problem will use the analogous
harmonic approximation, and the analog conductivity formula which has not been
previously worked out. Among the aims of these projects are "saturation" of
resistivity, and the occurrence in metals of negative temperature coefficients
of resistivity. Also a rigorous test will be made of the KKR-CPA theory of alloy
resistivity. The two other regimes involve quasi-particle transport, in
conventional band Fermi liquid metals and in the new oxide superconductors. For
the former, band theory will be used to extract coupling constants from the
anistropic resistivity of hexagonal metals, and also to analyze the Hall
coefficients. For the latter, an effort will be made to deduce the nature of the
current carrying quasi-particles and of the scattering mechanisms, by comparison
with experimental measurements.