* 8814572
* Mathematical Sciences: Eighteenth Conference on Stochastic  Processes and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Thomas Kurtz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1989
* USD 29,450.00

This project will support the Eighteenth Conference on Stochastic Processes and
their Applications to be held June 25 - July 1, 1989 at the University of
Wisconsin - Madison. The conference will be under the direction of Professor
Thomas Kurtz and will be conducted under the auspices of the Bernoulli Society
of the International Statistics Institute. Previous conferences in this series
have been held in twelve different countries. The primary purpose of the
conference will be to foster an active exchange of ideas among a diverse,
international group of researchers from all areas of stochastic processes and
their applications. The areas of specialization of the invited speakers include
probability and statistics, operations research, stochastic flows, Brownian
excursions, filtering, stochastic networks, Brownian sample paths, percolation
and random graphs, stochastic analysis, random media, statistical physics,
empirical processes, and particle systems. This conference was designed to
provide an overview of current research in applied and pure probability, to
bring together distinguished scholars from all over the world, and to feature
younger scientists who will help shape future directions of the field. The list
of invited speakers includes scientists from the United States, France, the
USSR, the United Kingdom, Canada, Brazil, and Japan. Some support will be
available for participants, particularly graduate students and junior faculty
members.