* 8814834
* Studies in the Molecular Thermodynamics of Adsorption       Equilibrium
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1992
* USD 156,026.00

This proposal is concerned with molecular theory of the interaction of fluids
and fluid mixtures with solid surfaces. The focus is on understanding
macroscopic behavior in terms of the microscopic interactions between the
molecules of the fluid and the molecules of the solid surface; the role of the
interactions between the fluid molecules themselves, in the presence of the
surface, will also be examined. A program of computer simulation using a new
method is proposed. Theoretical studies will complement the computer simulations
employing techniques from statistical mechanics. The approach will be extended
to adsorbed solutions, to nonspherical molecules, and to heterogeneous
adsorbents. It is also proposed to look at adsorption of nonvolatile solutes
from supercritical solvents. Research of this type will have a long-term impact
on all processes involving solid/fluid interfaces, such as separation process
involving adsorption; the technological impact of such work will continue to
grow with each future advance in computer technology. This proposal is concerned
with the development of the molecular theory of the adsorption equilibrium of
fluids and fluid mixtures at solid surfaces. The focus is on understanding
macroscopic behavior in terms of details of the microscopic interactions between
the adsorbate molecules and the solid surface, and between the adsorbate
molecules themselves. A program of Monte Carlo computer simulation using a new
isobaric method is proposed. This method has a number of advantages over
previous approaches, including the ability to study wetting phenomena.
Applications will include study of wetting phenomena, selective adsorption from
vapor and liquid mixtures, and adsorption in systems with anisotropic
intermolecular forces. Theoretical studies will complement the simulations,
employing techniques from statistical mechanics. Improvements in the density
functional theory treatment of the influence of attractive forces upon the
structure of fluid-solid interfaces will also be sought. The approach will be
extended to adsorbed solutions, to nonspherical molecules, and to heterogeneous
adsorbents. It is also proposed to look at adsorption of nonvolatile solutes
from supercritical solvents. Research of this type will have a long- term impact
on all processes involving solid/fluid interfaces, such as separation process
involving adsorption; the technological impact of such work will continue to
grow with each future advance in computer technology.