* 8814839
* Principles for Integrating Part Setup Planning and          Workholding in Automated Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1989,03/15/1993
* Paul Wright, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 03/15/1993
* USD 588,200.00

The broad theme of this research is the creation of intelligent, dexterous,
self-sustaining machine tools for the small-batch manufacturing industry. With
previous National Science Foundation support, the Principal Investigator has
developed an expert system that plans the setup processes for rectangular-type
parts in a parallel-sided vise on a three-axis Computer Numerical Control (CNC)
milling machine. At the same time, clamping and fixturing methods have been
systematically studied and an automated fixturing device has been made and used.
The specific work consists of: (1) broadening the expert system planning
software to encompass more complex part shapes that will require more setup
steps, the use of toe-clamps and the possible use of more complex fixtures, (2)
combining this expert system approach with a more solid mechanics approach to
stable fixturing that will come more into play as our parts increase in
complexity away from the simple rectangular parts held in a parallel-sided vise,
and (3) the construction of prototype fixtures that can handle more complex part
types. In this research, the software that integrates the machine tool planning
and clamping functions is referred to as the Unified Machining Planner; the
programmable hardware that will be developed is referred to as the Flexible
Clamping System.