* 8814272
* Responses of a Major Land Margin Ecosystem to Changes in    Terrestrial Nutrient Inputs:  Internal Nutrient Cycling,    Production and Export
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1988,05/31/1995
* Douglas Capone, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 05/31/1995
* USD 2,658,751.00

The study of nutrient cycling processes and their relation to autotrophic
production is of fundamental importance in the analysis of natural ecosystems.
While it is axiomatic that aquatic ecosystems at the land-sea interface are
among the most productive in the biosphere, surprisingly little is known about
nutrient inputs from land, fate and cycling of these nutrients, and associated
organic production. Recent analyses have suggested that estuaries may be
generally heterotrophic (gross primary production is less than community
respiration), implying that they are nutrient sources to the sea rather than
sinks of terrestrial inputs. For the proposed research program, a cohesive
interdisciplinary team of ecologists, geochemists, modelers and oceanographers
has been assembled to address two hypotheses: 1) Chesapeake Bay, as an example
of a coastal plain estuary, supports a N-limited autotrophic (GPP exceeds R)
community which exports DON offshore as a consequence of internal cycling and
transformation processes; and 2) spring inputs of N from land are coupled to the
summer productivity maximum by phytoplankton assimilation and biomass deposition
in spring with subsequent benthic regeneration and vertical transport during
summer. These hypotheses will be tested in this 5-year project by making regular
measurements of hydrographic variables and key carbon and nutrient processes at
stations along the main salinity gradient and at times emphasizing spring and
summer periods. Estuaries, in this cases especially the Chesapeake Bay, are
important zones of ecological interaction mediating the exchange processes of
continents and oceans. They provide a broad array of exploitable resources as
fragile as the estuarine system itself. Research such as this will allow the
more informed management of coastal ecosystems.