* 8814395
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Astronomy): Joint Observa- tions of the Long-Term Evolution of Solar Magnetic Fields
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Harold Zirin, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 11/30/1991
* USD 38,618.00

This proposal on "Joint Observations of the Long Term Evolution of Solar
Magnetic Fields" between Dr. Harold Zirin and Dr. Ken G. Libbrecht of California
Institute of Technology and Professors Ai Guoxiang, Han Feng, and Liu Jianqiang
of the Beijing Astronomical Observatory, is jointly sponsored by NSF and by the
Chinese Academy of Sciences. At all times the sun is covered with weak magnetic
fields arranged in the form of a network of elements 30 km across, thought to be
generated by a large scale convective pattern. Attempts to measure the lifetime
of the magnetic network have indicated that the elements last about 50 hours.
What replaces them when they die out is not obvious. Unfortunately, studies from
short daily runs provide good data for only 10 out of 24 hours, and do not show
what the source of these moving elements might be. The investigators believe the
only solution for this problem is to obtain continuous observations of these
magnetic fields. At present, only the videomagnetographs of the Big Bear Solar
Observatory and the Huairou Solar Observatory can perform this task. The program
will use the combined capability of the two sites to cover 16 of 24 hours per
day to follow the development and motion of the fields. By supplementing this
with data from a patrol telescope in Tel Aviv, the investigators shall be able
to follow the evolution of the small magnetic fields for several 24 hour periods
and determine exactly how they evolve, thus achieving a new understanding of the
magnetic features which underlie solar prominences.