* 8814838
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Structure/Reactivity       Relationships in Transition Metal Chemistry
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1993
* George Christou, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1993
* USD 14,290.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Kenneth Caulton and
colleagues at Indiana University, Bloomington, and Dr. Odile Eisenstein,
Laboratory for Theoretical Chemistry, University of Paris-Sud. The project will
combine the strengths of the Paris laboratory, which has a long tradition in
applied semi-empirical quantum chemistry, with the experience of the Indiana
group in experimental and rigorous quantum chemistry. A joint program of
theoretical analysis of on-going experimental inorganic and organometallic
chemistry will be carried out. The theory will be on two levels: one, a semi-
empirical procedure which employs molecular symmetry and atomic parameters
(properties) of intuitive transparency to experimental chemists, and a second
which is more rigorous and more general. The specific topics to be investigated
cover a broad range of fundamentally significant themes in inorganic and
organometallic chemistry: reagents for organic synthesis, molecular hydrogen as
a ligand, hydrogenation and coupling of olefinic ligands, and the structure and
dynamics of bridged multimetal compounds. Sophisticated "ab initio" calculations
will be used to probe experimental data where subtle influences are suspected to
be controlling, as well as to test the reliability of the semi-empirical
molecular orbital methods.