* 8814026
* Special Functions and Orthogonal Expansions with            Applications to Nonlinear Dynamics and Quantum Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Carol Williams, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 02/29/1992
* USD 236,936.00

This project combines the efforts of two investigators working on problems
involving orthogonal expansions, special functions and their applications. The
program concerns investigations into qualitative and quantitative features of
orthogonal polynomials in several variables and polynomials orthogonal with
respect to complex weight functions. Work is also planned on the application of
elliptic functions to study spectral properties of orthogonal polynomials
arising from stochastic processes and perturbation theory. Additional work will
be done investigating algorithms which reduce the complexity of equations
describing quantum mechanics. In particular, the applicability of Pade
approximants or their radial simplifications will be considered. Related work
involves the distribution of roots of complex orthogonal polynomials and Pade
approximants. The latter may shed light on the poles of Pade approximants in
understanding resonance phenomena in non-linear dynamics. While some of this
research represents continuations of earlier work, that relating to multivariate
polynomials follows recent breakthroughs following a period of intense research
by a number of mathematicians. Only during the past year have multivariate
analogues of classical one-variable results been attained. These include
multivariate integrals extending the well-known gamma and beta integrals. The
complexity of this research will require advanced computational support for
testing and experimentation.