* 8814362
* Workshop on Experimental Particle Physics; Bogota, Colombia,August 15-26, 1988
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1990
* Uriel Nauenberg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/1990
* USD 17,000.00

This award will support a workshop on experimental particle physics to be held
at the Centro Internacional de Fisica (CIF) in Bogota, Colombia. The workshop,
jointly organized by Prof. Uriel Nauenberg of the University of Colorado at
Boulder and Prof. Galileo Violini, Executive Director of the CIF, will have as
its main objective an overview of the present status of experimental activity in
elementary particle physics, with emphasis on topics of potential research
interest to physicists in Latin America. Topics to be discussed include:
accelerator and non-accelerator experiments in particle physics, experimental
astrophysics, cosmology, technologies associated with experimental particle
physics such as synchrotron radiation, superconducting magnets, cryogenics, and
vacuum systems, radiation therapy and nuclear medicine, and advanced electronics
and computers. A final objective will be a review of the present experimental
activity in Latin America and the feasibliity of new experimental projects in
the near future with close attention to collaboration with centers of research
in the industrialized world such as Fermilab in the U.S. and CERN. The workshop
will include active research physicists and is aimed at stimulating
collaborative ties between researchers in Latin America and at major
experimental research centers in the U.S. As such it builds on existing ties
with other collaborative particle physics groups elsewhere in Latin America,
particularly in Brazil and Mexico. By bringing experimentalists of renown to
discuss with their Latin American counterparts feasible projects for developing
countries, this workshop serves to advance the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program.