* 8814305
* Ground-based Observations and Theoretical Studies of the    Vertical Column Abundance of Atmospheric Hydroxyl
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1992
* Clyde Burnett, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 04/30/1992
* USD 218,500.00

Theoretical atmospheric chemistry models used to predict the effects of human
activities on stratospheric ozone are dependent on measurement of reactive
chemical species in the upper atmosphere. The radical OH is an important
chemically active transient species that is believed to control the
concentration of ozone above 40 km, and to have a strong influence on the
partitioning of odd-nitrogen and odd-chlorine species that affect the main ozone
level at about 25 km altitude. A relatively inexpensive method of gaining
information about fluctuations in OH levels is provided by ground-based
observations of the column abundance of OH by the PEPSIOS (Poly Etalcon Pressure
Scanned Interferometric Spectrometer) system. Under previous NSF grants the
principal investigator has carried on a successful program of PEPSIOS
measurements at the Fritz Peak Observatory in Colorado Since 1977, and more
recently for Boca Raton, Florida, the Poker Flat Research Range near Fairbanks,
Alaska, and at Truk Island in Micronesia. This research is being done by a
scientist who is generally recognized as a pioneer in this area of atmospheric
chemistry research. His research papers on the spatial and temporal variations
in the stratospheric hydroxyl radical concentrations are widely acclaimed and
have provided important information about several aspects of the chemistry of
the stratosphere and mesosphere. This continuation research will include
continued studies of the middle atmosphere hydroxyl radical in the tropics as
well as the measurement of this species from the Fritz Peak Observatory.