* 8814943
* Noncontacting Laser Vibrometer for Six Degrees of Freedom   Positional Measurement
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* H. Joseph Sommer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1991
* USD 226,026.00

The objective of this research is to develop a noncontacting system for the
complete dynamic measurement of all six degrees of freedom of position and
attitude of miniature mechanical components. This information is generally not
obtainable, yet it is essential in many new engineering applications. The system
is based on monitoring three laser beams reflected from a small reflective
target on the component. By utilizing the geometric origin of the beams and the
position of the respective reflections, all six degrees of freedom of position
of the target can be determined. The research will optimize the geometry of the
lasers, targets, and sensors in order to achieve the best set of operational
parameters while miniaturizing the overall size. The necessary hardware and
software will be developed to achieve high frequency real time operation (30
KHz). The design will be prototyped and evaluated to determine the operational
limitations and capabilities. The main research emphasis will be on system
development, with applications directed at noncontacting modal analysis of
structures. Specifically the incorporation of the rotational degrees of freedom
into the experimental modal data base will be examined using the new measurement
capability presented by this system.