* 8814664
* Intraband Processes and New Device Concepts in Compound     Semiconductor Heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1988,04/30/1991
* Unil A. Perera, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Arthur R. Bergen
* 04/30/1991
* USD 184,082.00

The project involves research on intraband (as opposed to interband) processes
in semiconductor devices and related research on new device concepts. The
research will include electronic and infrared measurements as well as device
physics theory and modeling. The research will be oriented toward improved
understanding of intraband process in silicon and selectively doped A1GaAs/GaAs
and toward concepts which could contribute to the development of (A) ultrafast
devices for logic, infrared data transmission, and oscillator applications, (B)
new types of infrared detectors and (C) new means of electronic implementation
of neural networks. Some of the proposed work is exploratory while other aspects
represent a continuation of current research. In accord with our predictions,
intraband processes involving tunneling and photoexcitation have been found to
have special advantages in terms of electronic switching speed and the ability
to tailor infrared detectors for optimal response at particular wavelengths. The
research will deal with issues related to picosecond switching and the analogous
frequency domain for heterostructure devices. The work will include analysis of
corrections to the standard treatment of Tsu-Esaki tunneling as well as
electron-electron interactions and heterostructure interface roughness. Infrared
detector concepts involving nonlinear effects in extrinsic silicon devices and
heterostructures will be developed and effects at impurity band interfaces will
be studied.