* 8814208
* The Interaction of Asset Pricing and Economic Activity
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Andrew Abel, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 07/31/1991
* USD 97,951.00

The pricing of capital assets and the interaction of asset prices and real
economic activity have been important subjects of macroeconomic research over
the past several decades. The role of stock and bond markets in determining
consumption demand and investment demand has been emphasized by Keynes and
others working in the Keynsian tradition. The new classical macroeconomics also
is concerned with the interaction of asset prices and the level of overall
economic activity. However, the specific questions addressed and the mechanisms
by which the business cycle and asset prices are related are frequently very
different from those in the Keynsian tradition. The purpose of this study is to
develop a number of general equilibrium models to analyze the effects of
changing risk on asset prices, the relationship among asset prices and aggregate
savings and investment, and the effects of monetary and fiscal policy. The
methodology employed will be based on the new classical macroeconomic paradigm.
This research is important because it will shed light on the interaction between
asset prices and fluctuations in output and employment. This in turn would
provide a deeper understanding of the business cycle how fiscal and monetary
policy might be used to ameliorate cyclical instabilities.