* 8814146
* US-United Kingdom Cooperative Research:  Assembly of the    Neuronal Cytoskeleton
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* James Bamburg, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1992
* USD 17,490.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. James Bamburg,
Colorado State University, and Dr. Dennis Bray, Cell Biophysics Unit, Medical
Research Coucil, London. In this project Dr. Bamburg and Dr. Bray will
investigate the sites of assembly of actin into the neuronal cortex using
fluorescence and electron microscopy. Actin filaments are the major cytoskeletal
element of the neuronal growth cone and comprise the core structure of
microspikes, pseudopodia which extend from the growth cone and which generate
the tension required for directed neurite growth. Drs. Bamburg and Bray plan to
identify putative complexes between actin and other proteins in transit to the
axonal cortex. The proposed experiments should determine if actin subunits
exchange between the filament population in the axon during transport, and if
the cortical actin layer of the axon arises from deposition at the growth cone
or the shaft. During the course of the project, Dr. Bamburg will prepare
proteins for microinjection; Dr. Bray will prepare antibodies against the
fluorescent labels. The microinjections studies will be carried out in both
laboratories. The proposed studies are well suited for collaboration between
these two laboratories. Dr. Bray has been a leader in the development of
neuronal culture methods, production of antibodies to neuronal cell proteins,
and the application of immunocytochemical methods for other localization of
proteins within neurons. Dr. Bamburg has been active in isolation and
characterization in vitro of proteins ________ involved in cytoskeletal
structures and in regulating assembly of cytoskeletal components.