* 8814888
* Quality Systems:  Optimization of Experimental Design for   Groundwater Supply and Theory and Field Validation
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Douglas Mackay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 07/31/1992
* USD 295,642.00

The objective of this proposal are to conduct theoretical work on the
experimental design problem in coupled groundwater supply and water quality
systems, and to evaluate the developed design methodology by conducting modified
pump tests in the Borden aquifer, for which the hydraulic and mass transport
parameters have already been determined by other field studies. The experimental
design problem includes the determination of the optimal experimental conditions
for estimation of the hydraulic and mass transport parameters in groundwater
systems. The experimental conditions define the location, timing and magnitude
of groundwater pumping or recharge, the location of observation wells in the
aquifer system, and the sampling frequency and duration of the experiment. The
experimental conditions, which are based on cost, reliability, and
identifiability criteria, are designed, from a management and prediction
perspective, to provide optimal information for parameter estimation, and as a
result, minimize the ill- posedness of the identification process. The
laboratory and field tasks are expected to refine understanding of the sorptive
characteristics of the Borden aquifer for several organic solutes (for which
extensive transport data are already available), and then implement a modified
pump test in the Borden aquifer in which inorganic tracers and the organic
solutes are injected. The modified pump test will be designed for optimal
estimation of the hydraulic and mass transport parameters. The design will then
be evaluated by comparing the estimated parameters to those determined by other
field and laboratory studies. Results of this research are expected to be useful
in determining identifiability criteria for hydraulic and mass transport
parameters, the trade-offs associated with monitoring network costs and
reliability, and provide baseline information for the design and operation of
groundwater monitoring networks.