* 8814457
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research:  Fracture Mechanics      Case Studies of Concrete Dams
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Anthony Ingraffea, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1992
* USD 8,080.00

This award supports Dr. Anthony R. Ingraffea of Cornell University in a research
collaboration with Dr. Hans P. Rossmanith of the Institute of Mechanics of the
Technical University of Vienna. The objectives of their cooperative research are
to further the understanding of the process of cracking in large concrete dams,
to create a simulation capability to diagnose the cause of cracking and evaluate
repair procedures, and to incorporate the resulting new knowledge and experience
into improved design procedures for new dam construction. Austria is among the
world leaders in the construction of concrete dams. Case studies of a number of
Austrian and U.S. dams currently under repair or construction will be performed
with the cooperation of the owners or operators of the dams. Simulations will be
based on advanced structural mechanics (including fracture mechanics, damage
analysis, and failure analysis), numerical modelling methods (including finite
and boundary elements modelling), and state-of-the-art interactive computer
graphics. Special emphasis will be given to the problems of crack avoidance and
control by design, and technically sound and cost-effective repair of cracked
dams. Cracking in concrete dams is a problem of considerable importance. The
results obtained from these case studies should guide and support designers,
builders, operators, and repair personnel of large concrete dams. The
cooperative nature of the project will hasten the development of simulation
capability, broaden the data and knowledge bases on both sides, engender better
cooperation from owners and operators of the dams, and transfer practical
failure analysis expertise to the U.S. and 3-D simulation expertise to Austria.