* 8814544
* U.S.-Australia Joint Seminar: Integrating                   Research on Fire-prone Forest Environments /                Melbourne, Australia / June 1989
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1991
* Terry Daniel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Carole Ganz
* 10/31/1991
* USD 17,530.00

This award will support the participation of six U.S. scientists in a
U.S.-Australia seminar that will focus on problems associated with development
in fire-prone forest environments. Human development in the U.S. and Australia,
as well as other regions of the world, is progressively extending into
essentially wild forested environments. People are frequently drawn to these
areas seeking closer interaction with nature and wildlife, as well as enjoyment
of natural scenic beauty, quiet, and solitude. However, in temperate forest
environments where fire is an important component of natural ecological
processes, development can prove hazardous to human property and lives.
Scientific understanding of forest ecosystems and forest fire behavior has
progressed considerably in the U.S. and Australia. Less, but significant,
progress has also been made in research on human perception of environmental
quality and of natural hazards. Models have been developed that predict forest
development, others that predict forest fire behavior, and still others that
relate forest characteristics to public perceptions of natural scenic beauty.
However, these separate areas of study have not yet been integrated into a model
that can effectively guide design and development in fire-prone forest areas.
This seminar, under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program, will serve
as a vehicle for bringing together researchers from both countries who have
separately addressed these relevant problem areas. The goal is to complete
initial steps toward the creation of an integrated scientific information base
for the design and management of forest developments that can provide the
natural environmental amenities that people seek, without unacceptable risks to
lives and property. Discussion will be directed toward identifying opportunities
for mutually beneficial binational cooperation. The seminar organizers are
Professor Terry C. Daniel, University of Arizona, and Professor Ian Ferguson,
University of Melbourne, Australia. Co-organizers are Professor Michael M.
McCarthy, Texas A&amp;M University, and Professor Ian P. Williamson, University
of Melbourne.