* 8814260
* US-United Kingdom Cooperative Research: The Role of Boron   in the Magma-Vapor Evolution of Granitic Systems in Cornwalland Devon, England
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* David London, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1991
* USD 14,896.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. David London,
University of Oklahoma and Drs. D. A. Manning and C.M. Henderson, Department of
Geology, University of Manchester, England. The joint study will focus on 1) the
magmatic to hydrothermal transition in the Cornish granite systems, 2) the roles
of boron and fluorine in melt-vapor evolution and metal transport and
deposition, and (3) general modeling of the relations between shallowly emplaced
granite/greisen sytems (e.g., Cornwall) and deeper granite/pegmatite
equivalents. The granites and associated pegmatites, aplites, and Sn-Cu
mineralized greisens of Cornwall and Devonshire, southwest England, are
recognized as a global type of differentiated silicic magmatism and associated
hydrothermal mineralization. The late-stage evolution of these granites, in
particular the temporal and compositional aspects of melt-vapor equilibria,
represent a critically important stage of magmatism from both scientific and
economic perspectives. Among the volatile or fluxing components in the Cornish
granite systems, the role of boron may be the most important and least
understood. The proposed work will document the abundance and geologic
associations of boron (as tourmaline) in this environment, and the tourmaline
will be studied for fluid inclusions that may uniquely reveal the compositions
and physical states of fluids generated in the granites and associated veins and
host rocks. The results of this study will then be integrated with experimental
and theoretical models developed by the principal investigator to elucidate
further the geochemical cycle of boron.