* 8814944
* US-Ireland Cooperative Research:  Classical Topology and    Quantum Symmetries
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,12/31/1992
* William McGlinn, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1992
* USD 16,270.00

This award will support collaborative research between U.S. and Irish physicists
on classical topology and quantum symmetries. The U.S. investigators, all from
Syracuse University, are Dr. A. P. Balachandran, Dr. Rafael D. Sorkin and Dr.
William McGlinn. The Irish investigators are Professor L. O'Raifeartaigh (Dublin
Institute for Advanced Studies), Dr. S. Sen (Dublin University) and Dr. C. E.
Nash (St. Patrick's College, Maynooth). Topological concepts and symmetry
principles play a significant role in many branches of theoretical physics. The
investigators will study the role of topology, and its interplay with quantum
mechanics and symmetry principles in quantum gravity, conformal field theories
(CFT's) and the theory of magnetic monopoles. In gravity, they will examine the
rich topological features of three dimensional spaces, the structure of
associated quantum theories and its influence on symmetry principles. The
properties of certain particle-like excitations called geons, associated with
these spaces, will also be studied. Other topics include: 1) the properties of
symmetry groups underlying CFT's and 2) the possible restoration of certain
symmetries at the quantum level, which classically are "broken" for topological
reasons in monopole theories. Both groups of U. S. and Irish physicists involved
in this joint project have extensive expertise in the proposed subject area.