* 8814937
* Scientific User Interfaces for Parallel Computing           (Women, Minority and Handicapped Engineering Research       Asistant Supplement)
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1992
* Sandra Walther, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 04/30/1992
* USD 127,805.00

This project will design and implement user interface systems for scientific and
engineering computation, with special emphasis on the parallel computing
environment. The work involves activity in several areas: graphical interaction
and visualization, computation strategies, and domain specific research in
computational fluid dynamics. The latter area serves as the "test bed" for the
interface research. The overall objective is to provide the engineer and
scientist with high performances, interactive computation environments that
allow prototyping exploration ("what if?" experimentation) by combining
interactive graphics, high performance (parallel) computation, with an
intelligent interface that allows problem input in physical, rather than
programmatic expression. Research on the user interface will enhance our present
version by addition of such features as detection of problem based parallelism
(such as embodied in singular perturbation problems). The interactive graphics
work will concentrate on constraint based object-oriented systems. Emphasis is
to be placed on the Model-View-Controller paradigm as a basis for the user's
interaction with his prototype model to effect computational steering. The
computation strategies research is concentrating on new models for parallel
computing, such as object-oriented parallel computation, and the development of
new parallel computation library modules to support engineering computation. The
domain specific (computational fluid dynamics, or CFD) work is directed at
parallel computing for nonlinear dynamics problems (such as Lagrangian
turbulence dynamics), and the integration into interactive environments for CFD
numerical exploration. This research is as continuation of on-going efforts in
the Rutgers CAIP* Parallel Computing Lab, and is proposed as a joint NSF-CAIP
program. *CAIP (Center for Computer Aids for Industrial Productivity).