* 8814354
* U.S.- Australia Cooperative Research: Benthic Flux          Measurements off the Northwest Coast of Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1988,12/31/1992
* William Berelson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 12/31/1992
* USD 11,250.00

This award will enable Dr. William M. Berelson (University of Southern
California) and Dr. Daniel C. McCorkle (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution) to
collaborate with Dr. David T. Heggie (Australian Bureau of Mineral Resources,
Geology &amp; Geophysics) during a research cruise aboard the Australian R.V.
Rig Seismic in the Indian Ocean off the northwest coast of Australia. The
research will entail geochemical studies related to exploration for petroleum
hydrocarbons, supplemented with modern process studies on carbon cycling and
light hydrocarbons in sediments, together with paleoceanographic studies related
to petroleum source-rock formations. It is important to understand the role the
benthic boundary plays in mediating global ocean cycles for elements such as
carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and silica because these elements influence the
productivity of the oceans and can be affected by anthropogenic activity. This
study will add to the sparse data set for deep ocean flux measurements and add
to a growing data base of nutrient benthic exchange measurements on productive
continental margins. The combined expertise and resources of the several groups
participating in the cruise will enable study of sediment, core water, and
incubation chamber chemistry to take place at the same time, margin on the same
samples.