* 8814763
* Science Cities, the History and Geography of Science-       Technology Growth Centers
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1989
* Robert Kargon, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 11/30/1989
* USD 5,000.00

Since World War II, science-based or "high tech" industry has become the motor
of advanced economies. Efforts to enhance national competitiveness and regional
development by encouraging cooperation between research enterprises and industry
has taken several forms, but one of the most dramatic has been the
science/technology-industry interactive regional complex or "growth-center."
This phenomenon has been in evidence world- wide. In the United States, "Route
128 near Boston and "Silicon Valley" in Santa Clara County, California, have
been the largest and most successful examples. These research regions or
"science cities" have received relatively little attention from historians of
science and technology. With this initial grant, Drs. Kargon and Leslie, who are
respectively historians of science and technology, and Dr. Schoenberger, a
geographer, will collaborate in an effort to organize an interdisciplinary study
of the roots, nature and dynamics of science-technology research and industry
complexes. Starting with Silicon Valley and Route 128 as prototypes, they intend
to examine three case studies. This grant will allow them to identify these
three study sites, locate the most significant institutional actors within each
site, and assess the key archival and published sources.