* 8814020
* Individual and Collective Responses to Global Warming
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Dale Jamieson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 06/30/1991
* USD 36,000.00

A central focus in science, technology and society studies examines uses of
science and scientific tools in societal and organizational decision-making. In
recent years, climatologists and other atmospheric scientists have become
increasingly concerned about the possibility of global warming induced by carbon
dioxide and trace gases. Policy actions are under consideration in response to
this possibility. This is an area of scientific complexity and uncertainty,
where values have important influence and questions of community and justice
deserve important consideration. This award will enable a philosopher at the
University of Colorado-Boulder who specializes in applied ethics to study the
phenomena of global warming and socio-economic models of projected impacts with
natural, physical and social scientists at the National Center for Atmospheric
Research, also on the Boulder campus. They will assist him to study the
literature in these fields and allow him to study the literatures in these
fields and allow him to participate in some research experiments and exercises.
In particular, he will work on methodological issues regarding the Case-Scenario
Approach to the projection of impacts. These studies will form the basis for a
review and assessment of policy options based on alternative moral claims. Final
products are expected to include both individual and collaborative presentations
and publications. This project addresses a very important issue. The principal
investigator and his host specialists are uniquely well-qualified to undertake
it. Institutional support is very good. Collaborative efforts are likely to
continue after the period of this award. Results are likely to be appropriately
disseminated and useful. An award in the amount of $36,000 is therefore
recommended.