* 8814562
* US-United Kingdom Cooperative Research: Optics and Movementsof Stomatoped Crustacean Eyes
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Thomas Cronin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 06/30/1990
* USD 13,484.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Thomas Cronin,
University of Maryland Baltimore County and Dr. Michael Land, University of
Sussex, England. The research will focus on the optics and movements of
stomatoped crustacean eyes. Stomatopod crustaceans have unusual and specialized
visual systems, characterized by two unique features. First, each eye is triple
in organization - three regions of one eye view the same point in space. This
design may be used for distance perception and hue discrimination; it also may
provide polarization vision and an unusual type of form vision. The other
characteristic feature of stomatopod vision is that the eyes scan large visual
fields, but do so without bilateral coordination. The proposed study will
examine the internal filters and visual pigments of the various eye regions
using microspectrophotometry, and work out their contributions to spectral
sensitivity. Using interference microscopy, the investigators will learn how
stomatopods form images on their retinas. Finally, the investigators will learn
how the investigators will use a video computer interfacing method developed by
Dr. Land to analyze stomatopod eye movements during scanning, tracking,
fixation, and optokinesis. These studies will not only assist the two major
laboratories working on stomatopod vision to coordinate their research, but also
are expected to have results of general significance for vision science and for
the application of artificial intelligence to computer/robotic vision.