* 8814655
* Turbulent Diffusion Flames Far from Chemical Equilibrium
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Stephen Pope, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 02/29/1992
* USD 207,478.00

This work develops, tests, and uses a turbulent combustion model that accounts
for far-from-equilibrium effects, including local extinction. The starting point
of the work is the modelled transport equation for the joint probability density
function (pdf) of velocity and compositions. In previous work this equation has
been solved by a Monte Carlo method to calculate the properties of a near-
equilibrium turbulent diffusion flame. In order to be able to account for far-
from-equilibrium effects, this pdf approach is extended in two respects. First,
an improved mixing model, that accounts for the effects of reactions on mixing,
will be developed, tested, and incorporated. Second, a four-step scheme for
methane/air combustion will be incorporated. Some important phenomena in diesel-
engine combustion and in gas-turbine combustors are associated with far-from-
equilibrium effects. Examples are ignition, blow-out, relight, and the emission
of significant amounts of CO and unburnt hydrocarbons. Although this research
deals specifically with turbulent flames, success will have an impact on related
problems that span the wide spectrum of turbulent fluid mechanics. Improved
turbulence modeling would have, in turn, an impact on propulsion systems
(internal combustion engines, rockets, and turbines), on acid rain (both in
formation of species and their subsequent dispersion throughout the
environment), disposal of toxic wastes, semiconductor and superconductor
fabrication techniques, and medical science, to cite a few.