* 8814229
* Biogenic Particles, Microbial Production and DOM Dynamics   in the North Atlantic Spring Bloom
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Hugh Ducklow, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1991
* USD 316,967.00

The Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) is intended to be a decade long
internationally coordinated program. This proposal is a level-1 component of the
U.S. contribution to a JGOFS study along longitude 20 w in the N. Atlantic to
take place beginning in 1989. Special interest in the North Atlantic as a
candidate for GOFS first basin-scale effort arises because of the intensity and
depth of winter mixing, which has major implication for biogeochemical processes
in the global ocean. Significant episodes of vertical export from the Upper
Ocean and deposition on the deep seafloor are associated with oceanic
phytoplankton blooms in the North Atlantic. Deep convection in this region, and
the transport of biogenic matter (both particulate and dissolved) is of profound
consequence for physical and biogeochemical properties and processes in the
South Atlantic, Southern and Pacific Oceans. In order to study the mechanisms
regulating the bloom process, its fate, and the meridional variability in them,
we propose a program with three components: a line of mooring deployed along 20
degrees west latitude between 33 and 60 degrees North, seasonal transects along
20 degrees West, and three process-oriented cruises at 33, 47, and 60 North.
This proposal is for support for the overall coordination of the process-
oriented cruises, and for some of the level-1 measurements which will take place
on them. A high degree of planning and coordination is required to ensure the
success of these cruises which will be part of a series of cruises to the same
areas by ships and scientists from the United kingdom, Germany and the
Netherlands. Furthermore coordination is required for enabling all related US
GOFS projects and PI's to contribute to this effort and derived maximum benefit
from it. This proposal also seeks support for the following level-1
measurements: microbial biomass (transect and process cruises), plant pigments
by HPLC and in vitro fluorometry, POC and PON, and DON (all on process cruises
only).