* 8815648
* Dissertation Research: Impact of Environment on Plant       Susceptibility to Leaf-Cutter Ants
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Colin Orians, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 11/30/1990
* USD 9,996.00

The proposed studies investigate the impact of environmental conditions on leaf
quality and subsequent selection by leaf- cutter ants, Atta cephalotes, a
dominant herbivore at the La Selva Biological Reserve in Costa Rica.
Specifically the interactions of light and soil nutrient conditions will be
studied to see if plant susceptibility is altered via changes in plant traits.
Leaves from both field collected plants and cultivated seedlings (started from
the seeds of a single parent tree, so as to control for genotypic effects)
growing under different environmental conditions will be used. This study
focuses on a tropical legume species, Inga edulis var. minitula, because it
commonly occurs in a range of habitats, appears to change in quality in response
to different environmental conditions, and experiences Atta attack. Field pickup
and cutting bioassays, laboratory choice assays, and fungal inhibition assays
will determine leaf acceptability and suitability to Atta. Both correlative
analyses and experiments will be used to isolate the impact of specific leaf
traits on the ant/fungus system. While previous research has been largely
qualitative and interspecific, this study concentrates on the impact of
quantitative intraspecific variation. Since the ant/fungus system is easily
manipulated both in the field and in the laboratory, it offers a unique
opportunity to quantify the effects of different environmentally induced leaf
traits and to establish the mechanism behind leaf-cutter ant selectivity.