* 8815861
* Dissertation Research: Seed Population Dynamics and the     Coexistence of Pioneer Tree Species in Tropical Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Montgomery Slatkin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 11/30/1990
* USD 9,924.00

A study is proposed of the importance of the colonization process in the
coexistence of the two most abundant pioneer tree species (Cecropia obtusifolia
and Heliocarpus appendiculatus) growing in the tropical rain forest of Los
Tuxtlas, Veracruz (Southeast Mexico). Both the patch dynamics of the forest and
the seed population dynamics of each species are considered. Demographic tools
are used to fulfill this objective and the following questions are addressed:
1.-What is the temporal and spatial pattern of gap formation? and what are the
transition probabilities of the different types of patches in the forest of Los
Tuxtlas? 2.-What is the spatial and temporal pattern of seed rain of Cecropia
obtusifolia and Heliocarpus appendiculatus at ground level in Los Tuxtlas?
3.-How does seed predation, germination and physiological death affect the
species soil seed dynamics of each species in different types of forest patches?
4.-How does the patch dynamics and the seed population dynamics of each species
affect their relative abundance of seeds during the process of gap colonization?
5.-How sensitive are the seed population dynamics to alterations of the
ecological variables that determine them? 6.-How does the relative availability
of propagules determine the future relative success of each species at the
seedling and juvenile stage in particular gaps? Answers to these questions will
contribute to understanding some of the mechanisms governing the coexistence of
so many tree species in the tropics.