* 8815566
* The Deadline Effect and Related Bargaining Phenomena:  Some Experimental Studies
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* J.Keith Murnighan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1991
* USD 6,012.00

This project is part of a rapidly growing body of research that uses laboratory
experiments to test and enrich economic theory. In this case the economic theory
is the game theoretic approach to bargaining. In a series of earlier experiments
in which relatively unstructured bargaining was allowed to proceed during a
fixed time period, there was a striking concentration of agreements reached in
the very last seconds before the deadline. The "deadline effect" appears to be
quite robust, in the sense that the distribution of agreements over time appears
to be much less sensitive to the various experimental manipulations than is the
distribution of the terms of agreement or the frequency of disagreement. The
experiments in this project are designed both to obtain a better understanding
of the effect of deadlines, and to investigate particular hypotheses raised by
various parts of the theoretical literature. The experimental research will
continue to investigate the robustness of the observed deadline effect to
changes in the mechanics of bargaining and to different kinds of deadlines. For
example, the sharp deadline used in earlier experiments is replaced by a
deadline after which there is a positive and rising probability that the game
will end abruptly. One of the main hypotheses is that the deadline effect arises
out of a screening effect similar to what is seen as separating equilibria of
incomplete information models. This project derives and experimentally tests a
theory about what factors might be screened for. Last-minute agreements are
neither uncommon nor overwhelmingly difficult to observe in naturally occurring
negotiations. But the deadline effect is not predicted or explained by standard
bargaining theories. This project provides the first scientific study of
deadline effects and it extends bargaining theory to capture the factors which
cause deadline effects to occur.