* 8815438
* US-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Statistical Mechanics of   Chemical Kinetics and Random Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Sidney Redner, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/1993
* USD 9,422.00

This award will support Professor Sidney Redner of Boston University in a
research collaboration with Professor Francois A. Leyvraz of the National
Autonomous University in Cuernavaca, Mexico. The investigators intend to study a
wide-range of kinetic and dynamic phenomena, based on approaches using modern
statistical mechanics. A major goal of the research is to elucidate, in general
terms, the role of fluctuations in simple diffusion-controlled reactions, as
well as slow relaxation phenomena in both reversible and irreversible chemical
reactions. In addition, the researchers will seek a better understanding of the
fundamental physical laws underlying multi-fractality for systems such as the
random resistor network and a class of physical processes under random systems
that encompass hydrodynamic dispersion and filtration. Understanding the
kinetics of diffusion-controlled reactions is an important basic science problem
with a wide variety of applications, such as trapping and relaxation processes
in condensed-matter, aggregation and gelation processes, and chemical reactor
engineering. Application of modern and powerful tools, such as scaling and the
renormalization group, should yield further insights into these processes. The
study of random system is a much more recent area of research, the effects of
disorder giving rise to a variety of new physical phenomena, as well as posing
fundamental and enduring questions. The Mexican side will contribute a strong
background in the area of diffusion and aggregation processes while the U.S.
side brings to the collaboration expertise with statistical mechanics and the
study of random systems.