* 8815216
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Simulation of Fluid Flow and Solidification in Die Casting
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Yong-Taek Im, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1992
* USD 17,990.00

This award will support collaborative research in die casting between the NSF's
Engineering Research Center for Net Shape Manufacturing at Ohio State
University, under the direction of Dr. Taylan Altan, and the Centre de Mise en
Forme des Materiaux (CMFM), Ecole de Mines de Paris, Sophia-Antipolis, under the
director of Dr. Jean-Loup Chenot. The research will focus on the development of
mathematical techniques and a computer program for the simulation of metal flow
and solidification in die casting. The computer program will be able to predict
the solidification pattern, microstructures and casting properties. Through use
of this program, occurrence of potential casting defects will be predicted and
avoided, by modifying the process conditions such as metal flow (shot speed),
die and melt temperatures. Each of the cooperating laboratories offers unique
analysis and computer modeling capabilities. In both locations, researchers are
working on the fundamentals of fluid flow and heat transfer. CMFM has extensive
experience in the mathematical modeling of processes that involve such as
injection molding and casting. The Ohio State University ERC has extensive
experimental and computational capabilities and has recently started the
computer modeling of casting and solidification. The proposed research and
associated software to be developed may have important applications in
industrial practice.