* 8815587
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Dynamic Transport          Properties of Fractal Aggreagates and Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1993
* John Brady, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 02/28/1993
* USD 10,550.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. John Brady,
California Institute of Technology, and Dr. George Bossis, Laboratoire de
Physique de la Matiere Condensee, University of Nice, France. The objective of
this research is to study the transport properties of fractal aggregates and
polymers by dynamic simulation. The past several years has seen an increased
interest in the transport properties of condensed matter in the form of
colloids, ceramics and polymers. Part of this interest arises from the practical
uses of such substances, motivated by the potential to design and manufacture
materials with novel and desired properties. A large part of the recent
theoretical activity in these research areas has been sparked by the recognition
that collodial aggregates and polymers have an important geometrical feature in
common--they are fractals. A fractal is an object that is not space filling; the
mass does not grow as the radius cubed, but rather to some other power called
the fractal dimension. Fractals also possess a dilational symmetry; that is, the
object looks the same at least statistically, regardless of the magnification
used. These two aspects, particularly the dilational symmetry, have allowed
researchers to make simple and far reaching predictions about polymer structure
and properties. The transport properties of polymers and collodial aggregates
depend on the basic fractal microstructure, and an understanding of the
relationship between structure and property will aid in predicting and
controlling the manufacture of these microstructured materials. In this project,
the investigators will use a general molecular-dynamics-like method which they
have developed together, called Stokesian dynamics, with the aim of providing a
computational bridge betwen analytical theories and laboratory experiments. A
major focus of the work will be to assess the importance of hydrodynamic
interactions and the restrictions imposed by the preaveraging assumption on
aggregate and polymeric behavior. This project will benefit from the specific
expertise of Dr. Bossis in statistical mechanics and Dr. Brady's background in
fluid mechanics.