* 8815459
* Flowing Afterglow and SIFT-Drift Studies of Gas Phase       Ion-Molecule Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1992
* Charles DePuy, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1992
* USD 325,500.00

This project, within the Organic Dynamics Program, involves the continuing work
of C. De Puy and V. Bierbaum of the University of Colorado. They will generate
highly reactive, ionic species by electron impact under high vacuum, and
observe, by mass spectrometry, reactions resulting from the collision of these
ions with neutral molecules. This will lead to a better understanding of organic
ionic reactions by removing the effects of solvation which are present in
condensed phase reactions. Reactions between ions and neutral molecules in a
flowing afterglow selected ion flow tube apparatus will be studied. Ions will be
generated by electron impact or by other methods including ion synthesis
reactions, separated from other ions and neutral precursors in a quadrupole mass
filter and injected into a flow tube together with 0.5 torr of helium. Highly
reactive ions, as for example CH anion, will be allowed to react with a variety
of neutral reagents in order to compare their reaction rates and product
channels with more conventional reactant ions. Isotopically labeled ions,
particularly those containing S-34, Cl-37, O-18 and C-13, will be used as
tracers to examine rates for reactions which would otherwise be hidden as in,
for example, that between HS-34 anion and hydrogen sulfide (S-32). Positively
charged hydrocarbon cations which are expected to occur in the interstellar
medium will be allowed to react with molecules (e.g., water) known to be present
in space in an attempt to understand the origin of organic molecules under the
unusual conditions of space. The acidity of very weakly acidic molecules, for
example amines, heteroaromatic compounds and alkanes, will be probed by chemical
reactions of silanes. The overall goal is to understand the details of simple
organic ionic reactions by removing the obscuring effects of solvation.