* 8815252
* US-United Kingdom Cooperative Science:  A Theoretical Study of the Perceptual Prerequisites of Learning
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1990
* Andrew Barto, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 05/31/1990
* USD 11,440.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Andrew Barto,
University of Massachusetts, and Professor Horace Barlow, Physiological
Laboratory, Cambridge University, England. Dr. Barto will spend a six month
sabbatical at the King's College Research Center at Cambridge. He will
participate in the Research Center's Program on Biological Information
Processing and will collaborate with Dr. Barlow on formulating and evaluating
perceptual principles that are linked to the facilitation of goal-directed
learning. The investigators propose to investigate how encoding schemes for
sensory input, depending minimally on the specific behavior to be learned, can
facilitate that learning. They will examine a variety of existing and novel
coding principles with respect to their implications for goal-directed learning.
They will focus particularly on the ideas being developed by Barlow on minimum
entropy encoding principles. The investigators plan to compare and contrast
these principles theoretically and, where need arises, via computational
experiments. They will also relate their theoretical findings to data relevant
to the coding principles exhibited by populations of neurons. Dr. Barto is a
recognized leader in the field of real-time computational learning problems and
Dr. Barlow has been for many years a preeminent researcher in brain perception.
The results of this research should make an important contribution to
understanding the theoretical link between biological and artificial neural
networks.