* 8815672
* Modelling Melt Motions and Mass Transport During Crystal    Growth with a Magnetic Field
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1991
* John Walker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* George P. Peterson
* 08/31/1991
* USD 121,608.00

Single crystals of semiconductors such as silicon and gallium- arsenide are
grown by several different processes including the Czochralski and float zone
processes. Wafers from these single crystals are used for integrated circuits,
optical devices and many other applications. In the liquid state, semiconductors
behave as liquid metals and have excellent electrical conductivities. Therefore,
a magnetic field can be used to control the liquid motion during crystal growth
from a melt as in the Czochralski and float zone processes. Without a magnetic
field, the melt motion in a Czochralski puller is turbulent. The turbulence
produces fluctuations in the heat transfer at the crystal-melt interface. With
such fluctuations, a point in the crystal face alternates between periods of
crystallization and remelting, and this cycle produces a high microdefect
density in the crystal. The progressive reduction in the dimensions of
integrated circuit elements has led to a demand for crystals with extremely low
microdefect densities. The application of a magnetic field during crystal growth
eliminates turbulence and greatly reduces microdefect densities. The proposed
research deals with the effect of a magnetic field on fluid motion in the melt
during crystal growth. It is proposed to develop models of the melt motion and
transport of dopants and impurities for the Czochralski process with a uniform
transverse magnetic field and for the float zone process with a uniform axial
magnetic field. For the Czochralski process, consideration will be given to the
fluid motions for either a weak magnetic field or for a strong one, since these
are the only cases with a nearly axisymmetric temperature field. For moderate
magnetic field strengths, the temperature is far from axisymmetric, which would
produce a poor crystal. For the float zone process, the first objective is to
determine the shape of the free surface and the melt motion driven by the force
from the induction coil which melts the feed rod. Next, the other components of
the float zone melt motion will be treated.