* 8815073
* Radio Astronomy Observations and Instrumentation Development at the Haystack Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Joseph Salah, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Continuing Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 08/31/1992
* USD 4,357,580.00

The Northeast Radio Observatory Corporation (NEROC), a non-profit consortium of
thirteen educational and research institutions, operates the Haystack
Observatory for radio astronomical spectral-line observations and for very long
baseline interferometry (VLBI). About 85% of the radio telescope time and 35% of
the VLBI processor time are devoted to astronomy. The Observatory and its
facilities are available to all astronomers and the majority of the research is
conducted by guest investigators. The operation, maintenance and improvement of
the Observatory's 37 meter radio telescope and the astronomy operations on the
VLBI processor will be supported by the grant. Haystack supports observations in
the 6mm to 18cm wavelength range, with emphasis on the use of its high
sensitivity maser receivers at the 7 mm and 1.3 cm wavelength bands. These
wavelength bands provide a uniquely powerful spectral-line observing capability
in the U.S., where valuable measurements of molecular line emissions, such as
from carbon sulfide (CS), silicon oxide (SiO), methanol (CH3OH), water (H2O),,
and ammonia (NH3), enhance our understanding of the mechanisms of star formation
and the structures of our galaxy and external galaxies. While the Very Long
Baseline Array (VLBA) is still under construction, the Haystack telescope will
continue to support VLBI Network observations and ad-hoc millimeter-wavelength
experiments. The correlator will process Mark III VLBI data, including those
from early VLBA antennas. These measurements provide high-resolution maps of
weak radio sources.