* 8815115
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Transition of Mean-Field   to Ising Behavior of Polymer Blends
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Benjamin Chu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1992
* USD 14,190.00

This award will enable Prof. Ben Chu of the State University of New York at
Stony Brook to collaborate with Prof. Takuhei Nose of the Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Japan, over a period of two years. They will investigate how the
behavior of binary polymer blends differs from that of binary fluid mixtures.
Polymer blends may behave in at least two different ways, depending upon whether
they consist only of high or only of low molecular weight fractions; or of high
molecular weight fractions dissolved in a solvent of small molecules. Study of
the cross-over between these two modes of behavior will be examined by using a
high molecular weight fraction for one polymer component and by varying the
molecular weight of the second polymer component. For these various blends, such
measurable quantities as local concentration fluctuations and properties of
phase separation will be used to characterize behavior at the cross-over between
behavior types. The purposes of this research are to test the basic theory of
critical phenomena for polymer systems, and to provide new knowledge in the
field of advanced polymer materials. The researchers share common interests in
polymer solutions, blends, and critical phenomena, and have visited each other's
laboratories in the past. Their combined experience in polymer dynamics adds to
the probability of success of this work.