* 8815064
* Workshop on the Continental Margins:  Evolution of Passive  Continental Margins and Active Marginal Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Mary Hope Katsouros, National Academy of Sciences
* GAA
* Louis B. Brown
* 02/28/1990
* USD 70,000.00

The Ocean Studies Board (OSB) of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) will
convene a Workshop on Continental Margins in late 1988 to compare the tectonics
and evolution of active and passive continental margins. The workshop will be
divided into two parts. The first will focus on evolution of passive continental
margins. This section of the workshop will consider mechanics of rifting of the
lithosphere; magmatic proces- ses associated with continental rifts and passive
margins; sequences and morphology of rifts and passive margins; and sedimentary
deposition at passive margins. The second part will focus on active marginal
processes and will address convergent plate margin mechanics and evolution of
active plate margin crust and mantle. The study of convergent plate margin
mechanics will consider displacements, seismicity, and deformation at convergent
bound- aries; mechanics of transform faults; subduction mechanics; and geometry
and deformation of accretionary wedges. The study of evolution of ac- tive plate
margins will consider initiation of convergence; tectonic evolution of intra-
oceanic island arcs and back-arc basins; accreted terrains; and fates of
subducted materials. Eighty scientists will participate in the workshop with
support from a group of Federal agencies. The deliberations of the workshop will
be summarized in a "Proceedings" report which will be widely ditributed to the
sponsoring agencies and the scientific community.