* 8815788
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Neogene Siliceous Sediments of thePacific Region/June 1989/Santa Cruz, CA
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1990
* Robert Garrison, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1990
* USD 10,050.00

This award will support a seminar, "Neogene Siliceous Sediments of the Pacific
Region," organized jointly by Prof. Robert E. Garrison of the University of
California, Santa Cruz, and Prof. Azuma Iijima of the University of Tokyo,
Japan. Participants will meet in Santa Cruz and Santa Barbara, California, June
21 to 27, 1989 to discuss neogene organic-rich and diatomaceous sediments and to
visit selected neogene sedimentary basins. These sediments, which are observed
around much of the Pacific rim, are the major source and storage rocks for
petroleum in both California and Japan. Furthermore, they record significant
global paleoceanographic events, such as intensified upwelling, and thus have
considerable economic and historical significance. The seminar will be organized
so that five major themes are discussed: the correlation between biological and
geological stratification; cycles in the earth's crust; depositional
environments; diagenesis; and natural resources and basin analysis. By comparing
the development of neogene sediments in Japan and California, and by summarizing
the latest research results in both countries, participants should be able not
only to advance the state of knowledge in the field, but also to clearly
identify the significant unresolved issues and act to promote future trans-
Pacific collaborative research in this area.