* 8815289
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Structure and Function of Glutamate Synthase
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Dale Edmondson, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/1993
* USD 12,760.00

This award will support Prof. Dale Edmondson of Emory University to engage in
collaborative activities with Dr. Bruno Curti and his group at the University of
Milan. The researchers will focus on the enzyme glutamate synthase, which plays
a key role in the assimilation of nitrogen in nitrogen-fixing microorganisms.
Specifically, they will pursue the investigation of the roles of the flavin and
iron-sulfur centers in the catalytic mechanisms of glutamate synthase isolated
from two nitrogen-fixing bacteria, Azospirillum brasilense and Azotobacter
vinelandii, the first of which is microaerophilic and associated with plant
roots while the second is an aerobic free-living soil bacterium. Experimental
work on the enzymes will be conducted at both Emory and Milan. Azospirillum
glutamate synthase will be purified and characterized in Milan while the
Azotobacter enzyme will be purified in Atlanta. The U.S. lab will provide the
expertise in physical measurements on the enzyme systems. The interaction
between Dr. Edmondson, who has an extensive background in areas of biophysical
chemistry in general and flavoproteins in particular, and Dr. Curti's group,
which has worked with the enzyme glutamate synthase for several years, should be
of mutual benefit. Furthermore, it has the potential for yielding substantial
results concerning the basic structure and mechanism of glutamate synthase as
well as new information concerning nitrogen metabolism.