* 8815199
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Nuclear Spin Dynamics in   Solid and Liquid Helium Three
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Pradeep Kumar, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1993
* USD 14,510.00

This award will support cooperative research between Dr. Pradeep Kumar,
University of Florida and Dr. Maurice Chapellier, Laboratoire de Physique des
Solides, Orsay, France. The investigators propose to study the dynamics of
nuclear spins in a quantum fluid or solid. Specifically, the research will focus
on the following three problems: (1) Polarized pure and dilute
__________________________ liquid. The investigators plan to study the spin-
lattice ______ relaxation time T1 and distinguish between the role of bulk and
various surface mechanisms. They will also investigate the viscosity and sound
attenuation as a function of the polarization. (2) The solid/liquid interface:
The principal problems include the __________________________ details of the
crystallization process, as well as the transfer of magnetic energy across the
interface. The precise nature of the solid and the liquid near a wall has a
critical bearing on these questions and will also be studied. (3) Low density
solid helium _________________________ three: In both bulk and constrained
geometry, the investigators _____ propose a precision study of the anomalous
susceptibility to test the polaron model and to investigate the relaxation
induced by vacancies in general. Both the U.S. and French investigators have
extensive research experience in the area of quantum fluids and solids, and in
particular liquid and solid helium three. The results of this research will
contribute to the understanding of the properties of quantum liquids and solids
systems, which is of basic importance to condensed matter physics.