* 8815793
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Studies in General         Relativity and Computational Astrophysics
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Saul Teukolsky, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1992
* USD 24,142.00

This award will enable Prof. Stuart L. Shapiro and colleagues of Cornell
University to collaborate with Prof. Humitaka Sato of Kyoto University, Japan,
and co-workers over a period of two years. They will investigate certain
leading-edge problems in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, including the
nature of gravitational collapse, the formation of black holes, and the
generation of gravity waves. The emphasis of this work will be on the
application of supercomputers to these problems. The purpose of this research is
to enhance our understanding of both relativity and cosmology, by bringing
together two of the leading groups in the field. Both groups have done
pioneering research in these fields and share an interest in the application of
supercomputers to these problems. The program of regular visits and
collaborative investigations to be supported by this grant will combine the
expertise of the groups. Appropriate supercomputer facilities are available both
in Kyoto and at the Cornell National Supercomputer Facility, and will be applied
to such problems as the nature of mass singularities leading to black holes; the
nature of nonspherical gravitational collapse; and cosmology of the early
universe. Each group has developed its own algorithms for computational
simulation of relevant phenomena, and programming techniques and results will be
compared.