* 8815110
* Travel Funds for U.S. and Developing Country Participants inthe Third Applied Regional Science Conference, Bangkok,     Thailand, July 7-9, 1989
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1990
* Tschangho Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1990
* USD 24,450.00

This proposal requests funds for partial support of 10 U.S. and 10 developing
country participants in the Third Applied Regional Science Conference (ARSC) to
be held in Bangkok, Thailand, July 7-9, 1989. The U.S. Coordinator is Dr.
Tschango John Kim, Professor and Associate Director, International Programs and
Studies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, who is a member of the ARSC
Organizing Committee. He will be assisted in the selection of participants by
Dr. Goeffrey J. D. Hewings, Professor and Head, Department of Geography,
University of Illinois, Dr. Peter Gordon, Associate Dean, School of Urban and
Regional Planning, University of Southern California, and Dr. Koichi Mera,
Professor of Commerce, Tokyo International University. Drs. Kim and Mera have
overall responsibility for organizing the ARSC. The Local Organizing Committee
is being Co-Chaired by Dr. Phisit Pakkasem, Deputy Director General, National
Economic and Social Development Board, and Dr. Hiranya D. Dias, Department of
Human Settlements Development, Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok. The major
theme of the conference will be Socioeconomic Development of the Southeast Asian
Region, especially focusing on applications of regional science methods to
regional development problems in developing countries. The major objective of
the ARSC is to identify a priority research agenda in regional science in the
Southeast Asian region. In addition to the benefits to be derived from the
exchange of scientific information in formal sessions, the ARSC will provide two
days of field visits to industrial and cultural sites in Thailand. The 10
developing country scientists, partially supported by this project, will be
selected from Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Singapore, and Bangladesh.
Other scientists from South Asia, the Western Pacific Rim, and Europe are
expected to participate. Selection procedures will give special attention to
assure participation of a significant number of younger U.S. scientists. The
coordinators of this international conference are highly respected regional
scientists with extensive experience in organizing international cooperative
activities. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries (SDC) Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in
developing countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
Under the SDC Program, conferences may be supported to explore the application
of science and technology to development problems. This project supports the SDC
Program in each of these areas through the scientific exchanges and cooperative
activities proposed.