* 8815319
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Knowledge Based Systems   for Cold Forging Estimating and Process Design
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Winston Knight, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/1991
* USD 8,750.00

This award will support Professor Winston Knight of the University of Rhode
Island in collaboration with Professor P. Bariani of the University of Padua,
Italy. The objective of this joint research is the development of knowledge
based procedures for computer-aided cold forging process design and estimating.
Process planning and estimating for the manufacture of engineering products are
activities that rely heavily on the skilled interpretation of experienced
personnel for the effective development of work plans and estimates. Computer
based procedures for process planning have attempted to incorporate the
manufacturing knowledge of experienced planners in a readily usable form through
a variety of approaches. However, most attention in the development of computer-
aided process planning (CAPP) systems has been devoted to machinery processes
and relatively little on the important area of process planning for forming
operations. This research is concerned with basic investigations into the
development of integrated systems for computer-aided estimating, and process
design for multi-stage cold forging processes. The implementation of the overall
system will require the establishment of a knowledge base, the development of
the interpretation logic for sequence design and cost estimation, and the
integration into the system. The problem is an important one for manufacturing
operations and the approach is sound. The group at the University of Rhode
Island will focus on the manufacturing knowledge representation and cost
analysis procedures, while the group at Padua will be concerned with the
interpretation logic, tool design, and sequence evaluation procedures.