* 8815027
* Structure and Formation of Lipid Tubules
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Paul Yager, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1992
* USD 271,069.00

This study will define the relationship between the molecular structure of
lipids, their packing in bilayers, and the tendency of those bilayers to self-
organize into lipid tubules as opposed to liposomes. A recent theory of tubule
formation, proposed by P. G. de Gennes, suggests that if lipid bilayer molecular
packing is like that of a smectic C* liquid crystal, effective charge separation
could cause bilayer strips to curl into helices and tubules. The proposed work
will test the structural assumption of this theory with regard to the
crystallinity of tubules, and the theory's qualitative and quantitative
predictions. Techniques to be used on known and potential tubule forming lipid
systems include a) phase contrast and fluorescence microscopy to study
morphology, helicity, and routes to tubule formation, and b) vibrational
spectroscopy to determine packing, order, hydration, and orientation of
molecules within tubules. The effects of ionic strength on formation,
morphology, and stabilities of tubules and helices will test predictions from
the theory. Data will be correlated with X-ray studies to develop a three-
dimensional model of bilayer structure in tubules. This study continues one
begun earlier by an expedited award. Lipids like those which are the principal
structural elements of cell membranes spontaneously organize into membrane-like
bilayers. The investigator was a co-discoverer of a new structure, lipid
tubules, which can form spontaneously out of certain lipid bilayers. The
tubules, only a few molecular layers thick, have a soda-straw structure. Study
of the phenomenon should significantly advance our understanding of structural
forces inside bilayers, including membrane structures in living cells. This work
occurs at the interface between physical chemistry, biology, and engineering,
though engineering applications of tubules are still speculative at this point.
Lipid tubules have a unique combination of physical attributes: they are rigid
and straight like crystals and graphite fibers, but are hollow, with extremely
thin walls; they are also biocompatible like liposomes. There is no other known
method to manufacture structures of their size, shape, and precision. It has
already been demonstrated that they can be coated with metals. Potential
applications are widespread, from obscuration, (by their interactions with
electromagnetic radiation) through repair of demyelinated nerves to structural
elements in ceramic composites.