* 8815521
* Metal Assisted Ionization in Carbenoids and Chiroptical     Properties of Acyclic Dienes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Harry Walborsky, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin F. Plummer
* 01/31/1993
* USD 269,440.00

This grant in the Organic Dynamics Program supports research of Dr. Harry
Walborsky, Florida State University, which is aimed at two areas of research in
structural and mechanistic organic chemistry. The first investigation will
provide information about the detailed pathway of the reaction of alkyllithiums
with halogenated, saturated and unsaturated organic compounds. The second is
aimed at a better understanding of methods for determing the structure of
acyclic dienes. This project will investigate carbenoids, intermediates which
possess a metal and a halogen on the same carbon atom. These intermediates may
collapse to form carbenes or they may undergo ambiphilic reactions. The effect
of variation in (1) metal (2) halogen and (3) nucleophile is to be studied.
Since in the latter case, the metalating agent also serves as the nucleophile in
a second step, mixed organolithiums will be used. A second part of the study
will investigate chiroptical properties of acyclic dienes. For example, the 5-X-
and 5-X-7-Y-adamantylideneacetaldehyde (and adamantylidenepropene) will be
studied since the adamantyl system has a built-in reference which enables direct
comparison of the effect of equatorial substituents X vs. Y on the pi-pi-star
Cotton effects. The data so derived should allow configurational and
conformational assignments to be made in otherwise undefined systems.