* 8815314
* US-France Cooperative Research: Electronic and Opto-        electronic Properties of 3-5 Compound
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Richard Higgins, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 02/28/1993
* USD 14,630.00

This award will support cooperative research between Dr. Richard J. Higgins and
his research group at Georgia Institute of Technology and Dr. J. C. Portal,
Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, Institut National des Sciences Appliquees,
Toulouse, France. Drs. Higgins and Portal will study the electronic and
optoelectronic properties of 3-5 compound semiconductor heterostructures. The
research will emphasize coherent (quantum) electronic effects, and identify
growth and processing issues that inhibit quantum electronic devices. Two test
systems will be studied: (a) coupled quantum well structures grown by molecular
beam epitaxy, whose negative differential resistance promises sub-picosecond
switching, but whose application is hampered by poor understanding of the
physical behavior and (b) nanometer-scale structures patterned by e-beam
lithography which can exhibit phase-coherent ballistic transport. Both the U.S.
and French investigators have an active collaboration with shared research
objectives in heterostructure magnetotransport. Techniques include
magnetotransport to probe electronic behavior, pulsed light to alter defect
charge state, and pressure to shift energy levels. Dr. Higgins' group brings
strengths in Fourier Transform Landau Level spectroscopy. The French group has
expertise in magnetotransport in heterostructures and also in high pressure
measurements, valuable for heterostructure studies. The results of this research
will: 1) increase understanding of semiconductor quantum-well heterostructure
and quantum-size effect devices; and 2) contribute to the technology base of
solid state electronics.