* 8815024
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Low-Frequency Measurementsof the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1988,11/30/1991
* George Smoot, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1991
* USD 14,496.00

This award will support a group of investigators headed by Professor George
Smoot of the University of California-Berkeley in collaborative work with
Professor Giorgio Sironi of the Universita Degli Studi di Milano in Milan,
Italy. The investigators plan to carry out improved measurements of the cosmic
microwave background radiation (CMBR) temperature from the Amundsen-Scott South
Pole Station. The Italian group will make measurements at frequencies of .8 and
2.5 GHz, while the U.S. team will make measurements at frequencies of 1.5, 3.8,
and 7.5 GHz. Already, measurements taken by 2.5 and 3.8 GHz radiometers have
yielded scientifically significant results; with upgraded equipment and the more
advantageous South Pole site, it is expected that more accurate results will be
obtained that will supplement, verify, and extend previous measurements by the
collaborators. In addition, atmospheric measurements in the 90GHz range will be
done, using existing instruments. In combination with current measurements at
higher frequencies and with very accurate high frequency data from the Cosmic
Background Explorer (CoBE) satellite, these measurements will more accurately
determine the shape of the CMBR spectrum and thus provide useful information
about the thermal history of the early universe, significantly affecting
theories of galaxy formation and particle physics. In addition, the atmospheric
measurement could help test existing models of atmospheric emission by providing
valuable data taken with a single set of instruments over a wide range of
atmospheric and meteorological conditions.