* 8815935
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: The E. coli rnc-era        Operon - a Genetic and Biochemical Study of its Genes and   their Products, RNaseIII and E. coli Ras, Respectively
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Donald Court, Advanced BioScience Laboratories Inc
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 05/31/1992
* USD 29,390.00

This award will enable Dr. Donald L. Court and co-workers at Bionetics Research
Inc. - Basic Research Program, Frederick Cancer Research Facility, Frederick, MD
to collaborate with Prof. Yoshikazu Nakamura and his group at the University of
Tokyo, Japan, over a period of two years. They will join in a project aimed at
determining how the rnc and era genes encode RNaseIII and Era, which are
involved in the life cycle of the E. coli bacteria. Specifically, these
researchers will determine the function of the era gene product; determine the
structural and functional organization of the rnc-era operon; determine the
various controls exerted on rnc-era operon expression; and determine the
biochemical and genetic interactions that these proteins may have with other
proteins. The purpose of this research is to apply a unified approach using both
physiological genetics and biochemistry to analyze the interaction between these
two genes, which are of importance in cell growth. These genes are known to
separately encode products in E. coli, and therefore there is the possibility of
a relationship between them, a possibility which will be investigated in this
project. The collaboration between the U.S. investigator, known for his work in
bacterial and phage genetics, and the Japanese investigator, a respected
molecular geneticist, should lead to an increase in the fundamental knowledge
base, particularly of how proteins are modulated and how they modulate other
systems.