* 8815876
* Experimental Analysis of Foraminiferal Taphonomy:           Implications for the Formation of Foraminiferal             Assemblages: Collaborative Research
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1990
* W. David Liddell, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 08/31/1990
* USD 28,996.00

Post-mortem alteration of Holocene foraminiferal assemblages from carbonate
shelf and basinal environments will be examined through experimental analyses of
test resistance to abrasion, dissolution and transport. In addition, the
magnitude of the effect of biotic processes, such as bioerosion, will be
determined through analysis of the frequency of their occurrence along a
bathymetric gradient. Such analyses will enable the determination of test
morphotypes which should predominate within assemblages accumulating under
particular environmental regimes. These data will be compared to collections
made previously alongonshore to offshore traverses, thereby allowing the
development of foraminiferal taphofacies models. When combined with data on the
relative abundances of living species and test production rates, these results
will better enable the elucidation of the relative effects of population
dynamics and taphonomic processes in the formation of sediment assemblages of
foraminifera. The determination of foraminiferal taphofacies based on test
morphotypes, not individual species, has application to the paleoenvironmental
interpretation of foraminiferal assemblages from different environments and time
intervals. Taphofacies models developed by this study will be applied to
Pleistocene carbonates, thereby providing tests of the models and the
determination of the preservability of taphonomic signatures.