* 8815285
* Micromechanical Component Production VIA X-Ray Lithography  and Precision Metal Plating
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1992
* Denice Denton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 604,940.00

An interdisciplinary research team consisting of electrical and mechanical
engineers will carry out fundamental research directed toward an improved
understanding of processing technology for the fabrication of
microelectromechanical devices. This research will use synchrotron based x-ray
lithography in connection with 25 micron PMMA (poly methyl methacrylate)
photoresist layers and fine-grained polysilicon mask blanks with optically
defined absorber patterns made from one micron thick electroplated gold layers.
The thick photoresist will be exposed on Aladdin, the Wisconsin synchrotron, and
subsequent developing will produce vertical flank PMMA profiles with one micron
minimum feature sizes. These structures will then be electroplated to provide
micromechanical devices made from the materials used to electroplate the
silicon. Additionally, research in plating will be aimed at creating deposits
with repeatable and controlled mechanical properties and will focus on nickel,
gold, cobalt-nickel, and silver-palladium alloys. The nickel- cobalt alloys are
intended for bearing surfaces in microelectro- mechanical devices. The silver
alloys address contact welding problems in microswitch applications. The
proposed process is fundamental to micromechanics and, in particular, lends
itself to actuator construction such as miniature gears and acceleration driven
switches, in addition to numerous other potential applications.