* 8815071
* UNIDATA
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1990
* James Moore, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 07/31/1990
* USD 6,069.00

An equipment proposal is submitted to the NSF UNIDATA program for the purchase
of a microcomputer system capable of running the PC-McIDAS software developed by
the University of Wisconsin. The PC-McIDAS hardware/software system will provide
real-time visible, infrared and water vapor satellite imagery in an animated
form in color on an IBM color graphics screen. Applications of this system to
teaching, research and the meteorological community are described in the
proposal. This system will be integrated with our current MASSCOMP mini-
computer, which presently handles data from the FAA-604 data line, to permit our
students to fully diagnose and analyze weather systems down to mesoscales of
motion. In addition, this system will broaden our areas of research potential in
mesometeorology, severe storm prediction, tropical meteorology, satellite
meteorology and radiative processes. Finally, examples of developed lab-menus
and other meteorological software are given to demonstrate ways in which St.
Louis University may contribute to the total UNIDATA effort. Overall, the goal
of this proposal is to update St. Louis University's weather receiving equipment
and create an interactive graphics computing environment for the education of
future meteorologists. The proposed system will help us maintain a strong,
relevant meteorology program necessary for the training of meteorologists in the
1990's.