* 8815251
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Sex Cell Isolation and     Characterization in Crop Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* H. Lloyd Mogensen, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1992
* USD 8,866.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Lloyd Mogensen,
Northern Arizona University and Dr. Christian Dumas, University of Claude
Bernard Lyon I, France. The research will focus on the isolation and
characterization of male and female gametes from three important crop plants,
corn (Zea mays), wheat ___ ____ (Triticum aestivum) and cabbage (Brassica
oleracea). Isolation ________ ________ ________ ________ procedures, gamete
membrane and protein studies, cytochemistry, stereology, and cryostorage studies
will be carried out by the French research team. The portion of the cooperative
research to be done at Northern Arizona University deals primarily with detailed
structural analyses of isolated sex cells, specifically, computer-generated
reconstructions and computer-assisted quantitative ultrastructure based upon
complete serial ultrathin sections. The experience of the U.S. and French
investigators in quantitative, three-dimensional ultrastructure and their past
and present work on structural analyses of male and female gametes of several
flowering plants, including corn and wheat, make the proposed cooperative
research well suited for the two laboratories involved. A pilot study, already
initiated, has demonstrated the feasibility of the collaborative investigation.
A long-range goal of this research is to be able to control and manipulate the
fertilization process for crop plant improvement.