* 8815537
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Localization &amp; Regulation  of Cell Adhesion Molecules &amp; Substrate Adhesion Molecules   During Development &amp; Regeneration of the Neuromu
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Gerald Edelman, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 11/30/1992
* USD 12,250.00

This award will support collaborative studies between Dr. Gerald Edelman and his
research group at the Neurosciences Institute, Rockefeller University and Dr.
Francois Rieger, Unite de Recherche de Biologie et Pathologie Neuromusculaires,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France. Dr. Edelman, a
Nobel Prize winner and eminent researcher in the proposed topic, has
collaborated successfully with Dr. Rieger in the past. The neuromuscular system
is a complex supracellular structure composed of a number of different cell
types: sensory and motor neurons, Schwann cells, muscle cells, fibroblasts, and
various support cells. The development, maintenance, and physiological functions
of the neuromuscular system depend upon specialized structures, including the
neuromuscular junction, the myotendinous junction, and the nodes of Ranvier. In
previous research Drs. Edelman and Rieger showed that three glycoproteins
involved in cell-cell adhesion are localized to these privileged sites and vary
in amount and distribution during development and regeneration of neuromuscular
contacts: the neural cell adhesion molecule, N-CAM, the neuron-glia cell
adhesion molecule, Ng-CAM, and cytotactin, an extracellular matrix protein. The
localization of these molecules was altered in mutant animals with various
cellular defects and antibodies to N-CAM blocked the appropriate reinnervation
patterns after injury, inhibiting reformation of synapses at old synaptic sites
and allowing for extrasynaptic nerve-muscle contacts. The patterns of expression
of these molecules correlate with those of other neuromuscular proteins,
including acetylcholinesterase, and voltage-dependent calcium channels. During
the next phase of collaboration, the investigators will examine the detailed
basis for the localized pattern of expression of adhesion molecules and
neuromuscular proteins, focusing particularly on cytoskeletal interactions. They
will also use cDNA clones specific for muscle forms of N-CAM to transfect cells
and produce transgenic animals. These joint experiments would be difficult to
accomplish in either laboratory alone. The expertise of Dr. Rieger and his
colleagues in electron microscopy, neurophysiology and mutant strains of mice
will complement the expertise of Dr. Edelman and his group in the isolation and
characterization of cell adhesion molecules, molecular biological techniques,
fluorescence microscopy and the production and screening of monoclonal and
polyclonal antibodies. These studies should provide new insights into the
formation and maintenance of structures crucial to muscle function, as well as
to their aberrations in muscle disease and dysfunction.