* 8815464
* US-France Cooperative Research:  The Environment of T Tauri Stars:  Protoplanetary Disks and Collimated Winds
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Gibor Basri, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 14,450.00

This award will support collaborative research in astronomy between Dr. Gibor
Basri, University of California at Berkeley, and Dr. Claude Bertout, Institut
d'Astrophysique de Paris, France. The objective of the project is the
investigation of the physical properties of T Tauri disks and winds. The T Tauri
evolutionary stage represents the first time during a young star's evolution
that its surface can be directly observed. At this time the observed spectrum is
somewhat abnormal, showing a number and variety of emission lines, and continuum
excess in the infrared and ultraviolet. These spectral peculiarities have eluded
a unified explanation, though many theories have been proposed. Current work by
the investigators has shown that the origin of these anomalies can be understood
if these young stars are still surrounded by flat equatorial disks of gas and
dust (out of which planets could form). There is evidence that material is
continuing to flow through these disks and onto the stars. The systems are also
ejecting a considerable amount of material in bipolar flows. In this joint
project, the investigators propose to develop and expand this understanding of
new stars through a collaboration involving both coordinated observations and
theoretical development. They will study both the disks and the winds from young
solar-like stars, which should shed light on conditions in our own early solar
system and eventually on the prevalence of planetary systems in the galaxy. This
project will benefit from the large set of high dispersion echelle spectra
collected by Dr. Basri, as well the theoretical expertise of Dr. Bertout.