* 8815126
* US-France Cooperative Research:  The Midway-Hawaii Seismic  Experiment
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Emile Okal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1992
* USD 9,194.00

This award will support collaborative research betwen Dr. Emile Okal, Department
of Geological Sciences, Northwestern University and Professor Michael Cara,
Institut de Physique du Globe, University of Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.
The research project will involve the joint operation of a three-component
broad-band seismic station at Midway Island (Pacific Ocean) Both investigators
have been engaged for several years in surface-wave studies on a world-wide
basis, and locally in the Pacific Ocean. The common goal in this research has
been the resolution of the crustal and upper mantle structure under the Pacific
Basin, in particular, its lateral heterogeneity and anisotropy. In this general
framework, Drs. Cara and Okal have started an active cooperation in surface-wave
investigations in the Pacific Basin. In this project they will jointly operate a
"portable" high quality broad-band seismic station in Midway Island. The data to
be gathered will be of importance for our understanding of the mechanical and
thermal evolution of the lithosphere near hot spots, as well as for the dynamics
of the mantle plumes. A major difficulty in constraining models of thermal
rejuvenation of the lithosphere is the lack of observational constraints, other
than ocean bathymetry and heat flow. The results of this research will address
this problem.