* 8815121
* Modeling of Building - Foundation Response to Earthquake    Ground Motion Using a Geotechnical Centrifuge
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1991
* Ronald Pak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 08/31/1991
* USD 199,950.00

The safe, economical design of earthquake-resistant structures requires an
understanding of the dynamic motions resulting from earthquake loading. The
dynamic interaction between a structure and its foundation-soil support can have
a significant influence on the response of the structure. This research program
is investigating the building-foundation interaction under seismic excitation.
An experimental program is being conducted on geotechnical centrifuges to
simulate the performance of multi-story buildings constructed on surface
foundations (as opposed to pile foundations) when subjected to earthquake ground
motions. The study includes investigations of the free-field motion, steady-
state vibrations of foundations, as well as the full structure-foundation-soil
interaction phenomenon. This information is being incorporated into a
mathematical model to describe the dynamic motions of buildings on surface
foundations when subjected to earthquake excitations. This mathematical models
can also be used to validate, calibrate, and combine various analytical
procedures that have been proposed. Another outcome of the study is to further
the capability of using the geotechnical centrifuge to investigate complex soil-
structure interaction problems.