* 8815543
* Testing a Model for Predicting Protein Stability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1990
* Bruce Dale, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 01/31/1990
* USD 29,005.00

This expedited award for novel research project deals with the effects of single
or multiple amino acid substitutions on the following properties of the
proteins: (1) changes of enthalpy and specific heat of unfolding; (2) thermal
stability; (3) resistance to chemical denaturants. These effects are correlated
in terms of a transfer free energy density model in order to determine whether
rational patterns emerge. To apply this model, the protein amino acid
composition must be known and the protein must consist of a single reversibly
unfolding domain. Most current efforts to explain and predict protein
properties, such as stability, center on an extremely complex approach based on
the protein's amino acid. In contrast, this approach applies chemical
engineering phase equilibrium methods to predict the thermodynamic parameters of
protein stabilization. This is a composition based approach, rather than a
sequence approach; and it goes directly counter to most current biochemical
thinking on protein property prediction. One of the key questions in
biotechnology processes is the stability of the protein. Until now, there have
been no quantitative tools for predicting protein stability. If this model is
successful, it will provide a rational basis for site-directed mutagenesis to
modify the thermal stability (and hence the protease resistance and in vivo
turnover rates) of proteins. Such a predictive tool would also permit one to
predict the temperature of maximum stability and thus to guide protein
processing and refolding operations. This transfer free energy density model is
the first such quantitative tool.