* 8815914
* Linear Programming Tools for Integer Programming
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Robert Bixby, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 01/31/1993
* USD 161,739.00

This research is directed towards simplex-based tools for integer and linear
programming. The principal application is integer programming, but this work
also provides an opportunity to study the simplex method as a method for solving
any linear program. This research makes use of LOPT, an existing C
implementation of the simplex method developed by the proposer. Principal
aspects of the research are the following: o Developing effective data
structures and reoptimization methods for dealing with a sequence related but
dynamically changing linear programming problems. o Studying methods for dealing
with the large-scale degeneracy that arises in combinatorial applications. o
Further improvements in the basic elements of the LOPT implementation, including
developing C implementations of sparse factorization routines, factorization
update routines, and variations of these routines that exploit the special
structure of combinatorially defines problems. This work is being carried out,
in part, in collaboration with Martin Grotschel of the University of Augsburg. A
joint research project on polyhedral methods for the max-cut problem is also
underway together with Francisco Barahona of the University of Waterloo. This
latter work is not formally part of the current proposal, but is an important
parallel effort. Both the collaboration with Grotschel and that with Barahona
will provide concrete integer programming instances central to the present
investigation.