* 8815310
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Systematic Measurements of Hyperfine Structure Anomolies
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,12/31/1993
* H.Henry Stroke, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 12/31/1993
* USD 14,250.00

This award will support collaborative research between Drs. H. H. Stroke and O.
Redi, New York University and Dr. Liberman and colleagues at the Laboratoire
Aime Cotton, Orsay, France. The objective of this research is to study the
systematic effects in nuclear structure as the neutron number is varied. The
extended magenetic structure of the nucleus is manifested when one compares the
interaction of the nuclear magnetization with a uniform magnetic field to that
in the inhomogeneous field, produced by the atomic electrons (Bohr-Weisskopf
effect or hyperfine structure anomaly). The effect can be used to explore
nuclear magnetic properties and wave functions. In practice, the nearly total
lack of systematic experimental data has limited this possibility. By extending
the measurements to long chains of radioactive isotopes obtainable at the CERN
isotope separator with on-line-detection (ISOLDE), the two research groups will
carry out studies that are expected to lead to magenetic structure data
comparable to that already obtained for the systematics of the nuclear charge
distribution from isotope shifts. An atomic beam magnetic resonance machine at
N.Y.U. is being adapted as a prototype for the final apparatus to be built by
the group in France, where much of the required laser systems are also under
development. The results of this research should lead to valuable new and
systematic data on electric and magenetic properties of nuclei.