* 8815927
* Ammonia Synthesis and Methane Dimerization in Solid         Electrolyte Reactor Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Michael Stoukides, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/1992
* USD 148,613.00

High temperature proton conductors are solid state materials which are of
interest because they can be used in heterogeneous catalysis in order to modify
electrochemically the rates of hydro- and dehydrogenation reactions. Many such
materials exist but few are of real engineering interest because they also need
to have high electrical conductivity and mechanical strength. Such materials may
be used in an electrolyte cell in the following configuration: Two porous metal
film electrodes are deposited on the two sides of a disk made of a proton
conducting material. One side is exposed to a hydrogen containing gas and serves
as the anodic electrode while the other side (cathode) is exposed to a compound
that can be hydrogenated via an exothermic chemical reaction. When placed in an
electrical circuit, a proton flux is established and hydrogen is transferred
from anode to cathode. Hydrogen reacts on the cathode while the electrical
circuit converts the reaction free energy into electricity. Hence a useful
chemical can be produced with simultaneous generation of electrical energy. The
PI plans to test the proton conductor SrCe.95 Yb.05O3-a in such cells to produce
ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen and C2 hydrocarbons (e.g. ethylene) from
methane while simultaneously cogenerating electricity.