* 8815509
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Selection of Specific cDNA Probes for Sodium Channels
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1992
* John Merlie, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1992
* USD 6,100.00

This award will support collaborative research in molecular neurobiology between
Dr. John P. Merlie, Washington University and Dr. Emmanuel Jover, Unite de
Membranes Biologiques et Toxines Animales, French National Center for Scientific
Research, Marseille, France. Preliminary experiments employing cDNA cloning
indicate the existence of at least four mRNA's for mouse brain Na channels and
one for mouse muscle. The investigators propose to extend the screening of
existing cDNA libraries to identify yet undiscovered sequences. In addition,
mRNA specific probes will be derived from the cDNA clones and used to
characterize mRNA distribution in tissues during development and in cell
cultures derived from brain and muscle. Finally, they will begin to prepare full
length clones for studies of function by expression. The group in Marseille will
carry out RNA analysis. At Washington University Dr. Merlie will continue to
screen for new cDNA clones, and to sequence the novel clones that are
identified. Full length clones for expression will be prepared and expressed in
fibroblasts for pharmacological study in Marseille. Dr. Merlie has made
significant contributions to the field of sodium channel physiology and
pharmacology. Dr. Jovet and his research group have extensive background in
mouse development systems. The results of this project are expected to show how
recombinant DNA and related techniques can be applied to the study of ion
channels.