* 8815362
* Dissertation Research: A Phylogenetic Analysis of the Major Lineages of Fishes Utilizing Direct Sequencing of Ribosomal RNA
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1988,04/30/1991
* Gregory Whitt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 04/30/1991
* USD 12,186.00

This study will determine the times of origin and evolutionary relatedness of
the major groups of primitive fishes (lampreys, hagfishes, sharks, rays,
lungfishes, coelacanth, sturgeons, paddlefish, gars, and bowfins as well as
selected species of advanced fishes, whose distinctive morphologies and habitats
have arisen relatively recently. Insights into the evolution of fish groups
whose ancestors gave rise to all land vertebrates is crucial to our
understanding of the evolutionary mechanisms and adaptations leading to the
highly diversified and complex vertebrates existing today. The evolutionary tree
for these fishes will be constructed on the basis of comparing the sequences of
their genes inferred from the sequence of a gene product, RNA. Once the
evolutionary tree for fishes is constructed from these molecular data, it will
be compared with trees constructed form other kinds of traits, for example
morphological differences, in order to determine what combination of traits is
most effective in resolving evolutionary relationships. Once the most likely
evolutionary tree for the fishes is established, it will be possible to
investigate the kinds and rates of evolution that have led to the diversity of
fish species that exist today. Once the "history" of fish evolution is
established, it will provide insight about the kinds of constraints and
opportunities that exist for a species when it faces altered environments
(natural or human influenced).