* 8815517
* US-China Cooperative Research Programs:  Cytosystematics of Cyprinid Fishes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* John Gold, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 08/31/1991
* USD 20,099.00

This proposal on "Cytosystematics of Cyprinid Fishes" between Dr. John R. Gold
Texas A&amp;M University and Professor Li Yucheng of Wuhan University is jointly
sponsored by NSF and the Chinese State Educational Commission (SEDC). The
investigators propose to investigate interspecific variations in chromosomal NOR
phenotypes among 10-14 species of cyprinid fishes from the western United States
and mainland China. They will investigate interspecies homologies of NOR-bearing
chromosomes by chromosome C-banding, restriction enzyme banding, and a newly
developed method which produces what appear to be analogous to G- (or R-) type
bands in higher vertebrates. The long-term goals of the project are to assess
the cytosystematics and evolutionary history of cyprinid fishes and to evaluate
the role that chromosomal alterations have played in that evolutionary history.
The systematic objectives of the research are to test the hypotheses that the
western North American cyprinids to be examined are (i) monophyletic, and (ii)
derived phylogenetically from an Asian lineage in the cyprinid subfamily
Leuciscinae. Data for each species examined will include the number,
position(s), and chromosome type(s) of all NOR sites. C- and other banding
phenotypes will provide critical tests of homology, of NOR chromosomes with
identical phenotypes and also putatively identify chromosomal rearrangements
involving NOR sites. The chromosomal data will be analyzed phylogenetically
using outgroup comparison. Additional benefits will include the intellectual
merger of two of the leading fish cytosystematic laboratories in the world, and
the possibility of future collaboration on a variety of projects. The
investigators will also attempt to promote an exchange of both alcohol-preserved
specimens and frozen tissues from a variety of fish species.