* 8815096
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Theoretical and            Experimental Studies of High Voltage Surfaces in Space
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Daniel Hastings, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 12/31/1991
* USD 14,350.00

This award will enable Prof. Daniel Hastings of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology to collaborate with Prof. Kyoichi Kuriki and co-workers at the
Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, Kanagawa, Japan, over a period of
two years. They will investigate the problem of destructive current flows that
often arise between the plasma that exists in space, and charged metal surfaces
such as occur in high-voltage solar energy arrays. The purpose of this research
is to develop a comprehensive theoretical description of the interaction between
the space plasma and high voltage surfaces, with the specific aim of providing
preflight predictions for a Japanese high-voltage solar array that is to be
tested in space in 1993. The U.S. researchers will perform computer simulation
of the geomagnetic fields arising from the array, and their effect on the space
plasma. Their Japanese collaborators will attempt to confirm the analytical
results by laboratory experiment and subsequently iterate array design to
minimize any problems predicted. The results of this research will have
important impact on the design of future spacecraft, and on the understanding of
problems which have already occurred with several U.S. spacecraft.