* 8815569
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Development and          Application of Numerical Techniques For Groundwater         Simulation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,11/30/1991
* George Pinder, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1991
* USD 10,935.00

This award will support collaborative research between Professor George Pinder
of Princeton University and Professor Ismael Herrera of the Universidad Autonoma
de Mexico (UNAM) in Mexico City, Mexico. The investigators intend to develop
mathematical tools that allow the efficient and accurate simulation of
groundwater flow and transport. More specifically, they will design an
alternating direction collocation computer code, capable of simulating the
movement of multiphase groundwater flow and transport in the subsurface, and
programmable for a parallel processor supercomputer. Further, a least squares
collocation algorithm will be developed, based upon a total derivative
formulation, that will accurately simulate the movement of contaminants
exhibiting steep fronts. In addition, the researchers plan to look at boundary
element techniques to simulate the movement of non-acqueous phase fluids in the
subsurface and carry out a theoretical analysis of the alternation direction
collocation algorithm from a functional analysis point of view. Many efforts
have been made over the last ten years in devising appropriate numerical methods
that can accurately simulate the propagation of sharp fronts in groundwater flow
and transport modeling. The proposed work will serve to advance our
understanding of such flow problems by combining the theoretical expertise of
the Mexican side with the practical experience of the U.S. side in subsurface
flow and transport modeling.