* 8815977
* Supramolecular Architecture and Function of Photosynthetic  Units in Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Anastasios Melis, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 02/28/1991
* USD 82,831.00

The formation of the photosynthetic unit is being monitored in chloroplasts
developing under controlled conditions. The assembly and organization of four
distinct Chl a and Chl b- containing polypeptides in the light-harvesting
complex of PSII are being studied by quantitation of photosystem complexes,
measurement of the Chl antenna size and composition in situ, correlation with
polypeptide subunit composition, and immunoblot analysis. In addition, the
origin, physiological significance and function of three novel low molecular-
weight proteins (12-19 kDa region) are being studied. These are abundant in the
thylakoid membrane during the assembly/development of the PSU but are largely
absent from the mature chloroplast. Experiments are designed for the isolation
of the three novel proteins and for the formation of antibodies against the
respective polypeptides. Subsequent research will investigate the immunological
cross- reactivity, chemical cross-linking and localization of these proteins in
the thylakoid membrane. Solar energy, the ultimate source of all biological
energy on this planet, is converted to chemical form through absorption of light
by chlorophyll in the photosynthetic unit of green plants. This research is
elucidating the architecture and function of this unit in green plant
chloroplasts and is providing information on the assembly/organization of the
photosynthetic unit. It will lead to an understanding of light utilization in a
biological energy conversion process.