* 8815465
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Transport Properties and   Dynamical Effects in Heterogeneous Disordered Matter
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Catalin Mitescu, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1991
* USD 13,450.00

This award will support collaborative research in condensed matter theory
between Dr. Catalin Mitescu, Pomona College and Dr. Etienne Guyon, Ecole
Superieure de Physique et Chimie Industrielle, Paris, France. The topics of the
joint study are dynamical properties and time-dependent effects in disordered
systems. Over a decade of research has revealed that heterogeneous, weakly
connected matter is frequently characterized by a large distribution of scales,
describable in terms of the new, elegant concepts of fractal geometry. It has
recently become clear that it is this fractal distribution which sharply
controls the transport properties of multi-phase materials, often invalidating
(for weakly connected matter) the classical, mean-field models for the behavior
of composite materials; these models, in analogy to "meanfield" approximations,
hold that most mechanical and transport properties are merely suitable averages
over an appropriate representative volume. Drs. Mitescu and Guyon propose that a
similar multiple-scale interpretation must apply to dynamical, time-dependent
phenomena, which often involve a multiplicity of time, not spatial, scales. They
also expect that the existence of fractal objects will lead to unusual high-
frequency effects, already theoretically discussed, but as yet little
investigated experimentally. Their study of transport phenomena will involve:
(i) fundamental theory of the dynamics of fractal lattices, (ii) computer
simulation of model systems, and (iii) experimental investigations on both real
materials and synthesized models. Specifically, they intend to investigate (a)
the permeability or dispersion in porous media, (b) elastic moduli and
vibrational modes of heterogeneous solids, (c) nonlinearity effects in random
media, and (d) the manner in which repeated stresses may lead to internal
failure in materials, and affect their observed properties. Both the US and
French researchers have made substantial contributions to dispersion studies in
porous media; Professor Guyon and his colleagues are among the leading experts
in the field of disordered materials, especially transport and dynamic
properties.