* 8815421
* Short Course in the People's Republic of China on the       Interactions of Law, Science, and Technology
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1989
* Albert Teich, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1989
* USD 2,000.00

At the invitation of the government of the People's Republic of China, the
National Conference of Lawyers and Scientists (NCLS), a joint committee of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the American Bar
Association (ABA), will offer a short course in October 1988 to senior
policymakers, scientists, and scholars in Beijing, Shanghai, and Nanjing on the
dynamic interactions of law, science, and technology. The primary Chinese
organizations responsible for the arrangements and for choosing the participants
include the State Council, the State Science and Technology Commission, the
National People's Congress, and the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. A multi-
disciplinary short course of this nature will provide the Chinese government
with an enhanced appreciation of the relevance of law to science and technology,
this at a time when China's goal is to harness science and technology to
economic development. The furtherance of such an understanding will permit the
leadership to apply complex conceptual concerns to making policy, formulating
legislation, and training specialists. As importantly, it will also acquaint the
leadership with social science theory and research relating to law, science, and
technology and some of the ethical issues involved in the interaction between
science, technology, and law.