* 8815378
* US-France Cooperative Research:  A Study of Magnetic Fields in Interstellar Material
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Richard Crutcher, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1992
* USD 12,328.00

This award will support collaborative research in astronomy between Dr. Thomas
Troland, together with Dr. Richard Crutcher, University of Kentucky, and Dr.
Ilya Kazes, Observatoire de Meudon, France. One of the most compelling problems
of galactic astronomy today is the process whereby clouds of interstellar
material gather together, form new stars and eventually disperse. Theoretical
studies indicate that magnetic fields may play a crucial role in this
evolutionary process. Yet magnetic field strengths are the least well determined
of all relevant physical quantities in the interstellar medium, especially in
molecular clouds. In the past few years, Drs. Troland and Crutcher have launched
a major observational program to correct this deficiency. Their studies of the
Zeeman effect in 18 centimeter OH lines have yielded most of the information
that now exists regarding field strengths in molecular clouds. Most of these
studies have been carried out with the Nancay radio telescope, which now
functions very efficiently for this purpose. They seek to continue this work at
Nancay, which will complement Zeeman effect observations in progress with the
NRAO 43 meter telescope and the Arecibo telescope. Data collected at all sites
will permit significant experimental tests of current theories on magnetic
effects in the interstellar medium. The investigators also plan to begin work on
another project, millimeter wavelength Zeeman effect observations with the IRAM
30 meter telescope. Moreover, additional observations made with the IRAM
telescope will form part of a study of densities in regions searched for the
Zeeman effect. The results of this proposed work may contribute significantly to
our understanding of molecular clouds and of the star-forming processes within
them.