* 8815572
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Theoretical and          Experimental Studies of Nucleon Transfer Reactions in the   Vicinity of Fermi Energy
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Kirk McVoy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/1992
* USD 12,096.00

This award will support Professor Akif Baha Balantekin of the University of
Wisconsin, Madison and Professors W. A. Friedman and K. W. McVoy of the Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory in collaborative research with Professors E. Chavez, A.
Dacal and M. E. Ortiz of the Instituto de Fisica de la Universidad Autonoma de
Mexico (IFUNAM) in Mexico City, Mexico. The investigators plan to undertake the
theoretical analysis and interpretation of detailed measurements involving
primary fragments produced in peripheral collisions of heavy ions at
intermediate energies. The proposed theoretical analysis and interpretation of
these results is to occur at two levels, both of which involve the collaboration
of theoretical and experimental physicists. The first level is concerned with
the determination of the characteristics of the primary reaction products
through a combined consideration of simple reaction models, Monte Carlo
calculations, and properties of the detection system. The second level consists
of interpreting the deduced cross sections for nucleon pickup and stripping in
terms of the theories of heavy ion transfer and inelastic scattering. The
proposed work has the potential to increase our understanding of heavy-ion
reaction mechanisms at intermediate energies. The collaboration between Mexican
experimentalists and U.S. theoretical physicists continues past successful work,
each side bringing complementary skills to a research project of much current
interest.