* 8815637
* Dissertation Research: A Study of the Relationship of       Climate and Vegetation to the Stable Isotope Chemistry of   Soils in Grassland Ecosystems of the Great Plains
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Ronald Amundson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 11/30/1990
* USD 9,612.00

A study of the relationship of climate and vegetation to the stable isotope
chemistry of grassland soils in the Great Plains will be conducted. Six study
sites in differing temperature, moisture, and vegetation regimes have been
selected and will be monitored for biomass production, dust accumulation, and
soil CO2 production. This background information, in conjunction with climatic
data, will provide a basis for interpreting the delta 13C and delta 180 of
pedogenic carbonate in these soils. An investigation of the data 13C and
chemical composition of occluded C in opal phytoliths is the major goal of this
research. The delta 13C of opal phyoliths extracted from the soil will be
examined and it will be determined whether it represents the ratio of C3 to C4
vegetation and the delta 13C of the soil organic matter. The work will
demonstrate the suitability of opal phytoliths, as well as pedogenic carbonate,
as tools in paleoenvironmental reconstruction studies. This research should be
of fundamental ecological importance as well as potentially useful in providing
a significant new method for soil science in general. The Ecosystem Studies
Program recommends support.