* 8815860
* U.S.-Italy Joint Seminar on Urban Traffic Networks;         Naples, Italy, June 1989
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1989,12/31/1990
* Nathan Gartner, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1990
* USD 17,050.00

This award will support a joint seminar on urban traffic networks, organized by
Professor Nathan Gartner, University of Lowell and Professor Gennaro Improta,
University of Naples, Italy. The problems of urban traffic in the industrially
developed countries have been growing in severity for a long time. While both an
indicator of and contributor to the economic well-being of those countries,
highway traffic also has well-known detrimental effects, evident in high rates
of congestion, accidents, and pollution. In the past few years, there were
particularly rapid advances in two areas that affect urban traffic: l) Modeling
of traffic flows in urban networks and calculation of predicted equilibrium
conditions; and 2) Technology for communication with the driver and the ability
to guide him to his desired destination. U.S. scientists have made tremendous
advances in the modeling and calculation of equilibrium flows in urban traffic
networks. Yet existing models lack the capability to deal effectively with the
impact of new control and communications technologies on traffic flows. It is
the goal of this seminar to contribute to the closure of this apparent gap. The
combination of the capabilities of the scientists from the two countries, with
the possible participation of observers from other countries as well, may lead
to improved methodologies that combine technological developments and new
computational capabilities for the improvement of traffic control and traffic
analysis in urban areas. The Italian side has embarked on a program code-named
PROMETHEUS (Program for European Traffic with Highest Efficiency and
Unprecedented Safety) to utilize advances in information technologies and to
increase safety and reduce adverse environmental impact. The lack of such a
comprehensive and far-reaching program in the U.S., increases the potential for
mutual benefits from this workshop.