* 8815866
* Theoretical Investigations of Surface Effects in Solids,    Anharmonic Properties of Crystals and Surfaces, and         Properties of Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1990
* Alexei Maradudin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1990
* USD 55,000.00

A research program in theoretical condensed matter physics which will increase
our knowledge and understanding of surface physics, the anharmonic properties of
crystals and surfaces, and the properties of semiconductors is planned. The
study of surface physics will include theoretical determinations of the
dispersion curves for surface phonons on low index surfaces of metals, the
amplification of surface polaritons, the propagation of surface polaritons in
superlattices layered parallel or perpendicular to the free surface of the
sample, and the properties of localized interface and impurity states in
quasicrystals. Computer simulation studies of the anharmonic properties of
crystals and surfaces will provide results for thermodynamic properties and
excitation lifetimes that are correct to all orders in the anharmonicity. Phonon
transport phenomena in dielectric crystals, such as phonon viscosity, thermal
conductivity, and ultrasonic attenuation, will be studied on the basis of
numerical solutions of the linearized Peierls Boltzmann equation for realistic
crystal models. The linewidths of surface phonons due to lattice anharmonicity
will also be investigated. A theoretical effort will be made on the excitations
and statistical mechanics of bounded nonlinear media. Theoretical investigations
into the properties of semiconductors will focus on the lifetimes of excited
impurity states and the effects of electron-phonon interaction on impurity
states in silicon inversion layers. Localized electronic states in compensated
semiconductors will also be studied.