* 8815052
* Internal Redistribution of Energy in Chemicals Excited by   Light
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1988,11/30/1992
* Peter Wagner, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 11/30/1992
* USD 393,900.00

This grant in Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry provides support for the
research of Dr. Peter Wagner, Michigan State University. The work is focused on
photochemical mechanisms of a variety of organic compounds. These studies are
designed to elucidate the details of the interactions between organic molecules
and light. Their understanding is important for a number of chemical and
biological processes. Chemical interactions between two discrete parts of one
molecule are at the core of most modern synthetic organic reactions. Many such
reactions are initiated uniquely by the absorption of light. Several such light-
induced reactions are the main subject of this work. The use of light to promote
reactions within one molecule not only allows some new reactions that could not
otherwise occur, but also provides unique insight into how molecules change
shape and into the geometries required for various chemical reactions. Because
the reactions of light-excited molecules are as fast as the motions by which
molecules change their shapes, altogether new competitions occur that cannot be
measured in thermal chemistry. Several systems will be studied in which the
orientation of the two reactive components in one molecule can be varied so that
the effect of such orientation on specific reactions can be assessed. The
reactions to be studied include transfer of excitation energy; electron
transfer, sometimes followed by chemical bonding and novel product formation;
hydrogen atom transfer, followed by novel product formation; and cleavage of
halogen atoms to produce polymerization initiators.