* 8815045
* Expedited Award for Novel Research: Deterministic Chaos in Nucleate Boiling
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1989
* Mihir Sen, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tammi Owens
* 11/30/1989
* USD 30,000.00

The goal of this research is to determine if the detachment of bubbles in
saturated nucleate boiling from a single site goes from periodic to chaotic
through a reproducible sequence of bifurcations, with the purpose of searching
for a suitable low- dimensional model of the phenomenon. An experimental study
of an electrically heated cylindrical cavity will be performed to determine the
periodicity. The route from isolated bubbles to continuous vapor columns will be
mapped. A model based upon bifurcations and dynamical systems theory will be
developed. There are many mechanisms which are responsible for the heat transfer
from a boiling surface to a saturated liquid. Theoretical studies of these
processes recognize the importance of factors such as bubble frequency,
nucleation site density and bubble diameter. They all depend on the heat flux,
surface superheat and cavity size in ways that are not entirely understood. The
results of the present proposal will help in understanding part of the
phenomenon by determining the frequency with which vapor bubbles leave a
nucleation site as well as its qualitative and quantitative change with heat
flux. It will be possible to find out whether the statistical distribution of
bubble departure frequencies is due to deterministic chaos. Thus the experiments
will also be vital in evaluating a low- dimensional model to simulate the
process over a range of heat fluxes.