* 8815335
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Numerical Studies of the   Formation and Evolution of Galaxies
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1989,02/29/1992
* Kevin Prendergast, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 02/29/1992
* USD 11,237.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Kevin Prendergast,
Columbia University and a group of French astronomers from the Observatoire de
Marseille, France, led by Dr. Evangelie Athanassoulas. The objective of the
project is to study galactic structure and evolution using a multifluid code to
follow the motions and interactions of stars, gas and dark matter. The existing
code embodies star formation, evolution and mass loss, together with stellar
heating and radiative cooling of the gas. Integrations with a spherical version
of the two-fluid code have yielded a theoretical Faber-Jackson relation, which
can be matched to observed ellipticals in the Coma and Virgo clusters. Other
results indicate that galaxies of intermediate mass are subject to outgassing,
while high mass systems are not. This may indicate a possible reason for the
differences between ordinary and dwarf systems. Low mass systems may be entirely
disrupted by the same process which leads to outgassing in systems of
intermediate mass. In this project the investigators will continue the work with
the existing code, and construct an axisymmetric version, in the hope that the
Fisher-Tully relation will emerge from stimulations of rotating galaxies. The
U.S. and French investigators have significant expertise in the area of proposed
research, and the project will benefit from the special facilities available at
the Marseille Observatory. The results of this work are expected to contribute
to our understanding of galactic structure and evolution.