* 8815306
* US-France Cooperative Research: Theoretical and ExperimentalStudies of the Interaction of Radiation with Matter
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Paul Berman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 02/28/1993
* USD 10,840.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Paul Berman,
Department of Physics, New York University and two groups of French scientists
at the Laboratoire Aime Cotton, Orsay and the Laboratoire de Spectroscopie
Hertzienne del'Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris. The objective of this research
is to further our understanding of the interaction of radiation with matter. In
this joint project, both theoretical and experimental studies will be undertaken
to examine the response of an ensemble of atoms to two or more radiation fields.
Research will focus on the sensitivity of the atomic response to the coherence
properties of the applied fields and to collisional processes occurring in the
atomic vapor. Specific goals of the research program are: (1) a experimental and
theoretical study of the interaction of intense stochastic fields with atoms;
(2) a unified approach to explain various collision-induced resonant structures
that appear in nonlinear spectroscopic line shapes; (3) a theoretical and
experimental study of new situations in which collision-induced resonances are
observed; and (4) a fully-quantized theory of multiple-wave interactions of
radiation with matter. This work will bring together three institutions with
significant expertise in the theoretical and experimental studies of atomic and
optical physics.