* 8815195
* Dissertation Research: Population Genetic Structure and     Differential Avian Extinction on Barro Colorado Island
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1988,02/28/1991
* Kathryn Sieving, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 02/28/1991
* USD 9,000.00

This dissertation research addresses potential causes of avian extinction in a
recently fragmented forest. Barro Colorado Island is a 1500 hectare forest
preserve in the Panama Canal that was isolated from mainland forests
approximately 70 years ago. The disappearance of certain species from Barro
Colorado (BCI) since the formation of the canal is typical of extinctions that
occur in habitat fragmented by clear-cutting and other types of human
activities. While some species tend to be tolerant of habitat fragmentation, and
manage to persist in small isolates, other species are prone to disappear even
from the largest of habitat fragments. The investigators will examine the
additional possibility that natural variation in population genetic structure
may account for variation in extinction probability in a habitat isolate. Since
species extinction from habitat isolates is a complex biological process,
involving changes in species interactions and population biology, the problem
warrants examination of more than one factor. Using the rapidly developing
technique of DNA fingerprinting, the investigators will seek to describe
population genetic structure at a fine scale that is difficult to examine with
less sensitive methods. In addition to assessing the research question posed
here, the data generated will lend itself to further characterization of
hypervariable minisatellite regions of DNA. The promise of DNA fingerprinting,
and similar new molecular techniques that can distinguish genetic variation
among individuals, is for its use in determining minimum viable population
sizes, suitability of mates in captive breeding programs and the genetic impacts
of re-introductions. With continued development, molecular biological techniques
will allow close monitoring of the genetic status of dwindling populations.