* 8815046
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Excited State Dynamics in the     Condensed Phases/November 1989/Honolulu, HI
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,01/31/1991
* William Yen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 01/31/1991
* USD 12,630.00

This award will support a seminar, "Excited State Dynamics in the Condensed
Phases", organized jointly by Prof. William M. Yen of the University of Georgia,
and Prof. T. Kushida of Osaka University, Japan. Participants will meet in
Honolulu, Hawaii in November 1989 to discuss the current status and future
directions of studies on the dynamical properties of optically excited states in
the condensed phases of matter. Recent introduction of a number of novel
spectro- scopic techniques has allowed new approaches to the study of the
optical properties of condensed matter and particularly of higher- energy
electron states in solids. In addition, new types of optically active materials
and systems have simultaneously increased activity in this area. This seminar
will allow leaders in the field to correlate their own results and impressions
of this recent work. Workers from both countries will discuss relaxation
processes of the excited state; characteristics of excitons in both ordered and
various kinds of disordered systems; and new experimental techniques. The
subjects chosen cross disciplinary boundaries, giving the seminar a
multidisciplinary flavor. The work discussed in this seminar has implications
for the design and use of such instruments as lasers, and in such important
technological fields as optical-fiber communi- cations.