* 8815781
* Self-Consistent Monte-Carlo Particle Simulations for        Collisional Low Temperature Plasmas:  Applications to       Magnetron Deposition/Etching Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Mark Kushner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/29/1992
* USD 168,212.00

Particle simulations are now commonly applied to the analysis of fully and
partially ionized plasmas. Sophisticated techniques have been developed to self-
consistently simulate fully ionized and solid state plasmas. In comparison, the
use of Monte Carlo Particle Simulations (MCS's) for modeling low temperature
partially ionized collisional plasmas is in an immature state of development.
This condition results from the difficulty of selfconsistently including the
effects of electron - electron collisions and changes in the charge density due
to sparse ionization collisions in a MCS under highly collisional conditions.
The parameter space in which these processes are important, and for which MCS's
are the most practical method of analysis, includes many technologically
important plasma devices. Among these devices are plasma processing reactors,
plasma switches, ion sources, and the sheath regions of higher pressure
discharges. In this work, computational techniques will be developed whereby
MCS's may be self-consistently applied to the analysis of partially ionized
plasma while including changes in the charge density (Poisson's equation) and
electron transport properties, and including electron - electron collisions.
Particle - particle, particle - mesh. and hybrid particle - continuum techniques
will be investigated. The validity and utility of these techniques will be
demonstrated by using them in a model for magnetron discharge sources of the
type now being developed for plasma deposition/etching applications. These
discharge sources have the potential for high processing rates with low
substrate damage. The model will be validated by comparing to experimental data
the principal investigator is obtaining in a related investigation.