* 8815461
* Dissertation Research: Ecological Determinants and          Evolutionary Consequences of Dispersal
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Beate Nurnberger, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 07/31/1991
* USD 9,986.00

Most natural populations exhibit cycles of growth and decline. In addition, the
number of individuals of a given species may increase in one area while it is
decreasing in a neighboring locale. These local dynamics are tied together by
individuals that move from one population to another, i.e. disperse, over the
course of their lifetime. This research project focuses on two particular
aspects of dispersal in animals. First, dispersal provides immigrants to areas
from which a species has disappeared thus compensating for small scale
extinctions which commonly occur in many species and ensuring long term
persistence. Moreover, dispersal forms the basis for gene flow, one of the key
factors that determine the genetic structure of populations. The following
questions will be addressed. 1) How frequently should animals disperse in a
given situation assuming that this strategy significantly influences their
chances of survival and reproduction? 2) What are the critical factors that
could trigger large scale extinction in this network of local extinction and
recolonization? 3) How much genetic variation can be maintained in such a system
of interconnected populations thereby providing the raw material for
evolutionary change? The principal investigator will approach these questions by
contrasting a computer simulation with a field study on the pond- dwelling water
beetle Dineutus assimilis. The rate at which these beetles move from pond to
pond will be measured in the field and genetic differences among the study
populations will be quantified by analyzing mitochondrial DNA variants. This
molecular technique is a powerful tool to describe small scale genetic variation
in animals. The information obtained in the field will be used to check the
assumptions on which the simulation is based. The computer model can then be
used to extrapolate beyond this particular natural system to explore the
consequences of dispersal over a wider range of conditions.