* 8815221
* RUI: Marine Invertebrate Purine Catabolism: A Model for     Mammalian Reoxygenation Injury
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* James Dykens, Grinnell College
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 08/31/1992
* USD 133,181.00

Most metozoans are aerobic organisms that die when denied adequate supplies of
molecular oxygen. However, euryoxic animals, as intertidal invertebrates like
the bivalve Mytilus edulis, tolerate prolonged periods of hypoxia, or
alternating hypoxia and normoxia, with few apparent difficulties. Behavioral,
physiological and biochemical responses of aquatic invertebrates to anoxia and
hypoxia have been extensively studied. Major mechanisms whereby euryoxic
invertebrates survive prolonged lack of oxygen have been elucidated. This
project will examine the recovery of aerobic conditions from environmental and
functional anoxia and hypoxia. The recovery to aerobic conditions from anaerobic
states of tissues is important since recent experiments have demonstrated that a
lack of energy production per se may not be the proximate cause of death in
aerobic organisms. For instance, in mammals myocardium (heart tissue) and bowel,
two tissues especially prone to damage upon exposure to cycles of anoxia and
normoxia, show little histologic evidence of cell injury or death on exposure to
anoxia, even though ischemia persists for over 60 minutes. However, when
molecular oxygen is introduced to the tissue during reperfusion, cellular
structures begin to reveal degeneration typical of moribund tissue. This
research proposal will deal with the role of superoxide radicals, generated
during reperfusion, in reoxygenation injury. Many intertidal invertebrates
thrive on alternating periods of hypoxia when the tide ebbs and normoxia when
the tide returns. Stenoxic subtidal species suffer from similar conditions of
alternating hypoxia-normoxia. Euryoxic intertidal and stenoxic subtidal species
will be compared to examine resistance and susceptibility to events underlying
reperfusion injury. This RUI proposal will involve research by three
undergraduates each summer.