* 8815367
* US-France Cooperative Research:  New X-ray Techniques to    Study Ligation State Changes in Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1994
* Charles Carter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1994
* USD 9,260.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Charles W. Carter,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Dr. Charles Zelwer, Centre de
Genetique Moleculaire, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Drs. Carter and Zelwer are
presently involved in a project on the topic of three-dimensional structures of
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Their groups are working on enzymes for two
different amino acids: Dr. Carter on the tryptophanyl enzyme from B.
stearothermophilus and Dr. Zelwer on the methionyl enzyme from E. coli. The
investigators each have different areas of expertise with data collection and
phase determination methods and the proposed project will benefit from a
combination of their experiences and resources. In this project, Drs. Carter and
Zelwer plan 1) to cooperate on implementing and testing programs for an
empirical absorption correction method for use in collected X-ray intensity data
using three-circle goniometry and a two-dimensional area detector; 2) to
complete data collection on a series of native and liganded form II methionyl-
tRNA synthetase crystals; 3) to collect high resolution synchrotron data from
one form of the tryptophanyl enzyme, and 4) to compare differences and
similarities between different conformations of the two aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases. The results of this research will contribute to our understanding
of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases; these enzymes supervise translation of the
genetic code by virtue of their ability to recognize and assemble specifically
the twenty amino acids and their cognatetransfer RNA molecules.