* 8815159
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Rheology of the Transition Zone of Earth's Mantle
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Robert Liebermann, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1993
* USD 14,700.00

This award will support cooperative research in geophysics between Dr. Robert
Liebermann, State University of New York at Stony Brook and Dr. Jean-Paul
Poirier, Institut de Physique du Globe, University of Paris VI. The objective of
this research is a better understanding of the rheological behavior of the high-
pressure phases of mantle minerals. Specifically, the investigators propose to
synthesize specimens of high pressure phases of olivine and pyroxene in the
large-volume, uniaxial split-sphere apparatus at Stony Brook and to study their
deformation using tranmission electron microscopy in Paris. Special attention
will be devoted to phase assemblages which contain mixtures of spinel and garnet
and to specimens synthesized at P-T conditions which straddle the garnet-
ilmenite phase boundary. These new data will be utilized to interpret the
dynamic processes occurring in the transition zone of the Earth's mantle. These
investigations also have relevance for the dynamics of the subduction processes
and the occurrence of deep focus earthquakes beneath island arc regions. The
U.S. and French laboratories are well qualified to pursue this project. Dr.
Poirier and his colleagues have developed techniques to produce co-existing
phases at high pressures and temperatures in diamond-anvil-cell apparatus and
used transmission election microscopy to examine the microstructure of high
pressure phases produced synthetically in the laboratory or naturally by
meteorite impact. The U.S. laboratory at Stony Brook is an international center
for high pressure measurement.