* 8815346
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny and Speciation in          Polygonella (Polygonaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1990
* Paul Lewis, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 10/31/1990
* USD 5,400.00

Graduate student Paul Lewis, under the supervision of Dr. Dan Crawford of Ohio
State University, will study the taxonomy and genetic variability of 11 species
of the genus Polygonella of the southeastern United States. In this genus
several species appear to have evolved as isolated island-like populations
during the warm periods between Pleistocene ice ages when glaciers melted. The
Florida Peninsula was submerged during these times with the exception of
"islands" that represented the highest land masses in the area. Two species of
Polygonella for example are restricted to the Lake Wales ridge running down the
center of the Florida peninsula, and other species may have dispersed from this
endemic area. The study will examine morphological variability within and among
the species and also genetic variation of plants by measuring enzyme variation
using electrophoresis. Gene-characters detected by enzyme electrophoresis are
likely to yield data useful for inferring evolutionary relationships among the
species and for estimating aspects of breeding systems in these plants, which
are known to be variable in sex expression. Thus Polygonella provides an unusual
opportunity to investigate past speciation events associated with Pleistocene
island formation which may shed light on the origin of many of Florida's endemic
plants and animals.