* 8815789
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Theory and Computer        Simulation of Associating Liquid Mixtures
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Keith Gubbins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1992
* USD 21,698.00

This award will enable Prof. Keith E. Gubbins and colleagues at Cornell
University to collaborate with Prof. K. Nakanishi and co-workers at Kyoto
University, Japan, over a period of two years. They will continue a cooperative
research program which has advanced the use of computer simulation techniques to
investigate the thermodynamic properties of fluids and mixtures of fluids, as
well as their structural properties at the molecular level. The techniques to be
used involve statistical (Monte Carlo) and more classical analytical computer
solutions of the equations of molecular dynamics. The purpose of this research
is to make possible the reliable prediction of the physical properties of fluid
mixtures, such as those involving natural gas and petroleum, that are used in
industrial and other chemical processes. The fluids studied here will be those
which associate strongly, such as alcohol and water. The phase equilibria of
such mixtures are so complex that no satisfactory theory for them has been
available. Computer simulations will be performed to study the thermodynamic,
phase equilibrium, and dynamical properties of the bulk phases of these aqueous
solutions, and the work will then progress to a study of the adsorption of
associating molecules at phase interfaces. This research may lead to significant
improvements in production, processing, and separation methods.