* 8815274
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Holosynthesis/Structural   Correlations With Optimal Synthesis Plans
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* James Hendrickson, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1992
* USD 6,370.00

This award will support collaborative research in organic synthesis between Dr.
James Hendrickson, Brandeis University and Dr. Michel Chanon, Laboratory of
Inorganic Molecular Chemistry, University of Aix-Marseille III. The project has
two interrelated goals. The first is to explore a number of quantitative
measures of the efficacy or "optimality" of any synthesis plan, with an ultimate
view to developing a unitary optimality value to judge and compare synthesis
plans. Synthesis plans for this search will be taken both from the literature
and from computer generation and will be incorporated into a computer database
for automatic calculation of defined values. The investigators will use
multivariate analysis to classify and rank the plans for global comparison. In
the second area they will seek to use such measures to develop a clearer
formalization of synthesis design and so more specific procedures for synthesis
plan generation. Among their research groups they have already explored several
such design procedures (SYNGEN, FORWARD, REKEST); the optimality measures will
help to judge the efficacy of different design models. Both the US and French
investigators have significant expertise in this area of research. Dr.
Hendrickson has been one of the pioneers in the adaptation of computers for the
design of organic synthesis. The results of this project should lead to improved
computer programs for this important area of chemistry.