* 8815553
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Supported Metal Catalysts with Unique Structures Derived    from Molecular Metal Clusters
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Bruce Gates, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1992
* USD 11,965.00

This award supports Dr. Bruce C. Gates of the Center for Catalytic Science and
Technology, University of Delaware, to collaborate in research with Dr. Helmut
Knoezinger of the Institute for Physical Chemistry, University of Munich, FRG.
They share an interest in catalysis and surface chemistry, and are collaborating
in a study of new classes of metal catalysts prepared from organometallic
precursors on basic metal oxide supports. The precursors they are using include
rhenium, rhodium, osmium, iridium and platinum. The supports include magnesium
oxide, lanthanum oxide and calcium oxide. The catalysts include ensembles of
mononuclear complexes, robust anionic metal clusters, and metal aggregates with
unique nuclearities formed by removal of ligands from molecular metal clusters.
After preparing a variety of supported catalysts, they will determine their
structures and characterize the reactivities of surface bound clusters. They
will also experimentally determine their catalytic activities, selectivities and
stabilities for industrially important test reactions. The work will be shared
based on the complementary expertise and facilities of the two research groups.
Dr. Knoezinger has expertise in surface physical chemistry and spectroscopy and
Dr. Gates has worked more with surface organometallic synthesis and detailed
characterization of catalyst performance using flow-reactor techniques.
Therefore, the catalysts will be prepared in Delaware and the analyses and
experimental testing will be done in both laboratories, depending on where the
appropriate equipment and available manpower is located. This research will
advance fundamental understanding of the structures and catalytic activities of
metal oxide-supported metal catalysts having molecular structures. It may also
elucidate the role of molecular metal clusters in what have heretofore been
considered conventional supported metal catalysts. By making the connection
between molecular metal complex catalysts and cluster catalysts and conventional
supported metal catalysts, it will point the way to possible exploitation of the
molecular precursors in the preparation of novel catalytic materials.