* 8815111
* International Seminar on Research in Socio-Economic Aspects of Disasters in Developing Countries in the Asian Pacific   Region, Bangkok, Thailand, March 20-24, 1989.
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1990
* Russell Dynes, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1990
* USD 20,000.00

This proposal requests funds for partial support of 4 U.S. and 16 developing
country participants in the International Seminar in Socioeconomic Aspects of
Disasters in Developing Countries in the Asian Pacific Region to be held in
Bangkok, Thailand, March 20-24, 1989. The U.S. Coordinator is Dr. Russell R.
Dynes, Chairman, Department of Sociology, and Co-Director, Disaster Research
Center, University of Delaware. Dr. Brian A. O. Ward, Director, Asian Disaster
Preparedness Center, Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok, will be Co-Director
of the Seminar. Scientists from the ASEAN countries, Bangladesh, India, Korea,
Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka will be invited to participate. The major themes
of the seminar will be an assessment of the current status of research within
the Asian Pacific region; the current status of research on socioeconomic
aspects of disaster in developed countries; exploration of high priority
research for developing countries; research opportunities created by different
types of disaster agents; development of cooperative research projects;
development of a sustaining network of help and advice to researchers isolated
from other research colleagues; and consideration of development of research
"technical assistance" based at the host institution. The coordinators of this
international conference are highly respected scientists with extensive
experience in organizing international cooperative activities. This project is
relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries (SDC) Program
which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and
engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. Under the SDC Program, conferences may be
supported to explore the application of science and technology to development
problems. This project supports the SDC Program in each of these areas through
the scientific exchanges and cooperative activities proposed.