* 8815656
* Mechanical Stress and Vascular Cell Growth                  (Women/Minority/Disabled Undergraduate)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* R. Wayne Alexander, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/29/1992
* USD 611,250.00

This research project will investigate the influence of mechanical stress on the
growth programs of vascular endothelial cell in vitro, including signal
transduction mechanisms. Endothelial cell, as well as other cell types for
comparison, will be studied in different mechanical stress environments, and
alterations in endothelial cell growth programs will be determined through
measurements of cell proliferation and the expression of growth-related genes. A
common set of membrane signaling mechanisms may be involved in both cytoskeletal
rearrangement and growth program changes induced by endothelial cells in
mechanical stresses, and regional alterations in intracellular calcium ion
concentrations to cytoskeletal rearrangements will be assessed. In vivo
endothelial cells are in a non-growth promoting mode, while in vitro basally
release growth promoting substances. This difference is believed to be due to
the artificial, non-physiologic nature of the static culture environment, which
is devoid of mechanical stress. The results should allow cell culture
environments to be engineered so as to make the cell culture more like a natural
environment. This procedure will aid in using culture experiments to understand
the processes involved in the maintenance, repair, and growth of vascular
components.