* 8815082
* Comprehensive Study of Direct Photon Production in Hadron   Induced Collisions, Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1992
* John Peoples, Universities Research Association Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1992
* USD 205,794.00

Description: This project provides living expenses for four Indian scientists
and graduate students to participate in a multi-institution experiment at Fermi
Laboratory. The experiment E706 is designed to study interactions of protons,
pions and kaons in a variety of targets, triggering on high transverse momentum
(&gt; 5 GeV/c) electromagnetic showers. It is a second generation fixed target
experiment using high energy beams (800 GeV protons from Fermilab Tevatron) and
with a wide acceptance spectrometer, intended to reach approximately 10 GeV/c.
The primary goal of this experiment is to obtain iformation on quark and gluon
interactions by studying the yield of direct photons and their accompanying
hadrons in collisions of positive pions, negative pions and protons with
nucleons. The Indian scientists participation includes designing and building
detectors, setting up multi-processor systems for data analysis and associated
software. Scope: This is a renewal for work done by the same Indian team under
Dr. R. Shivpuri of the Physics Department, University of Delhi and by the U.S.
team under Dr. Lederman of Fermi Lab and Drs. Tom Ferbel and P. Slattery of the
University of Rochester, under NSF grants INT-8514766, and INT-8500817
respectively. The collaboration is proving to be highly successful and of great
value to the two sides. Funding: This project is being funded under 2 grants:
(1) INT-8815082 to Dr. Leon Lederman, Fermi Laboratory for three years. Each
year U.S. $60,000, plus $8,900 in Indian Currency. (2) INT-8905213 to Dr. R.
Shivpuri, University of Delhi, for three years, in Indian rupees equivalent to
$138,514 first year and $80,000 each of second and third years.