* 8815398
* Point Defect Dynamics and Equilibria by Laser Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1989,08/31/1992
* John Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/1992
* USD 255,400.00

Site selective laser spectroscopy will be used to measure the concentrations of
different defect centers as changes are induced in the crystal defect
distribution by different environmental perturbations. Three parts are proposed
in the program. The activity coefficients that describe the nonidealities of
defect equilibria in calcium fluoride and lead fluoride will be measured for
different ionic strengths and ionic radii of the dopants by measuring the ratio
of site concentrations at high dopant levels where nonideality effects dominate
and at low concentrations where the effects are negligible. The kinetics of
defect aggregation will be measured in calcium fluoride by following the changes
that occur in the relative number of defect clusters as a function of the
annealing time, temperature, and dopant levels. The experiments will identify
the number of dopant ions that make up the individual clusters and the
thermodynamic parameters that control the mobility associated with the
aggregation. Finally, we will use the same methods that have been employed in
the previous work on binary compounds to study the more complex defect chemistry
of ternary perovskite compounds. They will probe ions at both cation sites in
the perovskites so there will be direct monitors of all the intrinsic defects.
The concentrations of the different defects will be measured over the range of
different conditions that affect the perovskites and related to microscopic
pictures of the defect equilibria that are responsible for the distributions.