* 8815332
* US-Mexico Collaborative Research: Lightning Effects on PowerDistribution Lines
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Martin Uman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1991
* USD 17,841.00

This award will support Professor Martin Uman of the University of Florida in a
research collaboration with Dr. Francisco de la Rosa of the Mexican Institute of
Electrical Research in Cuernavaca, Mexico. The investigators intend to pursue
the development of a procedure for estimating the lightning performance of
unprotected distribution lines, taking into account the effect of both direct
and close lightning. Also, the investigators plan to implement an evaluation
program for determining the improvement of lightning performance by using
different protection schemes. Lightning is one of the major causes of damage to
electric power distribution systems. Many studies have attempted to determine
the effects of direct strokes on both transmission and distribution power lines.
Recent work has demonstrated that, for the case of distribution lines, even
those strokes that terminate on ground in the close vicinity of the line can
produce a voltage whose peak amplitude is large enough to produce an insulation
failure. Working independently, the two collaborators have obtained important
results, such as the significance of the horizontal component of the electric
field, which have markedly improved our understanding of the mechanism of
induced voltage generation. Using a specially constructed experimental facility
near Cuernavaca, the two researchers now plan to join efforts to better
understand the effect of lightning strokes on power distribution lines.