* 8815156
* Dissertation Research: Evolutionary and Population Genetics of North American Cervids
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Jeffrey Powell, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1991
* USD 8,740.00

In this Doctoral Dissertation Research proposal, the principal investigator and
his doctoral student seek support for the study of genetic variation in North
American cervids (deer, elk, caribou and moose) both within and between species
using the modern techniques of DNA-DNA hybridization of genes that occur within
the nucleus and mitochondria (mtDNA) of cells. Supplemental analysis of mtDNA
will be carried out using a technique termed restriction enzyme analysis.
Specific goals are: 1) to reconstruct an evolutionary history for the 4 North
American genera, Alces (moose), Rangifer (caribou), Cervus (elk) and Odocoileus
(deer), 2) to determine whether mtDNA and single copy nuclear DNA, which
comprises the genes inherited through the nucleus, have comparable rates of
evolution within the group and to calibrate the molecular clock against the
fossil record, 3) to construct detailed evolutionary histories for populations
and subspecies of the several species and to analyze the genetic structure of
species populations in context of Pleistocene glacial history and barriers to
gene flow (for example, mountain ranges, prairies, etc). This study will help us
understand the roles of genetic variation, habitat and history in the origin and
preservation of these important game animals and enable us to make informed
decisions about their future management.