* 8815290
* Life Cycles of Moist Baroclinic Eddies: Mean Flow           Adjustment and Modification by Surface Fluxes
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1988,05/31/1991
* William Gutowski, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/1991
* USD 184,712.00

Dynamical heat transports by mid-latitude, baroclinically unstable waves
interact with a variety of physical processes to control the climatic state.
Classical instability analyses and numerous case studies of storm evolution
indicate an essential contribution by latent heat release to the development of
baroclinic waves. In addition, the transport of latent heat associated with
transient baroclinic eddies is known to have a significant effect on climatic
balances of heat, momentum and moisture. Previous studies of moist
baroclinically unstable waves from a climatic perspective have been limited to a
few cases where only the aggregate effect of a spectrum of waves have been
simulated. This research will investigate the effects of moisture condensation
on the life cycles of baroclinically unstable waves using a spherical, primitive
equations model. The study will emphasize the mechanisms that affect the
dynamics of climate, filling the gap between studies of individual storms and
studies of the hydrological cycle in general circulation models. It will seek
insight into the climatology of eddy flux structure, its interaction with the
zonal mean state and the influence of surface fluxes. Because it emphasizes
climatic processes, the study will concentrate on synoptic and planetary-scale
waves, which emerge with the largest amplitudes when a spectrum of waves are
perturbed in baroclinically unstable flow. This research is important because it
should improve our understanding of interactions between atmospheric circulation
and the hydrological cycle.