* 8815495
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Structure and Properties ofCrystalline-Amorphous Composite Coatings on Stainless Steel
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1992
* William Nix, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 03/31/1992
* USD 10,240.00

This award will support collaborative research between U.S. and French material
scientists on the topic of ion-assisted coating of stainless steel. The U.S.
investigators, all from Stanford University, are: Dr. Robert Sinclair, Dr.
William Nix and Dr. David Stevenson. The French counterpart is Professor P.
Moine, Laboratoire de Metallurgie Physique, University of Poitiers. Ion-
implementation has become over the past decade a versatile and effective method
for the modification of materials properties, including those of metals,semi-
conductors, ceramics, composites and polymers. In this project the investigators
will carry out a scientific investigation of the ion-assisted coating of
stainless steel. The technical goal is to realize a low friction coefficient,
high wear and corrosion resistant surface, by using amorphous TiNi combined with
BN. The scientific issues addressed will be: 1. The relationship of the coating
microstructure with ion-beam processing conditions, by carrying out thorough
material characterization on a wide variety of samples. 2. Correlation of the
surface properties with the microstructure, with particular attention to
adhesion, nano-hardness, friction, wear and corrosion. The Poitiers laboratory
is well-equipped for the ion-implantation, secondary ion-mass spectrometry and
x-ray characterization, and the tribological property studies. The Stanford
group has much experience with cross-section transmission electron microscopy,
mechanical properties of thin films and electrochemical corrosion studies.
Results of this research should provide 1) new knowledge about the structure,
properties and formation mechanisms of novel and promising coatings of stainless
steel and 2) improved understanding of ion-assisted coating technology.