* 8815276
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Molecular Basis of Calcium Cyclic Nucleotide Signal Transduction
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Daniel Watterson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1991
* USD 9,990.00

This award will support collaborative research in biochemistry between Dr.
Daniel Watterson, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, and Dr. Jacques
Haiech, Centre de Recherches de Biochimie Macromoleculaire, Montpellier, France.
The objective of this research is to study the molecular basis of calcium and
cylic nucleotide signal transduction. Calcium and cyclic AMP are two important
second messengers in eukaryotic cells. Variations of their concentrations serve
as intracellular signals. Appropriate receptors (calcium and cAMP binding
proteins) are key elements in the detection and management of these signals.
Among the calcium binding proteins involved in the calcium signal management of
eukaryotic cells, calmodulin appears to be a prototypical calcium sensor. Upon
calcium binding, this protein modifies its conformation and interaction with
target proteins, thus transmitting the information to another element in a
molecular cascade that results in a cellular event (e.g., contraction,
exocytosis). Among the target proteins is a calmodulin sensitive adenylate
cyclase. The objectives of the proposed research projects are: 1) To study the
mechanisms of calcium binding to calmodulin by using a site-directed mutagenesis
and protein engineering approach. The investigators will design isofunctional
mutants with a single tryptophan that will be used as a reporter group in
fluorescence studies; 2) To isolate a cDNA coding for the adenylate cyclase from
Chlamydomonas. This cDNA _____________ will be used to produce an engineered
protein in order to study the interaction between the adenylate cyclase and
calmodulin. Both the U.S. and French investigators have significant expertise in
the proposed research area. Dr. Watterson's laboratory has developed methods for
the mutagenesis of calmodulin, while Dr. Haiech's laboratory has the facilities
for growing the expressed proteins in quantity and for the physical analysis of
the resulting calmodulins.