* 8815815
* Automated 3-D Feature Extraction from 3-D Data Sets
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Lambertus Hesselink, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* George K. Lea
* 10/31/1992
* USD 415,037.00

The objective of the research is to decompose two-dimensional and three-
dimensional steady state and two-dimensional time dependent fluid flow data sets
into elementary structures for purposes of description, analysis and comparison.
Results obtained from numerical calculations and modern (optical) diagnostics
are often too complicated for manual inspection, manipulation and display. A
simpler but still accurate description of these results is needed to facilitate
data understanding. New methods will be developed for automatic extraction of
features from vector data. Vector fields such as velocity, vorticity or pressure
gradient are to be decomposed into elementary structures such as critical points
and dividing streamlines. Topological features are recognized and the
connections between them determined. The set of features and connections are
represented in the form of a graph, from which displays of topologically
significant features can be selected and displayed. This simplified feature
description also aids data interpretation and allows comparison between data
bases using syntactic pattern recognition. Such data can be both due to large-
scale computations or multi-channel experimental measurements. The need for this
research is becoming increasingly urgent with the development of new optical
three-dimensional flow diagnostic techniques and improved speed and storage
capability of supercomputers. Currently developed digital image processing and
pattern recognition algorithms are mainly aimed at two-dimensional imagery.
Extension of these techniques to higher dimensional data bases needs to be
carefully considered and is not a simple task. Research that appears to hold
promise for developing automatic methods for the manipulation, understanding and
display of multi-dimensional vector fields will be carried out.