* 8815210
* Dissertation Research: Gene Flow in Lathyrus latifolius
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Mary Jo Godt, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 06/30/1991
* USD 8,500.00

The movement of genes via pollen among plants within populations and between
plant populations is poorly understood. In addition, little is known of the way
ecological factors affect pollinator and pollen movement. Quantification of
pollen movement is necessary for understanding the evolutionary dynamics of
natural populations. In a more practical context, an understanding of pollen
movement is critical if we are to assess how to best preserve genetic diversity
in populations of endangered species. Understanding the movement of genes via
pollen will also help us assess the inherent dangers (and benefits) of
"introduced" genes in agricultural plants and trees. Previous measures of pollen
flow relied primarily on pollinator observations and on the dispersal of unique
markers from selected plants in an experimental setting. These methods have
serious drawbacks, and may not accurately assess pollen movement. A statistical
technique--paternity analysis-- developed for cases of questionable human
paternity and only recently adapted to plant populations--allows refinement of
the measurement of effective pollen movement. Paternity analysis will be used to
accurately assess pollen movement in a natural and an experimental population of
the legume Lathyrus latifolius. This plant was chosen for its level of genetic
variation and ease of experimental manipulation. The effects of plant density
and distance on pollen movement can thus be more easily measured. This study is
one of the first attempts to analyze in detail factors affecting gene movement
via pollen under controlled conditions, and to integrate the experimental data
with descriptions of pollen movement patterns in a natural population.