* 8815910
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Conformation and Dynamics  of Nucleic Acids
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Stephen Harvey, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1992
* USD 10,648.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Stephen Harvey,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, and Dr. Richard Lavery, Institut de
Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris, France. The objective of the project is to
study the nucleic acid double helix structure in terms of its primary base
sequence. JUMNA (Junction Modeling of Nucleic Acids), a program developed by Dr.
Lavery and his collaborators, is to be used to model various DNA structures. The
program will also be modified to convert it from a structure optimization
algorithm to a molecular dynamics algorithm. With regard to DNA structure, two
classes of problems will be investigated. First, the relationship between DNA
sequence and the variations in the local structure of the double helix will be
examined, with the goal of understanding (1) the origins of DNA bending and (2)
how proteins might recognize DNA sequences through subtle changes in structure.
Second, models will be built for structures associated with polypurine-
polypyrimidine sequences and with replication and transcription. Among the model
structural elements will be stem-loop structures, single strands, helices
containing two, three, and four strands, and the junctions between these various
elements. These studies will be significant not only for the insights they
provide into DNA structure, but because the methods developed will be useful for
examining other modeling problems for both DNAs and RNAs. With the experience
gained from these studies, the investigators will then turn to the problem of
converting JUMNA into an algorithm for molecular dynamics simulations on nucleic
acids. This latter project, if successful, would allow simulations to be
performed on much larger systems and over much longer time scales than is
possible with current molecular dynamics algorithms. The research groups headed
by both Dr. Harvey and Dr. Lavery have made important contributions in the area
of simulation of nucleic acids. Progress in simulation methods has been much
slower for NAs than for proteins. The work done by these two groups is unique
and an important contribution. The proposed collaboration is expected to
accelerate progress in this field.