* 8815235
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  A Compact Cerenkov        Free-Electron Laser
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Robert Layman, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1991
* USD 16,378.00

This award will support a group of U.S. researchers under the direction of
Professor John E. Walsh of Dartmouth College, New Hampshire, to collaborate with
a group of Italian scientists headed by Dr. Gian-Piero Gallerano of the ENEA
Research Center in Frascati, Italy. The investigators intend to produce a
moderate (10-100KW) source of tunable, short-pulse (10-30ps) coherent radiation
at FIR and IR wavelengths with the Frascati Cerenkov Free-Electron Laser
(C-FEL). Such a source should find ample application to a wide range of research
topics, including excitations in thin films, biophysics plasma diagnostics, and
the study of transient excitations in large molecules. For this collaboration,
which has been ongoing for the last four years, Dartmouth researchers provided
the original design concept, the basic theory for the device, and construction
of a C-FEL resonator. The ENEA (Frascati) laboratory has provided laboratory
space, a 5-Mev microtron accelerator, a beam transport channel and beam-
focussing monitoring and diagnostic equipment. A particular advantage of the
C-FEL schemes is that in comparison with other FEL schemes, the beam energy
required for operation at shorter FIR and IR wavelengths is modest. This results
in a source that is compact and thus ultimately practical for a wider range of
applications.