* 8815508
* Synthesis of Polymers and Oligomers for Nonlinear Optical   Activity
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Larry Dalton, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1991
* USD 254,800.00

By optimizing electron delocalization and intramolecular charge transfer,
polymers yielding third order nonlinear optical susceptibilities in excess of
10-9 esu have been prepared as thin (1 micron) films. Figures of merit as high
as 104 have been obtained for pristine materials. Doping (intermolecular charge
transfer) yields even larger values in some cases. Ladder and penylpolyene
materials prepared in preliminary studies also exhibit doping-induced visual
transparency, i.e., bleaching of the pi-pi* interband transition and
accompanying appearance of intraband (polaron/bipolaron) transitions. Electron-
donating and withdrawing substituents are observed to stabilize these mid-gap
state species. The reactivity of delocalized pi electron systems with molecular
oxygen has been investigated and the effect of interruption of electron
delocalization upon nonlinear optical activity has been demonstrated. This
research focues upon further development of polymers, copolyers, and composite
materials for enhanced nonlinear optical activity. Particular attention is paid
to the development of air-stable materials and to correlation of data obtained
for model compounds (oligomers) and polymers. Copolymers and composites of
linear and nonlinear optical materials will be developed. Components will be so
chosen that indices of refraction are matched at low light intensities but are
mismatched at high intensities.