* 8815268
* Dissertation Research: Epistatic Genetic Variation in       Quantitative Characters
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Douglas Futuyma, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 11/30/1990
* USD 3,310.00

Genetic techniques will be used to test the effect of genes extracted from a
wild population of Drosophila melanogaster in two different genetic backgrounds
for characters that are often assumed to be controlled by independently acting
genes. The experiments are also designed to get information about the nature of
gene interaction among variable genes in natural populations. The primary
significance of this work is its relevance to basic research in population
genetics and evolutionary theory, in which it is commonly assumed that genes
which determine the value of morphological characters such as the size or length
of structures, act independently of each other, so that the change that any one
gene produces does not depend on other genes. However, results from selection
experiments in the laboratory, as well as gene interaction studies, have shown
that the effect of any one gene often depends on other genes; that is, what is
usually referred to as the genetic context or background. Because the rate of
evolution depends on the magnitude of genetic variation, a comprehensive
understanding of the evolutionary process requires a more complete understanding
of the extent to which gene interaction affects the amount of variation in the
characteristics of organisms. Artificial selection, the chief means of
selectively breeding improved strains of domestic plants and animals, similarly
depends on the amount and kind of genetic variation in desirable
characteristics. It is known that an optimal breeding program depends on the
extent to which gene interactions affect a desirable characteristic. This
research also explores a method of assessing the magnitude of such gene
interactions.