* 8815880
* U.S.-France Seminar on Infinite - Dimensional Symmetries in Physics and Mathematics:  Paris, France, June 1989
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1990
* Isadore Singer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1990
* USD 15,180.00

This award will support U.S. participation in a U.S.-French seminar on the topic
of infinite-dimensional symmetries in physics and mathematics, to be held in
Paris, France in June 1989. The U.S. organizer is Dr. I. M. Singer of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The French counterpart is Professor J. P.
Bourguignon, Centre de Mathematiques, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau. The
seminar will provide the opportunity for exchange between U.S. and French
mathematicians and physicists on a number of topics of critical interest in
contemporary mathematics and theoretical physics. Among the subjects for
discussion are: 1) The representations of the Virasoro algebra, the super
Virasoro algebra, and affine Lie algebras; their BRST cohomology; extensions to
arbitrary Riemann surfaces; non-linear generalizations of the conformal and
superconformal algebras. 2) The classification of conformally invariant field
theories; integrable systems, quantum groups. 3) Supermoduli spaces,
superintegration, supercompactifications, and universal moduli spaces; multi-
loop string diagrams. 4) The supercharge operator, its index, and relation to
elliptic homology. 5) Superstring theories, sigma-models, coset spaces, attempts
to resum the perturbation series; fine tuning problems and particle
phenomenology, Planck-length physics. New string theories based on interacting
world-sheet dynamics.