* 8815410
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Genetic Aspects of Insect  Immunity and Parasite Resistance
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Anthony Nappi, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1992
* USD 3,250.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Anthony J. Nappi,
Loyola University of Chicago and Dr. Yves Carton, Laboratoire de Biologie et
Genetique Evolutives, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. The objective of this project is
to elucidate the genetic basis of immune recognition/regulation and parasite
resistance in insects. The investigators will study: 1) the role of cellular and
humoral catecholamine metabolizing enzymes during melanotic encapsulation
responses in genetically well-defined enzyme mutants, (2) the immune response of
different geographical species and strains of filed collected hosts, and (3) the
mechanisms of resistance by different geographic species and strains of
parasites. In order to ascertain the biosynthetic pathways employed in the
production of the cross-linking agents that form melanotic capsules, cytological
and biochemical studies will be performed of the immune responses generated in
larvae of Drosophila __________ melanogaster, a host for the wasp parasitoids
Leptopilina ____________ ___________ heterotoma and L. boulardi. __________ _
________ This project will combine Dr. Nappi's expertise in enzyme assays with
the availability in the French laboratory of specific genetic lines of fly and
wasp for the dissection of resistance mechanisms. The results of this research
will contribute to the understanding of: 1) coevolutionary relationships between
parasite and host, and 2) efficiency of use of parasites in the biological
control of insect pests.