* 8815629
* Polymer Surfaces for Sustained Cell Growth:  Development      and Study of Molecular Interactions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Mark McHugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Paul Werbos
* 02/29/1992
* USD 606,000.00

The objective of this research is to examine the influence of different
polymeric substrates on cell behavior, cell morphology, organization of cellular
structural proteins, and gene expression. It will also assist understanding
cell/polymer interactions to develop novel polymeric systems for sustained cell
growth. The sustained growth and function of mammalian cells on solid substrates
depends on the physiochemical nature of the substrate. Although the molecular
basis of this phenomenon is not well understood, it is of major importance in
the development of large-scale cell culture and artificial internal organs. The
approach is interdisciplinary, involving the integration of engineering methods
with biochemical and molecular biology techniques. Unique polymer surfaces,
including bioerodable surfaces, will be created by custom synthesis and by
modification with supercritical fluid solvents; these surface will be completely
characterized in terms of surface chemistry, roughness, and surface energy.
Fibroblasts and hepatocytes will be cultured on a variety of polymer surfaces.
Changes in cell behavior, cytoskeletal organization, and expression of specific
genes in response to these surfaces will be determined by quantitative computer-
assisted microscopy and biochemical analysis. By controlling and examining
molecular changes at several different levels -- from the polymer surface to
cellular protein -- changes in substrate properties with the precise effect on
cell function will be correlated. Finally, novel substrates will then provide a
local release of biologically important factors without the addition of media
serum supplements,