* 8815783
* A Chemical Investigation of Turkish Papaver Species
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Maurice Shamma, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1991
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT NARRATIVE Description: This project supports the scientific cooperation
of Dr. Maurice Shamma of the Department of Chemistry of Pennsylvania State
University and Dr. Gunay Sariyar of the Faculty of Pharmacy, Istanbul
University, Istanbul Turkey. The research is to reisolate the chemical character
of the Turkish Papaver plant species to determine the alkaloidal fractions that
occur in the species. In addition, the investigators will analyze the neutral
and acidic extracts of these plants because very little work has been carried
out on these non-basic components. All compounds obtained in sufficiently large
amounts will be forwarded to the National Institute of Health for screening for
anti-tumor and anti-HIV activity. They will also be tested commericially for
agricultural use. Scope: This project is planned to have the Turkish P.I.
identify and _____ gather the natural plants in Turkey. Plant extraction will be
done at Istanbul University followed by initial separation and identification of
compounds. The research data and samples then go to Penn State University for
higher level purification and identification of chemical components. The Turkish
P.I. will participate in this advanced research and data compilation. The
advancement of the international exchange of scientific knowledge and the
training and use of developing countries scientists fulfills a major objective
of the Science in Developing Countries Program.