* 8815502
* Gas-Phase Ion Chemistry with a Selected Ion Flow Tube -     Triple Quadrupole
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Robert Squires, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1992
* USD 329,240.00

This grant in the Organic Dynamics Program supports the research of Dr. Robert
Squires at Purdue University. Dr. Squires will complete the development of a
Flowing Afterglow-Selected Ion Flow Tube-Triple Quadrupole(FA-SIFT-TQ) apparatus
which will be a powerful new tool for gas-phase ion studies. With the completion
of the apparatus he will obtain new fundamental information about the
structures, properties and reactivity of gas-phase ions. Several systems of
interest will be studied. A new method for generating gas phase carbanions from
collisionally activated carboxylates will provide the basis for studying stable
alkyl anions and beta-substituted ethyl anions, for determining carbanion
thermochemistry from threshold measurements and for investigating the
configurational stabilities of vinyl and cyclopropyl anions. Hypervalent binary
hydride anions will be explored with particular emphasis on the properties,
reactivity and fluxional behavior of silicon and boron hydrides. Silicon-
substituted carbenium ions will be generated and their structures and
stabilities determined. Thermochemical data for reactive organic intermediates
such as ylides, cycloalkenylidenes and carbenes will be determined by activation
methods. The results of this gas-phase ion research should have broad
significance in many areas of chemistry and physics.