* 8815160
* Neutral Hydrogen in Poor and Compact Groups of Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1993
* Barbara Williams, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Pol C. Delosreyes
* 08/31/1993
* USD 231,800.00

The purpose of this research is to gain an understanding of the local
environment and the dynamical evolution of poor clusters of galaxies and compact
groups of galaxies. The high densities and low velocity dispersions which
characterize these systems make then unique dynamically. This combination is
expected to lead to rapid merging of galaxies creating an environment which
ought to be effective in altering the initial properties of disk galaxies,
especially their neutral hydrogen (HI) gas content. Poor clusters and compact
groups provide us with an opportunity to study the dynamical evolution of
galaxies within systems that are presumably at different stages of the merging
process: compact groups on the verge of the merging, while poor clusters have
experienced several mergers in the past. This research can lead to improving our
understanding of small groups which are "natural laboratories" for studying the
various physical processes which make galaxies evolve so rapidly and can shed
light on the interaction of galaxies with each other. Correlations between the
HI content of disk galaxies and the local environment in which they are found
have demonstrated that the 21-cm spectral line of hydrogen is a powerful tool
for studying groups. The local conditions within Morgan poor clusters will be
probed directly by measuring the HI content of their disk population and
comparing it to the average gas properties of rich clusters and loose and
compact groups of galaxies. Extending the data base of HI masses and sensitive
upper limits to include the unobserved groups in Hickson's sample of galaxies
will give a complete description of the global gas properties of dense groups.
Using the detected hydrogen in these groups, a map of its distribution and
kinematics should provide clues about the degree of dynamical evolution and the
physical compactness of these systems. The local environment, i.e. neighborhood,
in which compact groups are found will also be studied in order to gain some
insight into their origin and formation.