* 8815503
* Origin and Migration of Sulfur in Active Geothermal         Systems: A Sulfur Isotopic Study Using the SHRIMP Ion Micro-probe
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Michael McKibben, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 06/30/1991
* USD 84,280.00

Microbean techniques of stable isotope analysis offer great insight into
petrogenetic processes because minerals contain more information concerning
their origins and subsequent modifications than can easily be obtained by
conventional isotopic sampling and analytical techniques. S isotope studies with
SHRIMP ion probe have revealed dramatic 34S variations within and among minerals
in the Salton Sea geothermal system, identifying sulfides. The isotopic
equilibration of sedimentary sulfide and sulfate minerals during prograde
metamorphism, and the extent of recycling of sedimentary S by sulfur poor
hydrothermal fluids will be examined. From determinations of 34S for aqueous S
species the degree of isotopic equilibrium attained between H2S and SO4 in
saline hydrothermal fluids and the relative contributions of H2S to hydrothermal
fluids from igneous processes and hydrothermal reduction of host rocks
evaporites will be evaluated. It is proposed to extend our studies of S isotope
systematics to active silicic volcanic-hosted continental geothermal systems,
making use of new drill cores and fluid samples from the Valles Caldera and Coso
geothermal systems. The proposed study complements our research that are
transporting precious as well as base metals. We will continue to use the
unsurpassed 30 um spatial resolution of the SHRIMP ion microprobe for studying
microscopic 34S variations within and among minerals. Conventional techniques to
determine 34S of H2S and SO4 in coeval geothermal fluids and to characterize the
bulk S isotope composition of minerals will be used. Study of microscopic 34S
zoning patterns in vein minerals will help constrain mechanisms of ore
precipitation. Elucidation of the distribution of S isotope geochemistry of
sulfur sources in host- rocks and the degrees of isotopic equilibrium reached
between minerals and aqueous species at hydrothermal temperatures will allow
more accurate modeling of metal transport and deposition in volcanic-hosted
hydrothermal systems.