* 8816242
* Monitoring the Composition of Lavas from the Continuing Puu Oo Eruption of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii: Deciphering         Petrologic Processes in Volcanic Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Michael Garcia, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 05/31/1991
* USD 114,600.00

This is the continuation of a study to determine the nature and causes of
compositional variation in lavas from the eruption of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii
which has been going on since 1983. Mineral and whole-rock compositions will be
determined uand used to evaluate the relative importance of crystal
fractionation, magma mixing and mantle melting in controlling the composition of
the lavas erupted. Lavas collected from the active lava lake 19 km. from the
summit of the volcano seem to have a cyclic variation in composition that
correlates well (with a time delay) with summit tilt variations. The continued
monitoring of this variation will provide the first direct measurement of the
rate of movement of magma in the rift zone. It is also planned to evaluate the
temporal and spatial variations in the composition of lavas erupted historically
at the summit of Kilauea Volcano. This should make clearer the size and location
of the summit reservoir which is still poorly known. The petrological and
geochemical results from this study will be integrated with field and
geophysical measurements and interpretations by the staff of the USGS Hawaiian
Volcano Observatory. This collaboration should yield new insights that will have
fundamental implications for understanding the plumbing system of Kilauea
Volcano and for interpreting petrologic processes in volcanic systems.