* 8816363
* Petrogenesis of Proterozoic Anorogenic Granites in the      Central United States
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Bruce Nelson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 12/31/1991
* USD 138,569.00

The objective of the proposed work is to investigate the origin and tectonic
setting of 1.1 to 1.8 Ga anorogenic granites that make up a large part of the
crust in the central United States. The study will employ isotopic variations in
Nd, Sr, Pb and O, and trace element patterns to elucidate the nature of granite
source regions, the process of magma genesis, and the evolution of the magmas.
Anorogenic granites from a 600-1000 km-wide band that extends across the North
American continent. They were emplaced during several episodes between 1.1 and
1.8 Ga, and have a major and trace element chemistry that distinguishes them
from other types of granites. Suggested hypotheses regarding both the chemical
and tectonic sources of anorogenic granites are exceedingly diverse and
encompass antithetic extremes. A comprehensive isotopic and chemical data base
would help constrain the possibilities. This study focusses on four complexes
located in Wisconsin, MIssouri, and Texas. All have known U-Pb ages, and each is
petrographically and chemically characterized. Specific plutons will be targeted
for especially detailed sampling and study. This approach allows study of both
details of magma genesis in a specific pluton, and the comparison of plutons
among different crustal provinces and intrusive episodes. Both scales of
observation are required to identify and explain the main features of anorogenic
magma genesis.