* 8816728
* Further Investigations of B-Z Junctions in Synthetic DNA    Oligomers
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1989,06/01/1989
* Richard Sheardy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/01/1989
* USD 0.00

Specific DNA oligomers will be synthesized to use a model systems to aid in the
understanding of the structure- activity relationship of certain nucleic acid
conformations. These model conformations will be examined with high resolutions
by employing state of the arts techniques. It has been suggested that Z-DNA may
contribute to the control of biological events, in particular, genetic
activities. Although direct evidence is still lacking or at least incomplete,
the suggestion has not been disproved. Therefore it is very plausible that
mechanisms of conformational transition in DNA are best studied on Z-DNA models.
In particular, the primary goal of this project is to expand the work already
completed on the structural analysis of B-Z junctions. Much of the work will
incorporate a B-Z junction into an already well defined system. There are four
major areas of interest: 1) multiple and poly conformational junctions; 2) B-Z
junctions in DNA hairpins and dumbbells; 3) the effects of base pair mismatches
at or near a B-Z junction; and, 4) the hyperactivity of B-Z junctions to certain
carcinogens. Multiple and poly junctions will examine the effect of the presence
of many conformational junctions on the global conformation of a long DNA
oligomer. The effects of the loops in hairpins and dumbbells and the effects of
mismatches at or near a junction will be evaluated in terms of the
thermodynamics of the DNA duplexes in question. Their effects on the formation
and structure of the junction will also be evaluated.