* 8816931
* The Hydrodynamics of Phytoplankton Removal in Benthic       Boundary Layers by Filter-Feeding Bivalves
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Jeffrey Koseff, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1991
* USD 192,722.00

This is an experimental study of the fluid mechanics of particle removal in
turbulent boundary layer by suspension feeding bivalve mollusks. The study is
motivated by the need to obtain, for a variety of flow conditions, accurate
estimates of the rate at which these animals remove phytoplankton biomass from
the water column. It is not clear at present how particle removal rates of a
given population of bivalves should be related to pumping rates measured for
single animals in laboratory experiments, or even particle removal rates
measured for populations under conditions different from those found in nature.
Stanford's School of Engineering will provide supplemental funds to facilitate
the construction of the sophisticated flume. Extensive measurements of velocity
and concentration (solutes and particles) fields over "model mollusks" (various
pumping arrangements) in the laboratory flume will be used to test two
interrelated hypotheses: (1) Near-bed hydrodynamics influence the flux of
suspended particles (including phytoplankton) from the water column to filter-
feeding bivalves, and thereby determine whether or not filter-feeding bivalves
can control phytoplankton biomass in the overlying water column. (2) Bivalve
feeding currents modify flow properties near the bed, particularly rates of
vertical mixing of particles, and thereby play a role in determining when
benthic filter feeders can control phytoplankton populations. In order to assure
the direct relevance of the proposed work to estuarine systems, the experimental
program will be carried out in close collaboration with USGS scientistsV
studying suspension-feeding bivalve mollusks resident in San Francisco Bay.