* 8816281
* Facies Architecture and Depositional Processes Resulting from Intra-Basinal Maar Volcanism, Hopi Buttes, NortheasternArizona
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Richard Fisher, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 02/28/1991
* USD 45,000.00

The primary goal of this research is to determine the effect of intrabasinal
volcanism, specifically maar volcanism, upon lowland sedimentation. The
investigation will be carried out in the Hopi Buttes volcanic field of
northeastern Arizona, and will focus upon the depositional processes and
resulting lithofacies architecture of the Mio-Pliocene Bidahochi Formation. This
comprises fluvial and lake-bed deposits of interbedded, reworked tephra, un-
reworked tephra representing the ejecta rims of maar volcanoes, and maar crater-
filling sequences. A secondary objective is to compare the "wetness" of the
surficial environment (standing lake, dry playa, ephemeral streams) inferred
from the sedimentological study of the Bidahochi Formation with independent
estimates of "wetness" derived from study of the depositional features and
pyroclast morphology of the maar volcanoes' tephra rims. Maar fields are complex
depositional environments. The maar volcanoes themselves are both sediment
sources (erupted tephra) and sinks (the craters can capture through-flowing
streams). The resulting facies architecture cannot be interpreted without
understanding both the sedimentary and the volcanic processes operating within
the depositional basin. The Hopi Buttes area is ideal for the study. Exposures
are excellent and continuous in cliffs bordering the buttes, and erosion has
exposed various levels of the system, from slightly above the paleo-surface of
eruption to the bases of many crater deposits.