* 8816279
* U.S. Participation in the International Geological          Correlation Program 1989-90
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1989,09/30/1990
* Bruce Marsh, American Geological Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 09/30/1990
* USD 75,000.00

This award is a renewal of financial support by the National Science Foundation
for U.S. participation in the International Geological Correlation Program
(IGCP). It is submitted by the American Geological Institue on behalf of the
U.S. National Committee for IGCP. Established in its present form in 1973, IGCP
is a multidisciplinary scientific program sponsored jointly by the International
Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) and by the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco). Its principal goal is to promote
international cooperation in research on global geologic problems with emphasis
on the nature and sequence of major geologic events, geologic hazards and energy
and mineral resources. Program work is carried out through 51 individual
research projects, 23 of which have U.S. working groups. Financial support from
the National Science Foundation (NSF) has been critical to the success of U.S.
participation in IGCP. NSF funds act as a catalyst which stimulates additional
support from universities, the USGS and private industry. These funds support
domestic meetings of U.S. project working groups, meetings and associated with
the 28th International Geological Congress (Washington, D.C., 1989), travel by
U.S. representatives to project conferences and field excursions abroad, and
general clerical and technical assistance to the working group chairman.