* 8816156
* Geochemistry of the Nain Anorthosite
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Stearns Morse, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 06/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

It is proposed to resume the Nain Anorthosite Project to pursue geochemical
analysis of samples collected during the field phase of the project (1971-81)
funded by NSF. The intervening time has been devoted to geochemistry of the
Kiglapait Intrusion and to magma dynamics. Recent activities reaffirm that the
anorthosite problem has major significance to the evolution of the earth's crust
and mantle. Spectacular discoveries by members of this project show (1) that an
apparent source enrichment event took place over a large area of Labrador about
2.3 Ga ago (Hamilton); (2) that Pb isotopes give wholerock and wholerock -
feldspar alignments corresponding to 2.9 and 3.2 Ga, respectively, much older
than the crystallization age of 1.3 Ga (Weis); and (3) that metamorphosed mafic
rocks of the Adirondack region, New York, have almost identical major element
trends to the calculated liquids of the Kiglapait Intrusion (Olson). None of
these effects can be explained by crustal contamination, but instead carry
valuable information on the nature and processes at the source. The 2.3 Ga
enrichment event may extend across the boundaries of 3 or 4 structural provinces
of the Canadian Shield. Trace element studies at contacts of the Nain
anorthosite show the degree of interaction with crust, and allow evaluation of
chilled margins as magma compositions. It is proposed to analyze country rocks
and anorthosites in a 3-tier approach of x-ray analyses followed by rare-earth
element analyses by neutron acti- vation, followed by a program of isotopic
analyses for Nd and Pb. These will clarify and extend the current studies by
giving essential details and constraining hypotheses. The work will have a major
impact on the tectonic implications of anorthosites and their message about the
mantle.