* 8816011
* REU:  The Relationship Between Intra- and Interspecific     Competitive Abilities of Trees
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Boris Zeide, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 08/31/1991
* USD 34,478.00

Usually the ability to withstand competition from conspecifics is studied
separately from the ability to compete with other species, and little is known
about the relationship between these two abilities. The aim of this research is
to investigate this relationship using forest trees as an example. Objectives
include the construction of a measure of intraspecific competitive ability, the
arrangement of tree species according to this ability, and the testing of a set
of alternative hypotheses about the relationship by comparing the arrangement
with the ordering of the species by their interspecific competitive ability.
This latter ordering is securely established in forestry. Because the ultimate
test of intraspecific competitive ability is the rate of the decrease in the
number of trees caused by a certain increase in their average, this rate will be
considered as a measure of the ability. Among other methods to be employed are
techniques relevant to ordering and comparisons of tree species. The research
deals with basic concepts of ecology and is likely to advance our understanding
of such notions as competition, species richness, and adaptation. By clarifying
the confusion between tolerance and self-tolerance of tree species, this project
should also provide a more sound basis for forest management.