* 8816770
* US-France Cooperative Research:  The Geochemistry of The    Beryllium Isotopes
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* John Edmond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1991
* USD 11,290.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. John Edmond and his
research group at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Dr. Grant
Raisbeck, Centre de Spectrometrie Nucleaire et de Spectrometrie de Masse, Orsay,
France. The objective of the proposed project is the investigation of the
geochemistry of the isotopes of beryllium with a view to using Be-10 as a dating
tool, similar to Carbon 14. The long lived isotope Be-10 is produced by cosmic
ray induced spallation reactions in the atomosphere and in the upper meters of
the earth's surface. The stable isotope Be-9 is derived from the weathering of
rocks. If the isotopes behave coherently in the cycles of transport and
deposition, then the Be-10/Be-9 couple can be used for dating in a manner
analogous to Carbon 14/Carbon 12. However the time scales would be much longer,
i.e. 10 million years as opposed to 50 thousand. In addition, Be-10 produced in
rocks by cosmic ray bombardment could be used to date the exposure of the rock.
In this project, sample collection and preparation, principally from the Orinoco
Basin in Venezuela, will be the responsibility of the MIT group. Both the U.S.
and French groups have extensive expertise in the geochemistry of Be-9. Results
of this research may provide valuable information on the potential uses of Be-10
as a geochronometer.