* 8816417
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Structural Effects of Ion  Transport in Macromolecules
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* William MacKnight, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 09/30/1991
* USD 26,890.00

This award will enable Prof. William J. MacKnight and colleagues of the
University of Massachusetts to collaborate with Prof. Naoya Ogata and co-workers
of Sophia University, Tokyo, Japan, over a period of two years. They will
prepare and study structural effects on conductivity in new solvent-free, ion-
containing polymer complexes. Chemical structure, polymer morphology and
dynamics, and the state of the incorporated salt species will be studied in
order to obtain new information about ionic conduction in this type of polymer.
The objective of this work is to enhance our understanding of conductivity in
polymers, a phenomenon which finds important application currently in solid-
electrolyte batteries and which may even result eventually in polymeric
semiconducting devices. The mechanism of conduction in solvent-free polymers is
by ionic conduction, but little is now understood about why this process is as
efficient as it is. In this work, the complementary expertise of each group will
be utilized: the Japanese scientists will synthesize and characterize the ion-
conducting polymers, and make electrical measurements of the transport
properties of the ions; the U.S. researchers will determine the supermolecular
structures and other properties of these materials, using a variety of physico-
chemical- techniques.