* 8816709
* The Tomales Bay Macrocosm: Proposed Research Site for       Investigation of Biogeochemical Reactions in Estuaries.     1.  Interannual Variations in Nutrient Budgets
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1989
* Stephen Smith, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/1989
* USD 120,920.00

This project is a one year continuation of the PI's long term study of Tomales
Bay, California. It will complete his ongoing hydrographic and nutrient survey.
Tomales Bay is unique because of its hydrgraphic simplicity and because of the
long residence time of its water. These factors greatly facilitate mass and flux
calculations for the water, salt, and nutrients within the Bay, itself. In
addition, the Bay is optimum for studying the exchange of material between the
land, the estuary and the coastal ocean. It is a "net heterotrophic system,"
meaning that it consumes more organic matter than it consumes. It is also a
denitrifying system where nitrogen gas is released to the atmosphere as the
microbes decompose organic matter. The PI seeks to answer the following
question. Is the heterotrophy of this and similar systems fueled by material
from the land or by material from the coastal ocean? A great deal of organic
matter is delivered to the Bay from the coastal ocean, but when upwelling is
weak terrestrial runoff is strong and may contribute even more organic matter.
With this additional year of sampling the PI will resolve the relative
importance of these potential sources. The results of this study may force a
recalculation of the global carbon and nitrogen budget because other estuarine
systems may also be net heterotrophic rather than net autotrophic as previously
thought.