* 8816221
* US - China Cooperative Research (Physics):  Study of Very   High Energy Light Particle Production in Heavy - Ion        Collisions using BGO Glass Scintillator Detectors
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Fred Becchetti, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 05/31/1991
* USD 21,590.00

Title: US-China Cooperative Research (Physics): Study of Very High Energy Light
Particle Production in Heavy-Ion Collisions Using BGO Glass Scintillator
Detectors. This proposal is for support to construct a large bismuth germanate
glass scintillator detector for studying high energy particle production. This
cooperative study is proposed by Dr. Frederick Becchetti, University of
Michigan, and Professors Yin Zhiwan and Shen Dingzhong, Shanghai Instititute of
Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Science. The research team at the University of
Michigan has successfully tested the use of a large bismuth germanate glass
scintillator to detect particles generated under high energy (E &gt; 200 MeV).
The collaborating scientists from the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics (SCI) have
extensive expertise in producing large, clear bismuth germanate crystals, an
essential part in constructing this high energy scintillator detector, but not
commercially available. Jointly they plan to construct a very high energy
(E&gt;200 MeV) large bismuth germanate glass scintillator detector for detecting
particle production. Bismuth germanate glass scintillator detectors are used
extensively in high-energy physics and nuclear physics, and form an essential
part of the PET scanners. The result of this project is a device capable of
detecting particles generated under high energy (E&gt;200 MeV), which no
equipment is able to measure at present. Applications of this detector can
provide critical data for improving detection efficiency for radiation
monitoring devices and satellite surveillance. This project is jointly supported
by the NSF and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.