* 8816560
* PEST Sequences as Signals for Rapid Proteolysis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Martin Rechsteiner, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 02/28/1993
* USD 90,000.00

Rapidly degraded proteins contain sequences rich in proline (P), glutamic acid
(E), serine (S) and threonine (T), and it is proposed that these PEST regions
confer metabolic instability upon proteins possessing them. Although the
evidence supporting of the PEST hypothesis has increased substantially over the
past year, it is still mostly correlative. This research tests the hypothesis
directly, elucidates those features of PEST regions essential for rapid
proteolysis and elucidates the mechanism(s) by which PEST proteins are degraded.
PEST-conjugated proteins will be radio-iodinated and their metabolic stabilities
measured by introducing them into cultured mammalian cells using RBC- mediated
injection. Alternatively PEST sequences will be cloned onto the N terminus of
dihydrofolate reductase, and injected into mammalian culture cells. By varying
residues within the synthesized or cloned PEST sequences, essential features of
the degradation signal should be discovered. Using differentially labeled wild-
type and PEST-deleted ornithine decarboxylase molecules it will be possible to
distinguish PEST-specific proteolysis from indiscriminate cleavage. Most
proteins are studied from the point of view of their synthesis. Yet the living
cell makes and degrades proteins in its normal functioning. This study centers
on an innovative hypothesis about how the cell chooses which proteins to degrade
and when to do it. This is an underexplored but important topic in cellular
biochemistry.