* 8816796
* Components of the CO2-Concentrating System
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Martin Spalding, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1992
* USD 193,700.00

By comparison with C3 plants, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and other unicellular
algae exhibit unusual photosynthetic characteristics. It has been proposed that
these characteristics result from the operation of a CO2- concentrating system,
which increases the intracellular CO2 concentration to a level which suppresses
photorespiration by competitive inhibition of RuBP oxygenase. One of the
principal components of the proposed system is a protein which catalyzes the
active transport of inorganic carbon across either the plasmalemma or the
chloroplast envelope. However, direct, physical evidence for the existence of
this transporter, or any other component of the CO2-concentrating system other
than carbonic anhydrase, is lacking. Activity of the CO2-concentrating system is
under environmental control. Cells grown at limiting CO2 concentrations (air-
adapted) show activity, but cells grown at elevated CO2 concentrations
(CO2-enriched) show no activity of the CO2- concentrating system. We have
identified 7 polypeptides which increase in abundance during adaptation to
limiting CO2 concentrations or are specific for cells grown under such
conditions. We will continue to extend these observations to comparisons between
wild-type and mutants of Chlamydomonas deficient in the CO2-concentrating system
to help identify which polypeptides might be involved directly in inorganic
carbon accumulation. Using antibodies generated against one or more of these
"air-specific" polypeptides, we expect to: (1) determine whether appearance of
the "air-specific" polypeptides during "induction" of the CO2-concentrating
system correlates with the appearance of the capacity for inorganic carbon
accumulation, (2) determine the intracellular location of the corresponding
antigens, (3) determine whether Chlamydomonas mutants deficient in the capacity
for inorganic carbon accumulation contain polypeptides immunologically cross-
reactive with these antibodies, (4) investigate the appearance of translatable
mRNA for "air-specific" polypeptides during the "induction" of the
CO2-concentrating system. Genes differentially expressed during adaptation of
CO2-enriched cells to limiting CO2 will be identified by differential screening
of a cDNA library and, if time permits, by molecular cloning of the genes
corresponding to the "air-induced" polypeptides. Attainment of all objectives
will allow us to better assess the potential for transferring the
CO2-concentrating system into higher plants. Some algae can take up carbon
dioxide dissolved in water and photosynthesize sugars. How they concentrate the
dissolved gas is unknown but could be an important trait to introduce into
higher plants. This work investigates the mechanism of uptake and its subsequent
enhancement of photosynthesis.***//