* 8816092
* A Petrologic and Geochemical Study of Authigenic/Diagenetic Clay Minerals in Upper Mississippian Platform-Tidal Flat    Carbonate Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Charles Weaver, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1991
* USD 158,400.00

A survey of the literature indicates that, compared to shales and sandstones,
relatively little micropetrographic work (SEM-EDX, electron probe) has been done
on authigenic and diagenetic clay minerals in carbonate rocks. This project is a
micropetrographic investigation of the Upper Mississippian shelf-tidal flat
carbonates, which occur in excellent exposures along the edge of the Cumberland
Plateau (TN). These rocks contain a wide variety of possible
authigenic/diagenetic clay minerals (Ch/S, Ch/V, corrensite, vermiculite,
illite, I/S). A preliminary SEM-EDX study (Fig. 1-3) confirms the presence of
authigenic/diagenetic I/S (4:1) in the interior of calcite oolites. The study
will concentrate on the Upper Mississippian carbonates and establish the genetic
relation of the Mg clays and K clays to calcite, dolomite and the various
shallow carbonate environments. In addition to chemical, mineralogical, and
petro- graphic data will be obtained on spatial and volume data so that mass
balance calculations can be made for Mg and other ions. In addition to obtaining
information of the origin of the clay minerals, we will obtain information on
the factors effecting the partitioning of Mg between silicate and carbonate
minerals. The goal of this research is to determine the nature, significance of
clay mineral reactions in carbonate rocks, shedding light on diagenetic
processes.