* 8816179
* Salt Marsh Foraminifera, St. Catherines Island, Georgia:    Ecology, Taphonomy, Paleoecology
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Robert Frey, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 12/31/1991
* USD 75,000.00

Salt marshes and marsh foraminiferal assemblages of northeastern North America
differ appreciably from those of the Gulf of Mexico, yet the crucial faunal
transitions between them-- especially marsh assemblages characteristic of the
southeastern U.S. coast--remain essentially unstudied. Similarly, short- and
long-term aspects of loss, preservation, or redistribution of foraminiferal
tests in these sediments remains largely unknown. The work proposed herein is
designed to address both problems: the ecologic and taphonomic significance of
southeastern salt marsh foraminifera. Modern and relict (-200 to 1500+ year old)
salt marsh sediments of St. Catherines Island, Georgia, provide and ideal
setting for studies on the taphonomy and paleoecology of salt marsh
foraminifera. Modern marshes are extensive and provide examples of modern
environments for comparisons with the "paleoenvironments" of the older relict
deposits. Relict salt marsh sediments, extensively exposed along the eastern
margin of the island, contain key, well-preserved, in situ features that permit
the identification of those specific salt marsh habitats and subenvironments
that have been described in modern marshes. Foraminifera and other microfossils
are abundant in these deposits. A distributional study on foraminifera of these
relict deposits therefore can be achieved utilizing essentially the same methods
applicable to studies on modern marshes. The purpose of this study is to
document and compare distributional patterns of foraminifera in modern and
relict marsh sediments of St. Catherines. Results will address problems of
biogeography, ecology, paleoecology, paleoenvironmental interpretations, and
particularly the assessment of taphonomy and taphofacies.