* 8816056
* US-France Cooperative Research: Corticotropin Releasing Factor and Behavior/Mechanism of Action
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* George Koob, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1992
* USD 9,450.00

This award will support collaborative research in neurobiology between Dr.
George Koob, Scripps Clinical and Research Foundation, La Jolla, California, and
Professor Michel LeMoal, University of Bordeaux II, France. The objective of the
proposed research is to study the role of the peptide neurotransmitter
corticotronin releasing factor (CRF) as a primary mediator of the behavioral
state of stress and the behavioral responses to stress in the central nervous
system. Recent studies have shown that CRF liberated directly into the central
nervous system may have neurotropic actions important for mobilizing behavioral
responses to stress. The investigators have designed a set of experiments to
identify the specific neural substrates for these behavioral actions by direct
local interacerebral injection of CRF and CRF antagonists. In addition
experiments are proposed to explore the possible mediation of these CRF effects
via the central and peripheral noradrenergic systems. An attempt will be made to
modify behavioral responses to CRF using specific pharmacological and neurotoxin
induced inactivation of the central and peripheral noradrenergic systems. These
studies have important implications for the role of pituitary peptides in brain
function, and may provide important clues to the pathophysiology associated with
behavioral disorders as diverse as depression, anxiety, and obesity. Over the
past ten years Dr. Le Moal and his research group have developed and explored
systematically behavioral and endocrine correlates of stress, coping and
behavior. Dr. Koob's expertise is in classic behavioral pharmacology and basic
neurobiology. The expected benefits to U.S. science from this project include
not only the exchange of special behavioral techniques, but also the gain of
valuable expertise regarding the measurement of brain function via behavioral
techniques.