* 8816627
* Thermal Modeling Applied to the Evolution of Contact        Metamorphic Aureoles
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Kevin Furlong, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 06/30/1992
* USD 92,050.00

It is proposed to carry out conduction thermal modeling of contact metamorphic
aureoles with computer algorithms involving numerical (finite difference)
simulations of the thermal evolu- tion of intrusives. Variables that we will be
considered in this modeling include: shapes of intrusions (both two- dimensional
and three-dimensional modeling), initial temperature of the intrusion and
country rocks, latent heat of crystalliza- tion of the magma, magma convection,
thermal diffusivities of the rocks, and endothermic metamorphic reactions
occurring within the aureoles. Contact aureoles containing metapelitic
lithologies serve as excellent locales to investigate these thermal processes
because mineral thermometers in these rocks provide good constraints on the
temperature field. A primary thrust of our proposed research is to apply our
conduction modeling to the thermal development of contact aureoles, and to
integrate and compare our results with independent thermometry of the intru-
sives and aureole rocks. Our preliminary two-dimensional conduction modeling of
the Ottawa and Cupsuptic aureoles in Maine shows that our proposed research will
yield considerable insight into the nature of intrusives and the surrounding
thermal aureoles. For example, our modeling of these aureoles provides
constraints on the percentage of crystals initially present in the intrusives.
The Skiddaw aureole in the Lake District of England provides an excellent
opportunity to evaluate contact metamorphism overlying the roof of an intrusive.
Our modeling of this aureole may provide us with additional important insight
into the role of convective fluid circulation in he thermal evolution of contact
aureoles above intrusives. The proposed modeling of the Strontian aureole in
southern Scotland will provide not only an analysis of the thermal evolution of
contact metamorphism around a "mushroom-shaped" intrusion floored by metamorphic
rocks, but also improved insight into Lasaga's (1986) provocative kinetic
interpretation of the second sillimanite isograd in the Strontian aureole.