* 8816421
* Studies in Event Stratigraphy; Impacts Volcanism & Mass     Extinctions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Walter Alvarez, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1990
* USD 128,717.00

Most of Earth history consists of long intervals of time dominated by gradual
changes in climate and life. These quiet intervals are occasionally punctuated
by brief episodes of rapid change. Event stratigraphy is the study of these
geologically brief and interesting periods of time in which rapid and sometimes
violent changes have occurred. The event stratigraphy approach to the
sedimentary record is multi-disciplinary, and involves a variety of laboratory
procedures in conjunction with careful field stratigraphic studies. Using this
approach, we previously discovered iridium anomalies at the Cretaceous-Tertiary
and Eocene-Oligocene boundaries, leading to the formulation of the impact
hypothesis and generating a great deal of interest and research on the
importance of rare events in Earth history. Using a new analytical technique for
rapid iridium measurements developed by our research group, we are in a position
to extend this approach to the rest of the Mesozoic and Cenozoic, and have
already found a new iridium anomaly in the middle Miocene. We will do the
following: (1) a systematic search of the stratigraphic record for new iridium
horizons, (2) resolve of the impact vs. volcanism debate over the cause of the
Cretaceous- Tertiary mas extinction, and (3) study of the Eocene-Oligocene
boundary to resolve discrepancies between iridium peaks, tektites and extinction
horizons.