* 8816315
* Carbonatite Genesis: The Example of the Oceanic Nephelinite-Phonolite-Carbonatite Volcanic Suite on Brava, Cape Verde   Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* John Wolff, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 06/30/1991
* USD 55,400.00

The island of Brava, Cape Verdes, eshibits a Quaternary nepheline-phonolite-
carbonatite pyroclastic sequence. Eruptive styles of the dominant phonolites
depart markedly from those typical of felsic magmas, and mapping the deposits
will add to our knowledge of the eruptive behavior of highly alkaline magmas.
Phonolites are typically strongly depleted in rare-earth elements, and bear a
complementary relationship to associated rare-earth-enriched carbonatite
volcanics. The most probable mechanism for this is the immiscible separation of
a carbonatite liquid from silicate magma, the carbonate being represented in the
volcanic pile as carbonatite lavas and tuffs. The phonolites appear to be
products of fractional crystallization via the line of descent, olivine
nephelinite - nephelinine - phonolite, but major questions remain, especially
regarding the role of the sulphate feldspathoid nosean in phonolite geneses.
Petrogenetic modelling will be based on mineral chemistry and major, trace
element, and isotopic determinations of a suite of whole rocks and mineral
separates from fresh pumice clasts in carefully studied pyroclastic units. The
close association of nephelinitic, basanitic, phonolitic and carbonatitic
volcanic units at a well-exposed Quaternary center provides an unusual
opportunity to advance understanding of the genesis and behavior of carbonatite
magmas, and their relationship to associated alkaline silicate magmas.