* 8816321
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis, Sobolev           Inequalities and Geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Alice Chang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1992
* USD 152,643.00

Three main themes highlight this mathematical research. The first combines
ideas of harmonic analysis and probability theory. They involve infinite series
of Haar functions - orthogonal step functions defined on an interval. The power
norm of any alternating sum is always dominated by a fixed multiple of the
original norm. Although the sharpest multiplier is known, the alternating sums
which maximize or minimize the norm are not easily obtained. In this project,
work will be done in determining optimal choices of sign change based on the
coefficients of the original series. A second line of investigation will focus
on exponential multiples of the Laplace operator on the surface of a sphere. The
logarithm of the determinant of such an operator contains a nonnegative energy
term which vanishes only when the exponential is the potential in the basic
conformality equation. This result has implications in one lower dimension in
that it becomes the classical Lebedev-Milin inequality which, in turn, derives
from Szego's theorem. Efforts will be made in reversing the argument in higher
dimensions; from a version of the Szego theorem to the energy inequality.
Underlying this research are basic questions concerning the spectrum of the
Laplacian. Work of a more geometric flavor will continue on the question of
which functions defined on a sphere can be the curvature functions of
conformally related metrics. Sufficient topological conditions are known
depending on the critical points of the function. Necessary and sufficient
conditions based on analytic properties of the function will be sought.