* 8816062
* Mechanisms of Heterogeneous Transport of Monoclonal         Antibodies in Tumors
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1989,09/01/1991
* Rakesh Jain, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dov Jaron
* 09/01/1991
* USD 93,300.00

The overall objective of this work is to measure experimentally and to analyze
mathematically the relative contributions of various mechanisms of transport of
monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) in a tumor. Experiments will involve direct
measurement of spatial distributions of (i) blood perfusion rate, (ii)
interstitial pressure, (iii) antigen, and (iv) antibody at various times post-
injection in a tumor. The tumor will be grown as a standard implant
subcutantously, and as an "isolated-tumor" connected to the host with a single
artery and a single vein. The latter preparation will permit direct measurement
of interstitial fluid velocity at the tumor periphery. To discern the role of
binding, two types of antibodies will be used: a non-specific antibody and a
hepatoma specific antibody. The resulting data will be analyzed by developing
two physiologically-based distributed parameter models: (i) a fluid transport
model and (ii) a solute transport model. The former will permit calculations of
interstitial pressure and interstitial velocity in a tumor, and the latter will
permit calculations of the spatial and temporal distribution of MAbs in a tumor.
Extensive simulations and sensitivity analyses will be carried out to suggest
ways of improving MAb delivery and distribution in tumors. If MAbs are to
fulfill their promise, methods must be developed to deliver them selectively and
in adequate quantities to their target in the body. Unfortunately, MAbs have
shown limited or no success in cancer treatment primarily due to their inability
to penetrate solid tumors uniformly. In particular, when MAbs are injected into
the blood stream, very low amounts accumulate in the center of a solid tumor.
There is a preferential distribution of MAbs in areas closest to the functional
blood vessels and, in many cases, on the tumor periphery. An abundance of
antibody at the tumor periphery may be helpful in the tumor detection using
radioimaging techniques, but it has no therapeutic effect against cells in the
center. After the outer cells have been killed, the residual tumor grows back
again. The engineering approach used for identifying and understanding the
mechanisms governing the heterogeneous distribution in tumors may suggest novel
approaches to deliver antibodies and other macromolecules to all regions of a
tumor.