* 8816162
* A Proposal to Provide Services to Store, Publicize and      Fulfill Requests for NSF-Owned Visual Materials Regarding   Polar Subjects
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1988,09/30/1993
* Paul Proteau, Capital Systems Group Inc
* Contract
* Guy  G. Guthridge
* 09/30/1993
* USD 290,068.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) requires a service to store, publicize,
and fulfill requests for NSF-owned visual materials regarding antarctic
subjects. The collection, presently housed at room 627, National Science
Foundation, 1800 G Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20550, consists of
approximately 12,000 mounted 35mm slides, 6,300 black-and-white negatives with
contact proofs, and approximately 25 videotapes comprising raw footage and
finished films. These materials are used to respond to requests from the media,
public, NSF staff, and other Federal agencies. The contractor will fulfill
requests in a timely and efficient way, maintain caption and credit information
about the slides and black- and-white photographs (including those in negative
form), catalog caption and credit information, and number slides, photographs,
and black-and-white negatives. This information will be provided to NSF.
Fulfillment of requests includes performing research to identify items that
satisfy the needs of the requester, providing duplicates or prints, lending
original materials to responsible organizations (limited to established media
such as newspapers and magazines) or to others with NSF's permission, and
providing users with captions and credit information. The contractor will
monitor use of the collection and will dun users of originals when necessary to
assure return of materials to the collection. It also will perform research and
fulfillment (including duplication of slides and printing of black- and-white
photographs from the original negatives) for NSF when requested. The contractor
will store all materials in a way that assures long- term preservation, easy
retrieval and replacement, convenient addition of new items to the collection,
and security from loss, theft, or physical damage. It also will publicize the
collection among likely users such as media, educational institutions, and
science organizations. NSF will be consulted in advance of all publicity
actions. I recommend that Capital Systems Group be awarded $67,428 for the first
year of work.