* 8816258
* Catalytic Site of Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Marita King, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1992
* USD 152,500.00

Elucidating the molecular mechanisms by which calcium/calmodulin activated
enzymes aid transformation of regulatory calcium-signals into biochemical
responses is the ultimate goal. The proposal focuses on type II calmodulin-
dependent protein kinase, a dodecameric enzyme of functionally identical
subunits; each subunit is composed of catalytic, regulatory, and association
domains. As the location of the ATP-binding site has merely been inferred by
sequence comparison with related protein kinases, and the corresponding site for
protein substrates is unknown, these continuing investigations are directed
towards characterizing both of these substrate-binding sites. Because ligand-
promoted instability and aggregation have hampered studies with the holoenzyme,
a catalytic fragment will be used. This monomeric domain has the added advantage
of needing neither calmodulin nor autophosphorylation to be fully active. This
domain will be characterized and used to probe the kinetic reaction mechanism,
to study substrate-binding, and to identify amino acid side chains which are
lining the two substrate-binding pockets. The location of the ATP-binding site
on the protein sequence of the kinase will be verified by affinity and
photoaffinity labeling with analogs of ATP. Photoaffinity labeling with
photoreactive peptide substrates will be used to locate the second site. Calcium
is one of the most important intracellular regulators and second messengers of
biological systems. The intracellular levels of Ca2+ are increased upon
stimulation by a variety of extracellular agents, such as hormones, drugs, and
neurotransmitters. The increase in the concentration of Ca2+ triggers a serious
of regulatory events that ultimately alter many processes, including those
responsible for muscle contraction and the transmission of nerve impulses.
Activation of calmodulin-dependent protein kinase and calcinerin seem to be part
of the mechanism by which the Ca2+ calmodulin complex initiates biochemical
responses at the synapse because a detailed understanding of the structure,
function and regulation of these enzymes may aid in elucidating the molecular
events at the synapse, studies of these interconverting enzymes are of
considerable interest.