* 8816365
* Organic Free Radical and Electron Transfer Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1988,08/21/1991
* Martin Newcomb, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 08/21/1991
* USD 154,600.00

This grant within the Organic Dynamics Program represents a continuation of the
work by Martin Newcomb of Texas A&amp;M University. The aim of this project is
to elucidate the pathway of organic reactions which involve free radicals or
radical anions. This work is quite significant in that it will investigate many
reactions suspected to proceed by the pathway known as SET (single electron
transfer) which have previously been considered to react by other mechanisms.
This will enhance knowledge about how organic reactions proceed, and, therefore,
how they can be improved. Continued studies in the areas of organic free
radicals and mechanisms of potential electron transfer processes in organic
reactions will be investigated. Kinetics of exceedingly fast carbon radical
rearrangemens will be studied by the PTOC/thiol method developed in the Texas
A&amp;M laboratory with the objective of calibrating radical clocks so fast that
they may be used in competition with diffusion-controlled second order processes
in non-viscous solvents. In the PTOC/thiol method, N-hydroxypyridine-2-thione
esters are employed as radical precursors and thiophenol is used as a radical
trapping agent, and reactions with first order rate constants in excess of 1 x
10exp-9/s at 25 degrees C can be calibrated. Aminyl and aminium cation radicals
from N-hydroxpyridine-2-thione carbamates will also be studied. The main
objective will be to determine the rate constants for simple second order
reactions (such as hydrogen atom transfer) of these intermediates; with basis
reaction rate constants available, nitrogen-centered radical clocks will be
calibrated. Potential electron transfer processes (especially in reactions of
lithium dialkylamides) will continue to be studied. Verification of the
experimentally derived oxidation potential for the dialklamide anion--
dialkylaminyl radical couple will be sought. Reactions of lithium dialkylamides
with trityl halides will be studied; recent results suggest that a previously
unconsidered reaction process may be operating in this case.