* 8816007
* The Evolution of Solar Magnetic Fields
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1989,03/31/1992
* Harold Zirin, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 03/31/1992
* USD 696,680.00

This grant covers part of the operation of the Big Bear Solar Observatory,
emphasizing high-resolution imaging in multiple wavelengths, measurement of
longitudinal and transverse magnetic fields, and image processing based on video
and digital images. The program focuses on the evolution of magnetic fields,
both in the active and quiet sun. Major programs over the next three years will
be: 1. Round-the-clock observations of solar magnetic fields. Study of the
evolution of small magnetic elements and the equilibrium of creation and
destruction of field elements. 2. Study of emerging flux regions and how
sunspots develop. 3. Investigation of the detailed relationship between magnetic
elements and photospheric and chromospheric phenomena. 4. Observations of the
Wilson effect and other properties of sunspots. 5. Measurement of transverse
magnetic fields with the existing magnetograph and connection of these fields
with flare occurrence. 6. High-time-resolution videotape recording of flares
aimed at finding the sources of spike events. 7. Study of the diffusion of
magnetic elements from the active regions of the new cycle and the reversal of
the polar field. 8. A special study of the circumstances of impulsive flares
will be made, with the object of determining if there are special circumstances
in which those flares occur. 9. Continuation of operation of the Tel Aviv
photoheliograph. 10. Studies of solar magnetic fields and the temperature
minimum using the 12-micron lines. 11. Continuation of our high-resolution long-
term observational programs on active regions including support of various
rocket, balloon and other special intervals, maintaining a data base on solar
activity for the solar community. 12. Development and increased utilization of
digital data obtained with CCD's, leading to all-electronic data recording. The
overall aim is to understand flares and sunspots due to the rise and climax of
the next activity cycle.