* 8816077
* Mechanism and Regulation of the Transport Processes         Responsible for the Extracellular Current Pattern Formation in Chara and Nitella
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1993
* William Lucas, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1993
* USD 258,320.00

The proposed research will address the characterization of the membrane
transport processes, located in the plasma membrane of Chara and Nitella, that
generate the extracellular current pattern along the length of these giant algal
cells. Based on preliminary current-voltage profiles, obtained when these
extracellular currents were in the light-activated condition, and on vibrating
probe measurements of these currents obtained during pH pulse experiments, the
hypothesis has been proposed that the acid and alkaline bands are generated by a
Class II transport system. An extensive biophysical test of this hypothesis will
now be conducted using state of the art current-voltage measurements in
combination with kinetic modelling. For these studies a new computer-operated
2-dimensional vibrating probe system will provide important information on the
cellular mechanisms responsible for temporal and spatial control over the
putative Class II transporter. Ion selective microelectrodes will also be used
to record light-induced changes in cytoplasmic calcium and pH in experiments
aimed at elucidating the biochemical processes responsible for the time
dependent activation of these membrane transport processes following
illumination. The hypothesis will be tested that dark-induced inactivation of
transport is effected through a coupled reaction involving an increase in
cytoplasmic calcium which activates calcium-calmodulin followed by calcium-
calmodulin activation of a protein phosphorylase which inactivates the hydrogen
ion transport system by phosphorylation. The involvement of a protein
phosphatase in reactivation will also be investigated. Finally, the involvement
of protein synthesis in the regulation process will be further investigated
using inhibitors of 70S (chloroplast and mitochondria) and 80S (cytoplasmic)
protein synthesis. The giant algae Chara and Nitella have been the subject of
physiological studies for many years. The large size of their cells and the
light dependent patterns of electrical current that they generate make them an
excellent system in which to study the membrane transport processes underlying
cellular electrical phenomena. The results of this research using state of the
art biophysical techniques should greatly enhance our understanding of the
physiology of plant cell membranes.