* 8816941
* Collaborative Research: Cenozoic Tectonic and Magmatic      Evolution of the Mojave Desert: Constraints from Isotopic   and Trace-Element Compositions of Volcanic Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1991
* Allen Glazner, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 11/30/1991
* USD 31,400.00

This is a collaborative study between the University of Colorado and the
University of North Carolina on the Nd, Sr, and Pb isotopic, and trace element
compositions of Cenozoic mafic-to- silicic volcanic rocks in the Mojave Desert
region of southeastern California. The study will use temporal and spatial
variations in the geochemical characteristics of the volcanic rocks to constrain
models of the tectonic evolution of this region, and to study aspects of the
magmatic evolution of the Cenozoic volcanic rocks. Geochemical data from &lt;5Ma
basalts will be used to evaluate the age, structure, and composition of the
mantle currently underlying this area. The results of this study will be used to
test whether pre-Cenozoic mantle lithosphere has been tectonically removed from
beneath the continental crust, as suggested by available isotopic data and as
proposed in some tectonic models for this region. Geochemical data from older
Cenozoic basalts will be used to assess the tectonic setting in which
lithosphere removal took place. A similar geochemical data set will be obtained
for Miocene intermediate-to-silicic volcanics and will be used to constrain
models for the genesis of these rocks. The isotopic compositions of these rocks
will also be used to infer aspects of the geochemistry of the lower continental
crust, and to define any subsurface boundaries between Precambrian basement
terraines with different Nd isotopic characteristics. Overall this study will
represent the first comprehensive characterization of the isotope and trace
element compositions of Mojave volcanic rocks, and one of the first attempts to
apply such data towards constraining tectonic models of the continental
lithosphere. The study represents an outgrowth from previous NSF supported
research by both of the PIs. Glazner (UNC) will be responsible for sample
selection, petrography and trace-element chemistry, and Farmer (UC) will carry
out all isotopic determinations.