* 8816273
* Enzymology and Metabolism of Nitrogen Oxides
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1993
* Thomas Hollocher, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1993
* USD 263,300.00

The project focuses on the metabolism and enzymology of nitrogen oxides,
chiefly but not exclusively in denitrifying bacteria. Recent success in the
purification of nitric oxide and nitrous oxide reductases from Paracoccus
denitrificans and of a new type of nitrous oxide reductase (cytochrome c-
containing) from Wolinella succinogenes permits further detailed
characterization of these enzymes, purification of the analogous enzymes from
other bacteria for comparison, and raising of antibodies to test for antigenic
similarities across species. Structure and function will be determined for the
chromophoric lipid associated with nitric oxide reductase. The structural gene
for nitric oxide reductase will be cloned and sequenced. The kinetics of NO
uptake and production and the steady-state levels of NO will be studied in
denitrifying and enteric bacteria with use of a recently devised NO-electrode
and hemoglobin trapping methods. These studies are directed at resolving the
question whether NO is an intermediate in denitrification and exploring the
generality and enzymology of NO production from nitrite by enteric bacteria. The
mechanism of enzyme-catalyzed nitrosations and the possible participation of NO
in these reactions will be studied with use of nucleophiles that yield a
nongaseous nitrosylated product, e.g., morpholine and 2,3- diaminonoaphthalene.
The ability of certain bacteria to reduce nitrogen oxides to nitrogen was
described in the last century and termed denitrification. The process is energy
yielding and represents an alternative to aerobic respiration. Denitrification
is of considerable importance geochemically, because it represents the major
route for return of fixed nitrogen to the atmosphere as N2. It therefore must
serve in the mechanisms which control the amount of oxygen the earth's
atmosphere. It is clear that the biochemical mechanisms of denitrification are
not as well understood as those of some other areas of nitrogen metabolism. A
detailed understanding of these mechanisms might lead to inhibitors of
denitrification in agriculture and the facilitation of N2 production in, for
example, sewage treatment.***//