* 8816398
* Petrology and Geochemistry of Accreted Oceanic Crust in     Northern California
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* John Shervais, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 06/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

The Coast Range ophiolite (CRO) of California comprises one of the most
extensive tracts of oceanic crust in the western Cordillera, and forms the
basement which underlies fore-arc sediments of the Great Valley sequence.
Radiometric age data show that the CRO formed in a relatively brief time span
between 155-165 million years ago, just prior to the Nevadan orogeny. The CRO
and its correlatives form an important tectonic element in the western
Cordillera, and understanding its evolution is central to unraveling the
tectonic evolution of western North America. Older models of ophiolite
petrogenesis are commonly based on the assumption that these bodies form during
a single, long-lived magmatic cycle, with or without the periodic influx of
primitive magma. However, recent studies of well-exposed Tethyan ophiolites
(Troodos, Semail) show that at least two distinct magmatic episodes are required
to form these massifs. These episodes are represented by volcanic units which
are geochemically distinct, and by younger, commonly ultramafic plutonic suites
that intrude older deformed gabbros. These studies document the importance of
multi-stage magmatic histories in the development of ophiolites, and imply that
their tectonic evolution must occur in a dynamic, rapidly evolving tectonic
environment. The Elder Creek remnant of the CRO comprises the only complete
ophiolite in northern California. Preliminary geochemical data and
reconnaissance field surveys suggest that this ophiolite had a complex magmatic
history, and that at least two and possibly three distinct magmatic suites are
present. Evidence includes (for the plutonic rocks) gabbro pegmatite dikes which
cross-cut layered cumulates, and laminated (deformed?) gabbros occur as clasts
in agmatite breccias and (for the volcanic rocks) the occurrence of volcanic
studies with different geochemical signatures. Relationships between these
magmatic suites are uncertain, but one of the volcanic suites may be related to
the Stonyford complex. The Stonyford remnant of the CRO lies only 35 miles
farther south along strike, but it displays differences in its petrology,
geochemistry, and structural relationships which require that it formed in
tectonic setting distinct from the Elder Creek ophiolite. It is proposed to use
field relationships, petrology, and geochemistry to unravel the contrasting
geologic histories of these two ophiolite fragments, their magmatic evolution,
and how they came to be juxtaposed in the same tectonic position. I plan to
focus in particular on the role of multi-stage magmatic processes in ophiolite
petrogenesis. Some of the variations observed probably result from tectonic
juxtaposition of originally unrelated rocks, but others must result from changes
in magma composition through time within a single ophiolite spreading center.