* 8816664
* Cyclic Carbonates and Vail-Sequences on Carbonate Platforms:A Field and Modelling Study
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* James Read, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1991
* USD 99,000.00

We will to log in detail, and test for evidence of cyclicity, classic
stratigraphic sections in the Late Cambrian and Mississippian of the western
U.S. We will examine how the 1 to 10 m cycles may be packaged into larger scale
(1 to 10 m.y. duration) Vail-type sequences, utilizing a new application of a
technique first used by Fischer (1964), to define short term changes in relative
sea level. The technique provides a powerful, objective method of defining
eustatic vs. subsidence effects at 1 to 10 m.y. scale, and allows recognition of
sequence boundaries in cyclic carbonates. We will run 1-dimensional computer
simulations of the stratigraphic sequences logged in the field, and
2-dimensional simulations to generate stratigraphic cross-sections that may be
compared with actual cross-sections showing meter scale, vertical as well as
lateral changes in rock types. Our models are capable of utilizing complex sea
level curves to generate isostatically balanced, simulated stratigraphic
sections and cross-sections showing rock changes at the meter-scale, necessary
for a study of carbonate cycles. We will perform spectral analysis on deeper
water facies in the sequences to determine if there is any record of
Milankovitch climatic changes in the deeper water facies. The computer
simulations will be constrained with geological data. This approach should
provide us with a much firmer understanding of how carbonate cycles are arranged
on carbonate platforms, how they are packaged in Vail-sequences, and how the
various types of allocyclic and autocyclic mechanisms control their development
in the Paleozoic. Research will document the effects of climatic and sea level
change on the accumulation of sedimentary rocks.