* 8816542
* Transcriptional Regulation of RNA Polymerase Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* William Whalen, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1992
* USD 218,020.00

Two models for the transcriptional regulation of RNA polymerase synthesis will
be tested. The major site of transcriptional regulation appears to be modulation
of the efficiency of a transcriptional terminator, the attenuator, upstream of
the rpoBC structural genes. The first model is that the attenuator is regulated
by an antitermination system similar to those of phage lambda where the RNA
polymerase is stability modified to a termination resistant form at an upstream
site. The existence of such a system will be detected by testing whether
multiple heterologous terminators can be suppressed when placed in the rpoBC
operon. Given a positive result, the modification site will be identified by
deletion analysis and oligonucleotide mutagenesis. The factors required for
modification will be identified in vitro using depleted or mutant extracts of
known antitermination proteins and competition with other antitermination
systems. To identify specific for rpoBC, its expression will be uncoupled from
the requirement for attenuator suppression, and detector operons will be
constructed to allow selection for and screening of mutations affecting
attenuator readthrough. The ultimate aim is the reconstitution of the system
with purified components. The second model is that coupling of transcription and
translation in a gene rplL immediately upstream of the attenuator modulates
termination. This model will be tested by using lacZ:rplL gene fusions to
control the translation at the 3' end of rplL. The important features of the
sequence surrounding the attenuator will then be defined by deletion analysis
and site directed mutagenesis. In addition, the factors required for termination
will be defined in vitro using purified components. Finally, using partially
purified extracts, whether a factor other than RNA polymerase and the ribosome
modulates the coupling of transcription and translation will be explored. These
experiments will form basis for models defining how transcription of rpoBC is
modulated in response to the transcriptional needs of the cell. This research
should provide fresh insights into regulation of a gene that is of vital
importance to the bacterium E. coli.