* 8816481
* U.S.-Philippines Cooperative Research on Development of a   Predictive Capacity for the Occurrence of Large Amplitude   Coastal Seiches
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1989,02/28/1992
* Graham Giese, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1992
* USD 23,455.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Drs. David C. Chapman, Department of
Physical Oceanography, and Graham H. Giese, Department of Geology and
Geophysics, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, to pursue with Mr. Rolu P.
Encarnacion, National Institute of Atmospheric Sciences, Philippine Atmospheric,
Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA), for a period of
24 months, a program of cooperative research to develop a predictive capacity
for the occurrence of large-amplitude coastal seiches. The collaborators will
obtain time series measurements of sea-level oscillations and water temperature
and salinity from Puerto Princesa Harbor, Palawan Island, Philippines, out to
the shelf edge. Data obtained from these measurements will be input into an
improved numerical model, and the output will be compared with measured seiche
characteristics. Coastal seiches are long, standing waves that are frequently
observed as water-level oscillations in harbors, bays, and over shelves with
periods ranging from a few minutes to a few hours. Even small vertical motions
may be accompanied by relatively large horizontal motions, producing currents
which can carry ships out of control and cause their collision or grounding. A
simple two-layer model has been developed which relates seiche excitation by
internal waves to the degree of stratification. The output from this model will
be compared with measured seiche characteristics. The ultimate objective of this
research is reliable predictions of Palawan Island seiches. The collaborators
are highly respected scientists in the field of this research. The present
project will allow them to combine their talents and interests for mutual
benefit. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing
Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.
scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through
the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and
through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.