* 8816302
* Climate Variability Studies over the Northern Hemisphere
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1990
* Daniel Cayan, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/1990
* USD 63,529.00

This research builds upon and greatly expands studies of the long-period
evolution of the atmosphere-ocean system and its relationship to short period
climate variability of surface variables (e.g., temperature, precipitation and
wind) over North America. Besides improving understanding of the interactions
within this complex system, the ultimate goal is to develop improved tools for
predicting the circulation and climate over extended periods. In particular,
this study will involve the low frequency (seasonal-to-decadal) variability of
macro-scale features of the SST field and its relationship to the Northern
Hemisphere atmospheric general circulation, surface temperature and
precipitation over North America. The approach taken will be primarily empirical
(synoptic and statistical), involving conceptual physics and employing
atmospheric and oceanic fields. Finally, the possibility that the occurrence of
earthquakes is conditioned by persistently recurrent atmospheric pressure
systems will be investigated. Although this topic is bound to be controversial,
preliminary evidence suggests a link between the large-scale configuration of
monthly and seasonal atmospheric pressure anomalies and earthquakes in Southern
California. The importance of this research is that if successful, it will lead
to improved climate prediction on short (monthly to decadal) time scales.