* 8816678
* Species of the Genus Chaetetes (Carboniferous, North        America): Their Biogeography, Extinction and Role as Reef   Builders
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Ronald West, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1992
* USD 89,081.00

Chaetetes, a fossil demosponge, is the common reef-building organism of the
Carboniferous. As such, Chaetetes commonly occurs as laminar, domical, or
columnar colonies. As is true of a number of clonal reef-builders, the growth
form has been considered a reflection of the depositional environment with
columnar colonies indicating greater turbulence. Such is not unreasonable, but
it is possible that the different growth forms are different species. Variations
in the microstructural details of chaetetid colonies has been used to
distinguish species of Carboniferous Chaetetes. Unfortunately, these features
are subject to diagenetic alteration and the degree of variability within these
features is great. Characteristics of nearly all the "species" of Carboniferous
Chaetetes can be found on a polished surface of a single specimen. Proposed
research will: 1) test the validity of the criteria used to distinguish species
of Carboniferous Chaetetes of North America; 2) look for criteria that might be
less affected by preservation and more indicative of genetic variability, such
as the way new calicles are added to the colony; and 3) determine the degree to
which the growth form of chaetetid species is environmentally controlled. By
clarifying the taxonomy of chaetetids it will be possible to address: 1)
anomalies in the spatial and temporal distribution of this group, 2) some
aspects of Carboniferous extinction events, and 3) the role of chaetetids in the
structure and development of Carboniferous reefs.