* 8816318
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Fatty Acid Composition in  Blood Lipids
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* William Lands, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 09/30/1991
* USD 9,694.00

This award will enable Prof. William E. Lands of the University of Illinois at
Chicago to collaborate over a period of two years with Prof. Tomohito Hamazaki
of the Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical Univ- ersity and Professor Harumi
Okuyama of the Nagoya City University, both in Japan. They will investigate
whether or not analysis of the fatty acid composition of blood lipid can provide
a reliable index of a person's tendency to ingest certain types of
polyunsaturated fatty acids. Six different types of blood lipids, each of which
responds at a different rate to changes in diet, are accessible for study, and
the researchers will attempt to establish a definite relationship between the
composition of an individual's diet and the composition of the various blood
lipids. The purpose of this research is to obtain data on blood lipid
composition as a function of diet, and to this end groups of Japanese, among
whom there is a wide range of fat intake, will be given selected diets
containing various ratios of fish and fat, various types of fat, or a special
diet developed at the University of Illinois at Chicago. These controlled diet
studies will allow quantification of the relationship of blood lipid composition
to diet, making it possible eventually to eliminate the vagaries of dietary
recall from diagnosis of individual dietary problems. Collaborative interactive
teams of biochemists and nutritionists have been formed at each university
involved with this project. These workers will share common techniques,
reagents, and internal standards to ensure comparability of the data obtained.
Collaboration with Japanese workers is essential to realize the full advantage
of the variety found in the Japanese diet. This work has major implications in
the realm of dietary diagnosis and health improvement and maintenance.