* 8816215
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Ultrahigh Energy Cosmic    Rays
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1992
* W. Vernon Jones, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1992
* USD 31,250.00

This award will enable Professors W.V. Jones and J.P. Wefel, of Louisiana State
University, and co-workers at the University of Alabama in Huntsville, the
University of Washington, and the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to
collaborate with Prof. Ogata, of the University of Tokyo, and colleagues at
other Japanese institutions over a period of two years. They will investigate
nuclear inter- actions, energy spectra, and chemical composition of cosmic rays
using long-duration balloon flights of one to two weeks. In particular, detailed
investigation will be made of the chemical composition of high density nuclear
matter in these rays. The purpose of this research is to study cosmic rays with
energies greater than those of any existing accelerators, in order to examine
the properties of particles produced by nuclei under the extreme conditions of
high temperature and compression that exist when they collide in the form of
cosmic rays. New theories suggest that such collisions may lead to new states of
nuclear matter, including pion condensation, abnormal nuclear matter, hot quark
matter, and multi quark states. However, current accelerators do not possess
enough energy to lead to such states; at present, cosmic rays at altitudes which
may be reached by balloon are the only available sources of particles with the
energies required. The information obtained should help clarify some basic
physical and astrophysical processes and will therefore be of international
importance. The Japanese researchers will prepare and analyze the nuclear
emulsions to be used in the experiments, while the U.S. team will provide the
balloons, helium gas, and launch facilities.