* 8816597
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Passive Control of Heat    Transfer Performance in Reflux Condensers
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1991
* Chang-Lin Tien, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 04/30/1991
* USD 10,314.00

This award will enable Prof. Chang-Lin Tien of the University of California,
Irvine, to collaborate with Prof. Kunio Hijikata of the Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Japan, and other Japanese researchers over a period of two years.
They will investigate fundamental processes and mechanisms influencing the
passive control of the performance of devices, such as heat pipes, which operate
on the basis of counter-current, two-phase reflux condensation. Such passive
control may be achieved by addition of a second component to the heat-pipe
working fluid; this component might be a noncondensable gas or a binary mixture
of working fluids to control the condensation. The heat and mass transfer
mechanisms which control gas distribution, and hence overall performance of the
heat-pipe system, will be investigated both analytically and experimentally. The
purpose of this research is to enhance our basic understanding of the phenomena
which control the performance of heat pipes and similar mechanisms. Adequate
understanding of these phenomena could stimulate the use of heat pipes, which
has been limited even though they offer considerable advantages over other heat-
transfer methods in many applications. To achieve this objective the U.S.
researcher will analyze the heat-trans- fer performance of heat pipes with
noncondensable gases. Heat transfer with binary vapor mixtures will be
investigated experimentally by the Japanese collaborator. By comparing the
analytical and experimental results, the investigators will jointly determine
the most effective combination of working fluids. This research thus utilizes
the complementary analytical and experimental skills of the U.S. and Japanese
investigators.