* 8816648
* Surface Chemistry of Naturally and Laboratory Weathered     Plagioclase:  Relationship to Watershed Weathering Rates
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* David Mogk, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1992
* USD 119,129.00

An understanding of the rates and mechanisms of feldspar dissolution is
critical to accurately model the role of silicate weathering in the
biogeochemical cycling of H, Ca, Mg, Na, K, Si, and Al. We are proposing an
interagency, interdisciplinary project to study the mechanisms of plagioclase
dissolution reactions occurring under natural and laboratory conditions. The
objectives are to (i) determine the composition of surface layers of naturally
and laboratory weathered plagioclase grains from the same parent material using
a combination of surface sensitive techniques including X-ray photoelectron and
Auger electron spectroscopy (XPS, AES), and (ii) compare dissolution rates of
plagioclase determined under laboratory conditions to rates calculated from
chemical denudation in watersheds of the Silver Creek study area in the
southwestern Idaho batholith. We will examine the spatial variability of cation
depletion and preferential release of cations from calcic or sodic rich zones,
and relate these surface processes to proposed hypotheses for the stoichiometry
of plagioclase weathering in well characterized watersheds of the Silver Creek
study area. Results from this study will contribute to our understanding of the
extent and lateral distribution of altered surface layers and their role in
controlling rates of plagioclase dissolution. Information obtained in this
project will provide a framework for relating surface processes to measurements
of mass balance and chemical denudation made at the watershed scale.