* 8816776
* Physiological Role of Sugar-Modulated Gene Expression in    Higher Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1993
* Karen Koch, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/1993
* USD 223,600.00

Central to plant biology are the processes which govern allocation of
photosynthetic products among growing tissues. Recent findings indicate that
distribution and metabolism of these resources may be regulated in part by
short-term alterations of gene expression in response to carbohydrate
availability. Sucrose synthase is the primary enzyme responsible for sucrose
hydrolysis in many developing plant tissues which depend on imported sucrose.
This laboratory has shown that expression of a gene encoding this enzyme in
maize root tips is modulated by the level of sugars present. This research goals
are to: 1) characterize the role of carbohydrate status in regulation of sucrose
synthase (Sh1) gene expression, 2) define the physiological consequences of
rapid changes in Sh1 expression, and 3) identify other carbohydrate regulated
genes. The approach will combine metabolic studies with quantification of gene
expression using gene specific DNA probes and antibodies. The conditions under
which this response occurs in vivo will be established. In addition, maize
sucrose synthase and invertase mutants will be used to assess the metabolic
effects of short- term changes in sucrose synthase gene expression. Finally, the
possiblity that this response includes other metabolically important genes in
addition to sucrose synthase will be addressed. This research will contribute
not only to the clarification of the interplay between gene expression and
metabolism, but also to elucidation of mechanisms controlling sucrose allocation
in higher plants. Perhaps the first example of sugar-modulated expression of an
identified plant gene has been described by this laboratory. Specifically, the
Sh1 form of sucrose synthase is rapidly and selectively induced in maize root
tips depleted of sucrose. Sucrose is the predominant form in which sugars are
redistributed in most species, therefore its synthesis and breakdown are crucial
to the plant. Sucrose synthase catalyzes a reversible cleavage of sucrose, and
is thus vital in tissues which import and metabolize sucrose. In many instances,
sucrose synthase activity is positively correlated with the extent of sucrose
movement into a given tissue. Therefore, the interaction of sugar levels with
sucrose synthase gene expression is a potential mechanism for regulation of
sucrose import and utilization. This research explores sugar regulation of
sucrose synthase expression and its metabolic consequences, in detail, at the
molecular, cellular, and whole plant levels.