* 8816491
* Fifth International Symposium on Microbial Ecology (ISME 5):Partial Support for American Participants; Kyoto, Japan;    August 27 - September 1, 1989
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1990
* David Pramer, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 04/30/1990
* USD 15,000.00

American Society for Microbiology This award provides partial support for
American scientists to participate in the Fifth International Symposium on
Microbial Ecology. The Symposium will convene August 27-September 1, 1989 in
Kyoto, Japan under the auspices of the International Committee on Microbial
Ecology of the International Union of Microbiological Societies. This triennial
Symposium is the only meeting of professional scientists that focuses solely on
microbial ecology. The goals of the Symposium are to serve as a forum for the
discussion of recent advances in microbial ecology by scientists from throughout
the world, and to identify areas that require attention for the advancement of
knowledge and for the improvement of human well-being. The objectives of the
program include: (1) to bring together young and mature investigators in an
environment that encourages communication, enabling each to benefit from the
special knowledge of the others; (2) to generate collaboration among
investigators from different regions of the world; (3) to provide opportunity
for cross-disciplinary exchanges of refinement of principles and practices
current in microbial ecology. Adequate American participation in the Symposium
is of special importance today because advances in microbial ecology relate
directly to the future capacity of this country to maintain a competitive
advantage in the agricultural, environmental, and medical sciences.