* 8816322
* Photosynthesis: Metabolic Transport and Cold Lability of Photosynthetic Enzymes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Gerald Edwards, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 11/30/1991
* USD 137,000.00

Photosynthesis is of fundamental importance as a biological process and it is
important to understand its mechanism, and control by factors within the plant
and in the environment. Plants take up carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and
assimilate it into organic phosphates which are used for synthesizing starch,
sucrose, amino acids, etc. A limited number of higher plants, including maize
(corn), have evolved a mechanism for concentrating carbon dioxide in their
leaves so that the low concentration in the air (0.034%) does not limit their
ability to perform photosynthesis. This mechanism involves a biochemical pathway
called the C.4 cycle, and such plants are called C.4 plants. C..4 plants achieve
very high rates of photosynthesis under high temperature and light intensities.
However, in many C.4 plants, photosynthesis is quite sensitive to moderately low
temperatures (i.e. 10 to 15.oC while a few species or races are more tolerant.
In this project, sensitivity to low temperature will be examined relative to
processes associated with the C.4 cycle (transport of organic compounds and
function of proteins as catalysts of reactions). Factors which protect the
processes under low temperatures will be examined in C.4 plants which are
chilling tolerant. Basic knowledge gained from these studies will be of value in
exploiting the mechanism of C.4 photosythesis so that it can be used on a larger
scale in production of food, biomass and in urban applications.