* 8816203
* Metabolic Organization in Neurospora
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1992
* Richard Weiss, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne Paige
* 03/31/1992
* USD 200,000.00

This project supports research that will characterize the structure and assembly
of the mitochondrially localized feedback sensitive enzymes of arginine
biosynthesis in Neurospora crassa and investigate the regulatory implications of
this localization. The first seven biosynthetic enzymes, including the feedback-
sensitive enzymes, acetylglutamate synthase and acetylglutamate kinase, are
localized in the mitochondria. The structure and membrane topology of
acetylglutamate synthase will be determined to test various hypotheses
concerning the mechanism by which cytoplasmic arginine feedback inhibits this
mitochondrial enzyme. The structural and functional relationships between
acetylglutamate synthase, acetylglutamate kinase and acetylglutamyl phosphate
reductase will be investigated to evaluate various models for coordination of
feedback inhibition, enzyme synthesis and assembly. The specificity, kinetics,
energetics, and regulation of metabolite trafficking and the possible
relationships between mitochondrial, plasma and vacuolar membrane transport
systems will be investigated. The components of the transport systems will be
identified by conventional biochemical methods or by labelling with photolabile
amino acid derivatives. Attempts will be made to isolate and characterize
mutations affecting their function. The results will be of significance in
understanding metabolic regulation and the assembly of the mitochondria (and
other organelles) in eukaryotic cells. Organelles such asmitochondria,
lysosomes, and peroxisomes carry-out specialized functions. In some cases, they
also serve as localized sites of specific metabolic processes which do not have
any obvious relationship to the specialized functions of the organelle. Thus, a
variety of amino acid biosynthetic reactions take place in the mitochondria of
certain fungi and some reactions of the urea cycle occur in this same organelle
in mammals. Although some general hypotheses have been advanced to explain this
compartmentation phenomenon (e.g. conservation of solvent capacity; isolation of
potentially reactive intermediates; or separation of potentially competing
reactions), its exact physiolocial significance is not fully understood.