* 8816083
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        The Effect of Monensin on Golgi Apparatus (Cell Biology)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* D. James Morre, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1992
* USD 6,610.00

This award supports Professor D. James Morre of Purdue University to collaborate
in research with Drs. Herbert Spring and Michael Trendenlenburg of the German
Cancer Institute in Heidelberg. They plan to test the current concepts of how
the sodium-selective ionophore monensin exerts its action in specifically
blocking Golgi apparatus function in plant and animal cells. It is well accepted
that electron micrographs of monensin-treated cells display enlarged, disarrayed
Golgi cisternae. However, there is evidence that these effects may be dependent
on how the cells were fixed for electron microscopy. Through collaboration, they
will use a combination of state-of-the-art light and electron microscopic
approaches to observe monensin-induced swelling of Golgi apparatus in living
cells. High pressure freeze substitution will be employed to compare images
generated by this technique for transmission electron microscopy with images
observed with conventional freeze substitution electron microscopy. Dr. Morre
was among the first to use monensin in studies of Golgi apparatus structure and
function. The German co-investigators have pioneered in the development of the
video-enhanced viewing methods and sample chamber design needed for the planned
experiments. In addition, they expect to explore the use of a laser-scanning
confocal microscope, in collaboration with Dr. E. Schnepf of Heidelberg, one of
its developers. Monensin is a sodium ionophore capable of collapsing sodium and
hydrogen gradients. It has gained wide acceptance as a biochemical and
biological investigative tool to study Golgi apparatus function and to identify
the molecular pathways of subcellular vesicular traffic. An entire hypothesis of
how monensin works in the living cell is based upon the assumption that trans
Golgi apparatus cisternae swell following monensin treatment. Swelling has been
observed in a wide range of plant and animal cells treated with monensin and
prepared for electron microscopy using aldehyde fixatives. However,
morphological evidence of swelling is less or nonexistent with other fixatives.
The proposed research will critically evaluate the overall validity of the
monensin-swelling hypothesis by determining unequivocally whether Golgi
apparatus in the living cell respond to monensin by swelling. The collaborative
plan also offers an opportunity to test the uses of a German laser scan confocal
microscope, a very new, conceptually exciting and prohibitively expensive tool
in the field of cell biology. The confocal scanner may well be able to achieve
the resolving power necessary to answer the questions posed in the current
project. If so, it will be an important pioneering achievement in cell biology,
with significance for a broad variety of questions involving intracellular
membranes.