* 8816451
* U.S-Italy Cooperative Research in Condensed  Matter Theory  and Polymer Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1995
* Rama Bansil, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 06/30/1995
* USD 13,582.00

This award will support Prof. Rama Bansil and Prof. William Klein of the Center
for Polymer Studies of Boston University in a research collaboration with Prof.
A. Coniglio of the University of Naples. The objective of the collaboration is
to seek a better understanding of how basic physical laws are altered on random
materials and also of the physics of inhomogeneous media. In order to carry out
this objective, the researchers propose to study 5 general topics: Topic I, the
phenomena of multifractality in random materials, whereby an infinite hierarchy
of exponents is sufficient to characterize virtually any system near its
critical point. Topic II is concerned with applications of modern methods of
statistical mechanics to physical processes on disordered media and to how a
random material is fractured under sufficiently high stresses. In Topic III the
researchers plan to address questions concerned with one specific class of
random materials, linear and branched polymers. Topic IV is concerned with the
relation between geometric clusters and thermal phase transitions, while Topic V
will involve experiments using dynamic light scattering techniques to
investigate the problem of probe diffusion in polymer gels. This work will
continue a highly productive collaboration that has led to useful concepts and
applications to problems like irreversible growth, resistor networks and many
others.