* 8816719
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Specification and          Development of Prototype Instruments for the Japanese       National Large Telescope at Mauna Kea
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1992
* None   DATA NOT AVAILABLE, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1992
* USD 22,000.00

This award will enable Prof. Donald N. B. Hall and co-workers at the University
of Hawaii at Manoa to collaborate with Prof. Yoshihide Kozai, of the Japanese
National Astronomy Observatory, Mitaka, Japan, and colleagues over a period of
two years. They will jointly develop and verify concepts for optical and
infrared spectroscopic instrumen- tation for the planned Japanese 7.5 meter
telescope--the Japanese National Large Telescope--to be constructed in the early
1990s on Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The proposed telescope will be one of the most
powerful on earth, and will justify the development of highly sophisticated
optical/infrared spectroscopic instrumentation to be used in conjunction with
it. As part of the site agreement, the University of Hawaii will have access to
15% of the observing time. Astronomers at the University are thus anxious to
collaborate with the Japanese in design decisions for the telescope and its
associated instrumentation. This award will facilitate that collaboration. In
developing these instruments, the Japanese researchers will contribute the high-
efficiency optical elements, e.g., lenses, fiber light-transmission systems, and
coatings, while the U.S. side will contribute to development of two-dimensional
array electronic detector systems. Instrument concepts developed will be
verified on the 2.2 meter telescope of the University of Hawaii.