* 8816638
* Depositional Cycles, Diagenesis and Composite Sea Level     Changes in Platform Carbonates of the Alpine Triassic
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Lawrence Hardie, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1991
* USD 103,091.00

Shallow water carbonate deposits typically were deposited episodically at the
meter-scale in the frequency range of 104-105 years. The proposed research will
increase our understanding of the origin and significance of this stratigraphic
cyclicity, using the superb exposures of Triassic carbonates in the Alps as
natural field laboratories. Earlier work has demonstrated that composite
eustatic sea level changes with Milankovitch periodicities played a fundamental
role in the cyclical deposition of these Triassic carbonates. The research will
attempt, by careful field and laboratory study of the sedimentology, diagenesis
and stratigraphy of a spectrum of Alpine Triassic carbonates, to extend this
early work to bridge the gap between high frequency meter-scale cyclicity
(104-105 year) and the much larger 3rd order scale (106 year) depositional
cycles that are the fundamental units of both seismic and sequence stratigraphy.
If the response of shallow water carbonates (which are reliable sea level
gauges) to the interaction of composite 104, 105 and 106 year sea level cycles,
subsidence, and sedimentation can be predicted (or at least understood), then we
will have a powerful tool for use in stratigraphic correlation,
chronostratigraphy and sequence stratigraphy at an outcrop or borehole core
scale finer than that detectable by current seismic stratigraphic methods. Such
information would have obvious value in the exploration for hydrocarbon
reservoirs and hydrothermal ore deposits that are so commonly hosted in shallow
water carbonate deposits.