* 8816413
* Oxygen and Hydrogen Isotope Studies of Igneous Rocks and    Associated Hydrothermal Metamorphism
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Hugh Taylor, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1990
* USD 317,000.00

We have developed equations for the kinetics of 18O/16O exchange between
minerals and hydrothermal fluids that can be used as an "oxygen isotope clock".
The 18 values of coexisting minerals represent isochrons that can measure the
"life-times" and water/rock ratios of fossil hydrothermal systems without doing
lengthy computer simulations. We wish to apply these concepts to various rift-
zone environments, where enhanced fracture permeability allows deep circulation
of surface waters. Shallow, short-lived systems have been well studied, but
deeper, longer-lived, and hotter systems transitional to crustal melting are
poorly understood. We intend to study such "hydrothermal- anatetic" magmas in:
(1) Hercynian-age Metamorphic Systems in Europe, including the classic area of
migmatites in the Black Forest, West Germany. (2) Volcanism in Rift-Zone
Environments, notably in Iceland, the Great Basin in Nevada, and the Snake River
Plain, Idaho. (3) Spreading Centers in Arabia, including a 22 Ma subaerial
hydrothermal system (opening of the Red Sea), and a 95 Ma submarine system (Oman
ophiolite complex). Also, we need to improve our understanding of the 18O/16O
geochemistry of the continental crust and upper mantle, notably in: (4) Detrital
Sedimentary Rocks of different types and metamorphic grades to better define the
geochemical cycles of 18O/16O and D/H during digeneses, metamorphism and
melting. (5) The Ivrea Zone, Northern Italy, perhaps the best available section
through the lowermost continental crust. (6) Quaternary- Age Igneous Rocks of
Italy. (7) Eclogite and Periodotite Xenoliths to better define fluid-rock
interactions in the upper mantle, and to try to identify ancient subducted
oceanic crust in these sub-continental lithosphere.