* 8816472
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Atomic Processes Induced by       Electronic Excitation in Non-Metallic Solids/September 1989/Nagoya, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* W. Beall Fowler, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 11/30/1990
* USD 20,650.00

This award will support a seminar, "Atomic Proceses Induced by Electronic
Excitation in Non-Metallic Solids," organized jointly by Prof. W. Beall Fowler
of Lehigh University and Prof. Noriaki Itoh of Nagoya University, Japan.
Participants will meet in Nagoya September 11-14, 1989, to discuss the basic
processes that occur as a result of the electronic excitation of non-metallic
solids through the interaction of electrons and photons. These processes include
defect reactions, transformation from crystalline to amorphous structure through
defect formation, and surface phenomena including surface reactions and
desorption of atoms. Laser, X-ray, or even intense conventional light
illumination can give rise to the processes to be discussed at the seminar.
Japanese workers have efforts under way to utilize such irradiation inthe
processing of materials such as semiconductors and metals, and U.S. researchers
have been active in constructing theories for the interactions at the atomic
level. This seminar will bring both technologists and physical theorists
together for discussions which could have important implications in the fields
of commerical electron and photon devices, and materials growth and treatment.