* 8816350
* Pathways of Essential Trace Elements in Land and Coastal    Sedimentary Environments:  Past, Present, Future
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Fred Mackenzie, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 05/31/1991
* USD 109,528.00

The research concentrates on the refinement and analysis of the pathways and
cycles of ten biologically essential trace elements: cadmium (Cd), cobalt (Co),
chromium (Cr), copper (Cu), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), molybdenum (Mo), nickel
(Ni), vanadium (V), and zinc (Zn). These elements are to a variable extent
essential to land and aquatic plant growth, and a deficiency or excess of the
individual elements in soils and continental waters may affect not only the
functioning of their own biogeochemical cycles, but the cycles of other elements
coupled to them as well. In general, the deficiencies or excesses of the
essential trace elements in different compartments of the surficial environment
can be caused by such processes as anthropogenic releases, historical changes in
the rates of denudation, climatic changes, changes in the types of vegetation
cover, and possibly, releases from meteorite impacts in the geologic past. In
the first step of our work on the ten essential elements we plan to establish
and refine the mass balance and flux values in the continental, aquatic and
near-shore oceanic environments. The second step is theoretical analysis of the
main mechanisms that control the fluxes of the ten elements, and of the factors
responsible for the coupling of their cycles to the global cycles of carbon (C)
and phosphorus (P). Third step is development of conceptual and mathematical
models, and their sensitivity analysis, for the individual and coupled cycles of
these trace elements, within a general frame of reference of the carbon and
phosphorus cycles, as has been worked out in our, and other investigators',
earlier research. The goals of the proposed work are understanding of the
baseline picture of the ten essential trace elements in the global biospheric
change, their potential significance as environmental indicators for the
geologic past, and obtainment of the upper bounds on their fluxes and storage
rates under different sets of environmental conditions.