* 8816309
* Investigations of the Mesoscale and Microscale Structure of Midwest Winter Cyclonic Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1988,05/31/1991
* Mohan Ramamurthy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/1991
* USD 190,104.00

Due to the potential for disruption of human and economic activities, the
precipitation characteristics of winter-time cyclones are of great practical as
well as scientific interest. It has been know for some time that the heaviest
precipitation from these systems occurs in relatively narrow precipitation
bands. Over the past several years, the organization of precipitation bands in
cyclonic storms has received a great deal of attention with a variety of
physical mechanisms being proposed to explain the characteristics of these
bands. Interestingly, most of these observational studies of bandedness in
winter cyclonic storms have been conducted in coastal regions which experience
quite different meteorological conditions than the mid-continental area. The
principal Investigators propose a pilot observational and numerical modelling
study in Illinois to begin to define the characteristics of mid-continent
cyclonic precipitation bands. The observational component of this research will
involve enhanced serial sounding of the atmosphere and two advanced instruments
for meteorological research -- wind profiler and Doppler radar. A major focus is
to relate the organization and structure of precipitation bands to flow fields
and thermodynamic structure of larger scale phenomena such as fronts, lower and
upper level jet streams, and zones of deformation flow.