* 8816386
* Early Proterozoic Crustal Evolution:  Geochemical and       Neodymium Isotopic Evidence from Sedimentary Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Scott McLennan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 12/31/1991
* USD 70,000.00

A powerful approach to the investigation of terrigenous sedimentary rocks is
through combined study of petrography, major and trace element geochemistry,
mineral chemistry and Nd- isotopic study. Such data provide critical evidence
regarding the composition and mean age of he provenance. Using this approach,
important constraints are provided for models of crustal composition, growth and
evolution. Questions of tectonic setting and recycling history of sedimentary
rocks can also be addressed. Isotopic evidence indicates that an important
period of crustal growth occurred during the early Proterozic of North America
at about 1.9-1.7 Ga. Evidence from Australia and Europe suggests this episode of
crustal growth may have been of global significance. It is here proposed to
examine the petrographical, geochemical and Nd-isotopic composition of two
sedimentary sequences which were deposited at about this time, including the
Chelmsford Formation (ca. 1.85 Ga) of the Sudbury region, Ontario and the Vadito
- Ortega Groups (ca. 1.7 Ga) of northern New Mexico. The Chelmsford Formation is
a proximal turbidite unit deposited in response to early development of the
Penokean Orogeny. The Vadito - Ortega Groups are representative of sedimentary
rocks deposited during crustal growth in southwestern U.S.A. at about 1.9 - 1.7
Ga. From this study, it will be possible to place important constraints on the
nature of crustal growth and evolution during the early Proterozoic. Comparisons
with crust-forming events at other times in earth history (particularly at the
Archean - Proterozoic boundary) will help to test current models of crustal
evolution.