* 8816220
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Solidification Processing of      Advanced Materials/May 1989/Sendai, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Merton Flemings, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 06/30/1990
* USD 20,782.00

This award will support a seminar on "Solidification Processing of Advanced
Materials," organized by Prof. Merton C. Flemings of the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology and Prof. Takateru Umeda of the University of Tokyo, Japan.
Participants will meet in Sendai, Japan, May 22-25, 1989 to exchange recent
research results and promote future joint research projects. The seminar will
deal primarily with the technology and principles of alloy, ceramic, and
electronic material solidification, including rapid solidification processes;
computer-aided analysis and design of high-integrity castings; metal matrix
composites; innovative casting and solidification techniques; and relations
between structure and properties of advanced materials. This seminar will
continue a series of such U.S.-Japan joint meetings. In the five years since the
last meeting, there have been many advances in new materials, solidification
processing, and the use of computers to enhance related technologies. Japan and
the U.S. are the world centers for research on solidification science, and the
joint discussion of the latest results from these countries could have important
implications for high-technology castings as used, for example, in turbine
blades, continuous-cast materials, the casting of intricate shapes, and casting
of advanced materials.