* 8816496
* Antarctic Marine Yeasts:  Preservation and Distribution of aLiving Collection
* O/D,OPP
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1993
* Jack Fell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 10/31/1993
* USD 51,666.00

This project will preserve and make available a collection of living yeasts
obtained through National Science Foundation funding of microbial ecology in the
Antarctic, southern Pacific and Indian Oceans. These studies were conducted
during cruises of the R.V. Anton Bruun, USNS Eltanin and the USCGC Icebreaker
Eastwind during the l960's. As part of the research, more than 3000 strains of
yeasts were isolated and studied in considerable detail. The collection
represents a unique genetic pool of organisms isolated from an extreme and
relatively inaccessible environment. Some of the strains from the collection,
which were made available through international collections, generated
considerable research in the areas of systematics, molecular biology,
biochemistry, enzymology and biotechnology. At the completion of the research,
the collection was freeze- dried to keep the strains alive with minimal
maintenance. During storage, the seals of the lyophilization vials have
deteriorated and the viability of the collection is in jeopardy. In addition, it
is difficult for interested investigators to use the collection because the
strain data is in the original field and laboratory data books. This award will
to make the entire collection and data readily available. The collection will be
relyophilized in long term storage vials and the strain information placed in a
computer data bank. The collection and data will be included in the Agricultural
Research Service Culture Collection, U.S. Department of Agriculture, which
maintains one of the world's largest microbial collections. Strains to be made
available for agricultural, industrial and academic research, will be maintained
and dispensed.