* 8816123
* Modulation of Embryonic Metabolism and Growth by Urea
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Gary Packard, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 12/31/1991
* USD 86,173.00

This is a proposal to investigate the physiological mechanism that links the
metabolism and growth of embryonic turtles to the water exchanges occurring
between their eggs and the environment. Embryonic turtles form large quantities
of urea as the end- product in protein catabolism, and this urea accumulates in
all fluid compartments inside their eggs over the course of incubation. The rate
of increase in concentration of urea is higher among eggs in negative water
balance (i.e., in dry environments), but the rates of metabolism and growth by
embryos are lower in the former than in the latter. Research described here will
focus on the possibility that urea, which is known to inhibit key metabolic
enzymes at low concentrations in vitro, plays, a critical role in suppressing
metabolism in embryos with access to limited supplies of water. A pair of
experiments will determine (1) whether manipulating concentration of urea inside
eggs affects the size of hatchling turtles, and (2) whether the effect of urea
is mediated by a suppression of embryonic metabolism and growth. These
experiments comprise an important test for a novel theory purporting to explain
why animals regulate the osmotic and ionic composition of their body fluids. The
research will also elucidate an ecologically important mechanism whereby
embryonic turtles balance their demand for water with availability of water.
Many species of turtles produce flexible-shelled eggs that exchange water
relatively freely with the environment inside their subterranean nests. Eggs
incubating in moist environments consequently absorb large amounts of water
during development, whereas eggs incubating in relatively dry settings lose
water to their surroundings. Interestingly, embryos developing in moist
environments (and having access to relatively large quantities of water) have
higher rates of metabolism and growth than embryos developing in dry conditions
(and having access to smaller amounts of water). Research to be performed under
auspices of this grant will ask how the availability of water to developing
embryos affects their metabolic waste, differs in concentration in blood and
other body fluids from embryonic turtles developing wet and dry environments,
and that high concentrations of urea cause and inhibition of metabolism and
growth.