* 8816604
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Petrogenesis of the Laramie        Anorthosite Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Carol Frost, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 07/31/1991
* USD 73,044.00

The origin of massif anorthosites and associated alkaline rocks remains an
important problem. To date our studies of the Laramie Anorthosite Complex, one
of the few unmetamorphosed massif anorthosite complexes in the world, have
focussed on the evolved rocks: the monozosyenites of Red Mountain, Sybille, and
Maloin Ranch. We have found evidence for differentiation and variable
contamination in these bodies, and in the Maloin have identified an additional
process in which less evolved biotite gabbro magma has mixed with differentiated
magma. Our preliminary Sr and Nd isotopic data indicate that no units of the
L.A.C. are simple depleted mantle-drived melts, but that all-- even the
anorthosites--have interacted with the crust to some degree. Moreover, the
evolved plutons each have unique Sr and Nd isotope characteristics indicating
that, although their mineral chemistries suggests that they evolved by similar
processes, they evolved independently and assimilated crustal materials to
different degrees. Our work to date allows us to identify several important
goals: (1) We must produce petrochemical models of the differen- tiation
processes within the Complex, focussing in particular on the isotopic and
chemical trends within the anorthosites that are produced by country rock
contamination on transitional contacts between the anorthosite and
monzosyenites, and on the gabbroic bodies that have evolved with little country
rock interaction. (2) We must determine the extent of layered and unlayered
anor- thosite, determine the cause of the layering, and assess whether any or
all of these anorthosites was emplaced as a diapir. (3) We will determine
whether changes in oxygen fugacity and silica activity are correlated to crustal
contamination. (4) We will study composite dikes to determine whether the mafic
portions are related to residual magmas from the anorthosite units. (5) We will
continue to determine the absolute age of the various units. (6) Finally, we
will attempt to determine the origin(s) of the magmas that produced the Complex.