* 8816749
* The Glucose-Induced cAMP Signal in Fungal Spores and Its    Relationship to Glycolysis
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1993
* James Bourret, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 01/31/1993
* USD 91,602.00

Dormancy and its relief in fungal spores constitute an attractive model system
for the study of development and differentiation. The spores of many fungi are
triggered to germinate by exogenous glucose. However, the early events in
glucose-induced germination may be independent of glucose metabolism. Instead,
glucose triggers a rise in intracellular cyclic AMP which in turn releases a
regulatory cascade that activates the cell. Associated with this regulatory
cascade is a dramatic surge in glycolytic activity. The objectives of the
proposed research are to examine the mechanism by which the glucose-induced
cyclic AMP signal is generated and to understand the relationship between the
cyclic AMP signal and the increase in glycolytic flow. Specifically, the
proposed research will test the hypotheses that (1) the cell's glucose transport
system is the receptor for the cyclic AMP signal and (2) a rise in fructose
6-phosphate is responsible for the surge in glycolysis. Dormancy has survival
value because it isolates the organism from a hostile environment. To be
effective, however, dormancy must be accompanied by the ability to recognize
environmental factors characteristic of favorable periods. Otherwise, dormancy
would assure death of the organism without reproduction. These recognition
systems, once activated usually provoke biochemical and physical changes that
are rapid and dramatic. This project studies the early events once dormancy is
broken.***//