* 8816932
* Mesozoic and Cenozoic Kinematic Evolution of the            Transantarctic Mountains
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Terry Wilson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Campbell
* 12/31/1992
* USD 108,982.00

This grant will support a field investigation of the Transantarctic Mountains
(TAM), an intracontinental mountain belt that developed along the crustal
boundary between the subcontinents of East and West Antarctica. Uplift of the
TAM appears to be related to extensional tectonism within the Antarctic Plate
during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic. The principal goal of this study is to
document the kinematic history of the boundary between East and West Antarctica,
both during the early stages of Gondwana break-up in the Jurassic and during the
morphological development of the TAM in the Cenozoic. The work will focus on the
Beardmore Glacier area of the central TAM and on a portion of the TAM in South
Victoria Land where faults or dike swarms of demonstrated Jurassic and Cenozoic
age are present. Detailed structural analysis of fault, fracture and dike arrays
in these regions will be used to define Jurassic and Cenozoic regional strain
kinematics and paleostress fields. These data will directly test existing models
for Jurassic extensional and translational motions between East and West
Antarctica, and will provide new constraints on Cenozoic displacements within
the Antarctic plate that must be integrated into the Antarctic-Australia-Pacific
plate circuit. The results will enhance our understanding of the tectonic
evolution of the Antarctic plate and will have application to the general
geotectonic problem of continental rifting and the development of rift-margin
uplifts.