* 8816977
* Petrogenesis of Massif Anorthosites
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Robert Dymek, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 07/31/1991
* USD 50,000.00

Massif anorthosites are plutonic igneous rocks consisting almost entirely of
plagioclase feldspar. Recurring problems in the study of these enigmatic rocks
include the mechanisms that lead to such unusual concentrations of plagioclase
on the scale of batholiths, the nature and source of their parental magmas,
their relationship to associated iron-titanium oxide ores, their relationship to
associated granitic igneous rocks of the admellite-charnockite-mangerite suite,
and the crystallization - differentiation processes that link some or all of
these rocks together as parts of single or repeated episodes of magmatism. The
emplacement of massif anorthosites appears restricted in space and time to
relatively narrow belts of mid-Proterozoic age. Accordingly, the formation of
massif anorthosites and their associated rocks represents an important stage in
the growth and development of the continental crust spanning only a short
interval of Earth history. We will investigate the origin of massif anorthosite
and associated rock types through an integrated field, petrological and
geochemical study on the St. Urbain and Labrieville anorthosites, Quebec. Our
study of St. Urbain is a continuation of work begun a number of years ago,
whereas the study of Labrieville represents a new initiative. Each massif
contains a range of rock types pertinent to a critical evaluation of the
anorthosite problem within plutons that are small enough to be investigated in
great detail. Our work will include the analysis of mineral compositions by
electron microprobe methods, and the analysis of whole-rocks for major and
selected trace elements by a combination of X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and
instrumental neutron activation (INA) methods. We will establish a comprehensive
petrological and geochemical data base that will allow us to develop
quantitative models for the chemical assembly of the anorthositic rocks, to
evaluate processes responsible for their magmatic differentiation, and to
provide well-constrained estimates of their parental magma compositions.