* 8816192
* The Deccan Traps in Space and Time: Geochemical Studies of  the Eastern Deccan, Lower Western Ghats, and Madagascar
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* John Mahoney, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 06/30/1991
* USD 93,300.00

This is a thre-part analytical program to investigate fundammental aspects of
Deccan-related volcanism using existing well-documented smaples; the goal is to
expand knowledge outward from the intensively studied southwestern region, to
begin to understand the huge Deccan episode ina plate-tectonic framework and
with respect to other large continental flood basalts. 1) Existing chemical
evidence shows that the lower six formations of the western Deccan do not simply
repeat the geochemistry of the Five later, upper level formations, now quite
well understood. A Nd, Pb, and Sr isotopic study of otherwise thoroughly
characterized lavas from the lower formations is proposed. The combined chemical
and isotopic data will be used to evaluate the nature and evolution of their
mantle source(s), the roles and mechanisms of contamination early in the Deccan
succession, and relationships to the overlying formations. In particular, were
ancient lithospheric mantle sources supplanted by asthenospheric sources; and
did AFC processes dominate early on, as has been predicted? 2) An even earlier
suite of flood basalts from southern and eastern Madagascar represents a stage
of volcanism (70-80 Myr) in India proper. Nd, Sr, and Pb isotopic ratios will be
measured on a set of Madagascar lavas, in conjunction with petrographic, major
and trace element, and geochronological work by Frency collegues, in order to
trace the beginning phases of volcanic activity. 3) Though a huge anticlinal
structure incorporating the western Deccan formations has been indentified
recently, the geochemical stratigraphy of the province in a W-E direction
remains completely unknown. On extreme view holds that lavas in the central and
northeastern Deccan are simply distal fringes of the western formations (up to
1000 km or more away); another that most or all of the former were erupted more
locally from dikes along the Narmada-Son Lineament and thus should reflect their
own unique petrogenesis. Isotopic, chemical, and petrographic data on sections
running W-I from Aurangabad, Chikaldara, and Nagpur areas will directly text
these two conflicting but critical hypotheses.