* 8816470
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Development of an X-ray    Detection System for an X-ray Astronomy Satellite
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* George Ricker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 09/30/1991
* USD 18,610.00

This award will enable Prof. George R. Ricker and co-workers of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology to collaborate with Prof. Yasuo Tanaka and
colleagues of the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, Japan, over a
period of two years. They will cooperate in the development and testing of an
X-ray charge-coupled device (CCD) camera to be included as part of an imaging
X-ray spectrometer on the Japanese X-ray astronomy mission Astro-D, planned for
launch in early 1993. X-ray spectroscopic measurements of galactic and
extragalactic sources are planned for the Astro-D mission, with an energy
resolution not previously attained. Distant active galactic nuclei, quasars, and
the remnant of supernova SN1987A are among the objects to be studied. For
selected distant objects, precise measurements of X-ray redshifts will be made,
measurements that will be important in themselves and at the same time useful in
identifying astronomically interesting sources for complementary optical and
radio-astronomical investigations. It is the U.S.-Japanese cooperation in the
scientific aspects of this activity, including selection of objects for study in
Astro-D and in related ground-based observations in both countries, that this
project will seek to further. The results are expected to make a significant
contribution in the field of X-ray astronomy.