* 8816744
* Organometallic Chemistry - Synthesis and Reactions
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Dietmar Seyferth, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* E. Kent Barefield
* 04/30/1992
* USD 330,477.00

This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
will support research on two rather diverse projects in organometallic
chemistry. In one of these projects new metal-containing derivatives of the
molecule decaborane will be synthesized and studied. The new compounds are
expected to be useful as precursors for metal borides, a group of materials
valued for their exceptional thermal stability, strength and hardness. In the
other project the possibility of carrying out organic syntheses on the
diironhexacarbonyl framework will be be explored. The iron compound is a member
of a class of compounds which contain two or more metal atoms per molecule and
which are important as industrial catalysts and as models of metalloenzymes. The
goals of the research project are: (1) To develop novel and potentially useful
proximity-assisted ligand reactions in chemistry which is based on salts of the
mu-CO,mu-RS-diironhexacarbonyl anion. (2) To use the above anions as starting
materials for the synthesis of novel dibridged complexes and to explore the
reactivity of the bridging ligands in these new complexes. (3) To develop
further the organometallic and organic chemistry of decaborane. Of particular
interest is the synthesis of adducts of decaborane with such early transition
metals as titanium, zirconium, hafnium, vanadium, niobium and tantalum.