* 8816756
* Vibrational Spectroscopy of Biological Macromolecules
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Samuel Krimm, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 12/31/1991
* USD 312,899.00

Vibrational spectroscopy is an important physical tool for studying structure.
However, in order to realize its full potential, such spectroscopic studies must
progress beyond the band correlation stage to the use of the rigorous methods of
normal mode analysis, which permit detailed predictions to be made of spectral
frequencies and intensities associated with a given three-dimensional structure.
Dr. Krimm has laid a strong foundation for such approaches by refining an
empirical vibrational force field for the polypeptide chain and applying it to
normal mode calculations and the analyses of structure in some simple
polypeptide systems. He will now extend this approach to a number of new
systems, including more complex globular proteins, as well as develop a more
detailed and theoretically-based force field from quantum mechanical studies.
The determination of the three-dimensional structure of peptides, polypeptides
and proteins continues to be a necessary goal in achieving a molecular
understanding of their biological functioning. While X-ray diffraction is
clearly the most powerful technique for obtaining the structure of a large
molecule at the atomic level, it is not satisfactory for studying conformations
in non-crystalline systems or under a variety of environmental conditions. The
application of spectroscopic methods to the study of protein conformation is of
particular importance, since they can provide equally effective ways of probing
molecular structure. Vibrational spectroscopy has a long history of application
to structural studies on polypeptides and proteins. In recent years it has
become possible to do meaningful normal vibration analyses on such molecules and
make specific predictions of the vibrational frequencies associated with a
proposed structure. As a result, much stronger structural conclusions can be
reached.