* 8816278
* Paleoclimatic and Paleohydrologic Reconstruction in Western China
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Teh-Lung Ku, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1991
* USD 176,293.00

The objective of this research is to establish absolute chronologies and
reconstruct Quaternary climatic and water- balance variations in Qaidam Basin,
an arid, high altitude basin in western China. The study material consists
mainly of long drill cores retrieved by Chinese scientists at the Qinghai Salt
Lakes Institute (QSLI), Academia Sinica. These cores have alternating layers of
evaporitic salts and clastic sediments laid down in varied climatic conditions
through the entire Quaternary or longer. On selected cores, the QSLI scientists
have launched studies of stable isotopes, U-series/14C/paleomagnetic dating,
pollen and grain-size analyses, Ostracods, and major/minor elemental chemistry.
Detailed geochronological studies will be done using accelerator mass-
spectrometric measurements of cosmogenic 26Cl and 10Be, supplemented with
uranium-series dating for the more recent sections. Additionally, 36Cl and
possibly 10Be buildup dating glacial moraines in the Kunlun Mountains bordering
the Qaidam Basin will be carried out to provide a framework for correlating the
glacial fluctuations at the headwaters of the hydrologic systems with the
lacustrine variations at the terminus. The proposed research will be a joint
project with the Chinese scientists at QSLI in that samples will be shared and
all the relevant data will be pooled to arrive at optimal interpre- tations of
the paleoclimatic and paleohydrologic history of the region. Central Asia is one
of the last great "blank areas" in the world with regard to Quaternary climatic
change. It is also an area of particular importance, lying, as it does, near the
center of the world's largest landmass. Therefore, any light this study will
shed on climatic fluctuations would contribute to global paleoclimatological
science. ***