* 8816050
* Lipid and Lipoproteoglycan Hemagglutinins from Nereis
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1994
* Charlotte Russell, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 04/30/1994
* USD 213,080.00

Little is known about the roles of lipids as specific recognition molecules
although hemagglutination by lipids has been reported on several occasions. The
composition, properties, and functions of lipid and lipoproteoglycan
agglutinins, which have been isolated from Nereis coelomic fluid and
coelomocytes, will elucidate their roles in the invertebrate immune response and
their potential for recognizing specific cell receptors. While studying the
phospholipid agglutinins from Nereis, it was discovered that aged preparations
of synthetic unsaturated phosphatidylethanolamines are hemagglutinins. This
observation opens up a second route to obtain appreciable quantities of a
specific class of lipid agglutinin and to define the structural requirements
which confer activity. Chemical analysis, chromatography (2D-TLC, HPLC) and
spectroscopy (MS, FTIR and NMR) are being used to characterize the components
and structures of these agglutinins. Red blood cell (RBC) binding and inhibitor
profiles and the use of enzymically-modified RBC indicate range and specificity
of binding. The effects of these agglutinins on other kinds of cells are being
determined. Light and electron microscopy (EM) are being used to visualize these
interactions and the structures of the lipid aggregates will be studied using EM
and 31 P NMR (for phospho-lipid agglutinins). Specific receptors on susceptible
cells will be isolated. The information from these studies will define the
structures and aggregation state of exogenous lipids which act in a bi- or
multi-valent manner on specific cell surfaces, suggest what kind of binding is
taking place, predict the behavior of other natural or synthetic lipids, and
suggest ways in which lipids, as reagents, can be used in cell manipulation.
Cell-surface interactions mediated by lipids have received very little
attention, although scattered reports have suggested that lipids may play such a
role. Further study of the role of lipids and lipoproteoglycan agglutinins in
the immune-like defense mechanisms of the marine worm, Nereis, promises to
provide important new insights into the more general role of lipids in specific
cellular recognition phenomena.