* 8816085
* Viral Induced dsRNA-Dependent Protein Kinase Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Don Roth, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 07/31/1992
* USD 180,000.00

The long-term goal of this project is to determine the influence of nucleotide
binding and protein phosphorylation on the regulation of pathogenesis and define
specific mechanisms mediating RNA replication. A host encoded,
autophosphorylating, dsRNA dependent protein kinase (p68) has been identified
whose activity is regulated in host plants by virus or viroid infection. The
protein has biochemical and immunological similarities to proteins implicated in
the replication of poliovirus and in the regulation of protein synthesis.
Specific aims of this proposal are directed at determining the role of p68 in
infected and healthy tissues and at studying the mechanisms by which its
activity is regulated. In order to define the function and regulation of this
protein, it is being purified and biochemically characterized to determine the
gene sequence. Antiserum to the protein is being raised and will be used in
localization studies, screening of cDNA libraries and to probe the activity of
the protein. Further studies on the purified protein will include
characterization of the nucleotide binding and phosphorylation stoichometries,
partial sequencing, phosphoamino acid analysis and tryptic peptide mapping in
the presence and absence of dsRNA and use of various nucleic acid species to
define the mechanism by which dsRNA regulates the activity of p68. If time
permits the gene and mRNA sequences will be obtained, yielding information on
the total amino acid sequence of the protein and allowing further
characterization of regulatory events at the genetic level. Viruses and viroids
effectively interact with and regulate host proteins during replication and
pathogenesis. The identification and characterization of host proteins directly
involved in pathogenesis is important to determine fundamental mechanisms
regulating host-pathogen interactions. These studies will provide a foundation
to determine how pathogens regulate host proteins, what effect on disease
development the interaction has, and provide insight into RNA regulatory
mechanisms.***//