* 8816280
* Investigation of the CO2 System during the 1989-GOFS        Expedition in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Taro Takahashi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/1992
* USD 251,360.00

The total CO2 concentration and partial pressure of CO2 will be measured in
discrete water samples during the scheduled 1989-GOFS North Atlantic Expedition
along the 20 W meridian between 33 N and 60N. The total CO2 concentration will
be determined at sea by means of a coulometer with a precision of +1.5 uM/kg or
better, and the CO2 partial pressure will be determined also at sea by means of
equilibrator-gas chromatograph method with a precision of 0.1%. With a team of
two analysts aboard (i.e. one for each instrument), 40 to 45 water samples will
be analyzed per day for each of these CO2 properties. With this rate of data
production and with the precision of measurements, the CO2 distribution
associated with major ocean dynamic features as well as fine features in the CO2
distribution within and below the photic zone of the ocean can be resolved. The
total CO2 and pCO2 data collected during the expedition will become part of the
basic communal data set for the GOFS participants. Using the hydrographic,
biological and chemical data, the following questions will be addressed; 1) the
orgin of a strong CO2 sink area centered at 50 N and 20 W, which was observed in
the surface water during the 1981-TTO/North Atlantic Study; 2) the geographic
and depth variability of the C/P ratio for regenerated nutrients in the water
column using the isopycnal analysis method of Takahashi et al. (1985); and 3)
seasonal changes in the CO2-nutrient chemistry in the subarctic and temperate
gyre regimes, and interaction between these two regimes in terms of the bio-
geochemical processes occurring within the transition zone.