* 8817635
* Research on Antarctic Coastal Ecosystem Rates: (RACER)      Mechanisms of Bloom Formation and Decline
* O/D,OPP
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1994
* Maria Vernet, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 04/30/1994
* USD 562,733.00

Historical data and observations from studies of the coastal Antarctic Peninsula
region provide detailed documentation of massive phytoplankton blooms which
develop within the Gerlache Strait and the southwest portion of the Bransfield
Strait. Hydrographic data indicate that the flow field is relatively quiescent
in the region of bloom formation. The objectives of the proposed work are to
understand the temporal detail regarding the mechanisms leading to formation and
decline of these blooms. This component of the RACER (Research on Antarctic
Coastal Ecosystem Rates) program will utilize an interdisciplinary approach to
resolve the phytoplankton response to physical forcing. The emphasis will be on
high temporal resolution of meteorological forcing of turbulent mixing within
the upper water column, and the response of the phytoplankton. This will be
accomplished with a permanent meteorological station on an island adjacent to
the primary station and rapid profiling of physical- optical-biological
properties. Detailed studies of phytoplankton rate processes including carbon
and nitrogen isotope uptake studies, growth rates determined by radio-carbon
labelling of chlorophyll a, and kinetics of photoadaptation will be carried out.
The photoadaptive status of the phytoplankton crop will be determined from
optical, biochemical, and photosynthetic parameters. This information is
essential for an understanding of the underlying mechanisms of bloom formation.
Such an understanding is required for development of mechanistic models which
are capable of predicting seasonal progression and interannual variability
forced by the physical environment.