* 8817209
* The Preservation and Accumulation of Biogenic Silica and    Organic Carbon in a High-Latitude Environment:  The Ross Sea
* O/D,OPP
* 09/15/1989,02/28/1993
* David DeMaster, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 02/28/1993
* USD 496,562.00

This project is a study of the rates of deposition, seabed regeneration, and
sediment accumulation of biogenic silica and organic carbon in the Ross Sea, and
is part of a coordinated study of the biogenic silica and organic carbon cycling
in the water column and the sediments of the Ross Sea. The antarctic deep sea
and continental shelf environment is the major repository for silica
accumulation in the global ocean, and dominates the global silica budget. The
Ross Sea is a particularly anomalous area in which large amounts of biogenic
silica are accumulating in modern sediments, while the surface production rates
are generally below the global average. Moreover the usual similarity between
the oceanic silicon and carbon cycle does not appear to hold around Antarctica,
and the two cycles are decoupled in that the rate of particulatew carbon
deposition in the modern sediment is very low. The overall project is an
integrated study of production, vertical transport, dissolution, and deposition
processes, using moored instrumentation and direct observations in a series of
transects in the Ross Sea by R/V POLAR DUKE. The approach to be used to quantify
the rates of bottom processes will be to collect box cores, piston cores, and
kasten cores along specific transects in the Ross Sea that included both silica-
rich and silica- poor sediments. Seabed dissolution of silica and degradation of
organic carbon will be evaluated by measuring pore-water profiles of dissolved
silica, carbon dioxide, amonia and nitrogen species, sulfates, and phosphates.
Accumulation rates will be determined from radiochemical chronologies. These
sea-floor studies will provide the closure for the surface production studies
and the water column flux studies that will be carried out by other
investigators cooperating in this project.