* 8817934
* Serengeti Ecosystem Processes: Water or Nitrogen Control?
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1994
* Samuel McNaughton, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 06/30/1994
* USD 1,724,053.00

A research plan of modeling and experimental field studies has been designed to
determine the degree to which tropical savanna grassland ecosystems containing
abundant populations of large, grazing mammals are controlled by water,
nitrogen, grazing, fire, and their interactions. Modeling will focus on
alternative nutrient cycling pathways as affected by those factors, coupling of
cycles of different nutrients, generalizing for a broad range of site conditions
and temporal scales, and simulating experiments impossible in the field. A
uniform split- plot 23 factorial design will be implemented at four experimental
field sites over substantial ranges of precipitation, soil fertility, soil
salinity, primary production, fire, and herbivory representative of a broad span
of arid to subhumid ecosystems. The basic design will be augmented by extensive
plots whose purpose will be to provide better coverage for inherent variability
of physical factors such as climate. Twelve hypotheses about the balances of
controlling factors will be tested with model simulation and field data on
aboveground and belowground net primary productivity, herbivory, plant water and
N status, litterfall, decomposition, and mineralization. Grazers as controllers
of nitrogen cycling and hydrologic balances will be evaluated as an integral
component of modeling and experiments. This project continues to enjoy excellent
support at the home institution. Additionally, the host country science
establishment remains committed to its past levels of receptivity, assistance
and participation. The project group is excellent and well versed in the subject
ecosystem and the necessary, but difficult, remote logistics. It is reasonable
to expect that findings of major significance in fundamental ecology will
continue to be produced by this work. Similarly, one can expect that the
resultant information will be useful in range management, both in Kenya and
elsewhere. The Ecosystem Studies Program recommends that the first year of this
five-year continuing award be supported.