* 8817330
* Phylogeny and Rates of Evolution in Hummingbirds (Aves:     Trochilidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Robert Bleiweiss, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1993
* USD 110,999.00

Adaptive radiation, the process by which species diversify to fill different
ecological roles, is a central phenomenon in the evolution of biological
diversity. Among bird families, the radiation of hummingbirds is exceptional in
scope (over 320 species) and in the detail with which the adaptive significance
of many anatomical features and behaviors have been studied. Our understanding
of their radiation is hampered, however, because relationships among these birds
are poorly understood; hummingbirds lack a fossil record and unrelated species
may converge in anatomical traits characters because of similar nectarfeeding
habits. Drs. Bleiweiss and Kirsch will examine the evolutionary relationships of
hummingbirds by comparing directly their genetic material using the technique of
DNA/DNA hybridization. With these data they will elucidate the
interrelationships among many hummingbird genera, and determine which bird group
is the family's closest relative. Using this information Drs. Bleiweiss and
Kirsch will conduct several natural experiments that will test how DNA evolves.
Hummingbirds are well-suited for such experiments because they represent the
extreme among birds in several features presumed to affect rates of genetic
change. The study will provide an important framework for understanding several
basic evolutionary mechanisms associated with adaptive radiations. //