* 8817024
* Physical and Chemical Evaluations of Diamonds and Their     Mineral  Inclusions from Kimberlite in the Colorado-Wyoming State Line District
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1991
* Malcolm McCallum, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 09/30/1991
* USD 51,400.00

Diamonds in kimberlite apparently reflect physiochemical conditions associated
with ancient mantle processes. Chemistries of diamond and of included mineral
grains are indicative of crystallization environments (e.g. peridotitic vs.
eclogitic affinity), and P-T equilibration values can be calculated from some of
these data. Parcels of diamonds from all but two recovery sites in the Colorado-
Wyoming State Line Kimberlite District are available for study and a detailed
physical and chemical evaluation is proposed. The State Line diamonds constitute
the largest and only known comprehensive assemblage of diamonds in North America
that represents an entire kimberlite field. Determination of the major physical
properties (particularly those related to resorption and deformational
processes) of these diamonds will permit evaluation of growth environment(s) and
changes that may have occurred during and/or after emplacement of host
kimberlite. Supporting information will be derived from diamond chemistry (trace
elements and C isotopes) and chemistry of included minerals. These data will be
utilized to assess diamond genesis models and petrologic models of the upper
mantle under the southern Rocky Mountains. Special attentian will be directed
toward the problem of a suggested relationship between eclogitic affinity
diamonds and subducted oceanic crust.