* 8817992
* Molecular Systematics of the Nymphaeales
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Donald Les, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1992
* USD 188,800.00

An important issue in plant evolution involves the origin of the flowering
plants. Drs. Donald Les and Charles Wimpee of the University of Wisconsin at
Milwaukee will study this problem by focusing on phylogenetic relationships
among primitive aquatic plants in the waterlily group, the ten genera of the
Nymphaeales. Because these plants possess features that are considered
primitive, they may represent an early "branch" off the evolutionary line
leading to the remainder of the flowering plants. Biologists, however, have been
unable to specify the precise relationships of waterlily taxa to other plants
because the great age of the group has resulted in considerable divergence in
many morphological traits. As a result, the many traits either lost or changed
over time have prevented meaningful estimations of phylogenetic affinity. At the
gene level, the DNA sequence of plants records their evolutionary history as
molecular changes become fixed within related lineages as they diverge (through
mutation) from others. Unlike morphological features, genes may change in their
structure but are seldom lost. As a result, the structure of one gene can be
compared between very distantly related groups that may appear morphologically
dissimilar. Using techniques of modern molecular biology, Drs. Les and Wimpee
will examine this record of molecular evolutionary change by "sequencing" the
nucleotides of the DNA molecule itself. They have chosen to sequence a gene
called "rbcl" which codes for a portion of an important enzyme of photosynthesis
in plants. Using recent innovations including the polymerase chain reaction,
they will examine DNA sequences in all ten waterlily genera and in several
putatively related groups. By computer analysis of the sequence data, they will
reconstruct the phylogenetic or branching pattern among these genera, based upon
the genealogy of molecular changes that have occurred as the taxa diverged. This
work will clarify the evolutionary relationships among primitive flowering
plants, and it may also provide better understanding of the ancestors, and hence
origin, of flowering plants.