* 8817748
* Synthesis and Chemistry of Bridgehead Alkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Kenneth Shea, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1991
* USD 244,977.00

This research program of Dr. Kenneth J. Shea will be supported by the Organic
Synthesis Program in the Department of Chemistry at the University of California
at Irvine. The principal investigator will investigate the chemical and physical
properties of the carbon-carbon double bond, the so-called olefinic group, under
structural conditions that will distort the unsaturated linkage under
geometrically controlled, well defined conditions. The changes in properties
will be utilized to develop new methods of synthesizing complex structures. The
carbon-carbon double bond is perhaps the most ubiquitous functional group in
organic chemistry. The chemical and spectroscopic properties of this functional
group may be significantly modified by twisting the double bond out of
coplanarity. This project involves the synthesis of molecules that contain
twisted carbon-carbon double bonds. The synthetic effort makes available
molecules that permit study of how the chemical and spectroscopic properties of
carbon-carbon double bonds respond to twisting. One particularly interesting
prospect is to identify reaction manifolds that may be particularly sensitive to
specific molecular deformations. It is also the intention to utilize molecules
with twisted double bonds as key intermediates in the synthesis of
stereochemically complex natural products.