* 8817414
* Biochemical and Molecular Genetic Regulation of Sucrose     Phosphate Synthase in Leaves
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Steven Huber, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 02/28/1993
* USD 195,000.00

Sucrose phosphate synthase (SPS) is a key enzyme in determining the biochemical
capacity of leaves for sucrose synthesis. However, detailed knowledge of SPS at
the biochemical and molecular genetic levels is lacking and must be obtained in
order to understand the regulation of this pivotal enzyme. Study at the
molecular level can be stated as a result of obtaining monoclonal antibodies
against the spinach leaf enzyme (polyclonals are in preparation). Using the
antibodies, direct evidence has been obtained for phosphorylation of SPS in
vivo, and also a partial amino acid sequence has been determined from which and
oligonucleotide probe will be made and used to isolate a cDNA. The proposed
studies will expand on these developments and examine the two subtypes of coarse
control which regulate SPS activity in vivo: covalent modification mechanism;
and 3) produce a DNA probe to the enzyme with which to begin studies of
transcriptional/translational mechanisms that regulate the expression of the SPS
gene. This project investigates the enzymes which determines how much sucrose is
made in leaves of plants, and thereby how much plant growth is possible. This
has been a very elusive enzyme but recent success in raising a monoclonal
antibody now opens the door to a through study now opens the door to a through
study of this critically important enzyme.***//