* 8817275
* RUI: Mechanisms and Structural Components Involved in       Development of Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Steven Ackerman, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1991
* USD 100,000.00

Transcription initiation is a primary site for gene regulation. The goal of this
work is to further define and characterize the mechanism (s) of general and gene
- specific transcription. Basic information will be aquired on the structure and
function of the transcription apparatus and on expression of developmentally
and/ or light regulated genes. Several wheat transcription factors (TFs) have
been isolated. One TF has been purified and footprinted to a DNA promoter, it
appears to be the plant equivalent of animal TFIIA. The transcription complex
formation will be investigated in order to define the intermediate structures
which occur during assembly. Studies will be continued on developing an in vitro
RNA polymerase II transcription system and perfecting an RNA polymerase III in
vitro system. Lastly, studies are begining on identifying gene-specific TFs.
There is a need to improve agricultural crops to yield more ford per - acre and
to increase the nutritional value of these crops. Insect and microbial damage
pose a constant threat to plants and there is also a need for plant more
tolerant of environmental variability and extremes. To develop better plant
species it is now possible to introduce new traits into plant gene pools. Thus
these types of studies are sorely needed and Dr. Ackerman can help with his
expertise.//