* 8817074
* A Study of Trapped Liquid Variations and Coupled Chemical   Trends in the Keweenawan Beaver Bay Gabbro Complex,         Minnesota
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Christopher Chalokwu, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 12/31/1991
* USD 70,628.00

This proposal is to develop techniques for distinguishing cumulate from
intercumulate components in rocks from the Beaver Bay gabbro complex, Minnesota,
using backscatter SEM imaging, Normanski interference-contrast microscopy, and
electron micro- probe traverse. From this study the trapped intercumulus liquid
abundance (i.e., original porosity) will be estimated through summation of all
intercumulate components, in a manner analogous to original porosity estimates
in sandstones. A major study of major element, REE, and other trace element
variations in whole-rocks and in mineral separates is also proposed in order to
examine the relationships between whole-rock chemical composition and abundance
and composition of the cumulate phases. We also wish to understand the
relationship between the variation in the amount of trapped liquid and the
composition of the liquid, and to test whether the hypothesis involving a
compositionally uniform trapped liquid in the Duluth complex applies to Beaver
Bay gabbro. The relatively small size, excellent exposure, complete
stratigraphic sequence, and extreme iron-enrichment differentia- tion trend of
the Beaver Bay gabbro make it well suited for the kind of study proposed here.
The data obtained from this study will also lead to the characterization of the
parent magma composition(s), a description of the crystallization sequences in
the rocks, and an understanding of the processes to strong iron- enrichment
crystallization trends in the complex.