* 8817403
* Quantitative Test for Eustatic Events of 2 - 6 M.Y. Durationin Early Paleozoic Strata of North America
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Michelle Kominz, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 02/28/1991
* USD 115,917.00

We have completed the first phase of developing a new, quantitative method for
analyzing a complex record of cyclicity beginning with the Cambrian strata of
North America. So far we have found two orders of cycles, one consisting of a
single long- term cycle with a wave length of about 70 m.y. and the other
consisting of repeating short-term cycles with wavelengths of 2 to 6 m.y. The
pattern cyclicity has been found to occur consistently within the ancient
passive margins of North America. The form of this complex signal strongly
resembles the form of the controversial eustatic sea level curve for the
Mesozoic and Tertiary that has been constructed using seismic stratigraphic
methods along the submerged margins of the continents. A eustatic mechanism is
also a viable explanation for the Cambrian cyclicity, and, if correct, is
evidence that short-term oscillations of sea level have been a dominant factor
in the evolution of the stratigraphic record for much, if not all, of the
earth's history. A tectonic mechanism cannot be ruled out, however. In addition
to the question of the origin of the cycles, the results of our research have
raised the possibility that the period of the cycles is not random, but further
investigation of this problem is hampered by the lack of a reliable time scale.
Finally, since our analyses have been confined to strata that were deposited
mainly within a carbonate platform, we cannot evaluate the degree to which our
new procedures have general applicability to the stratigraphic record. We will
conduct a two-year program of research to address the questions that have been
raised by the results of our previous work. We will to measure sections in key
localities within the North American craton where it should be possible to both
test the eustatic versus tectonic origin of the cycles and to assess the
validity of our methodology in different depositional environments.