* 8817299
* Mechanisms of Na and Ca Transport Across the Plasma         Membrane of Squid Giant Axons
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Luis Beauge, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

The Na/Ca exchange is a membrane bound mechanism responsible for net Ca
extrusion from the cells. The importance of the Na/Ca exchange is evident from
its ability to extrude large Ca loads; however, an additional fundamental aspect
of this system results from its capacity, under certain conditions, to work in
"reverse" facilitating the net Ca gain and the corresponding increase in the
levels of ionized Ä±Ca! of the cell. The relevance of this function is both
physiological and pathological, for the intracellular Ca concentrations regulate
cardiac muscle contraction and the contraction of the arterial musculature.
Therefore, the understanding of the Na/Ca exchange function can provide insights
into the mechanisms leading to the development of hypertension. The present work
intends to further characterize the Na/Ca exchanger in relation to the
asymmetric properties of the carrier (different reactivity towards intra- and
extracellular ligands). The aim is to establish if that asymmetry is intrinsic
to the system or a consequence of the different ionic and electrical
environments surrounding the intra- and extracellular phases of the cell. This
analysis will allow a comparison between data obtained in intact cells and in
the membrane vesicles from isolated plasma membranes, widening the field of
cellular and molecular research.