* 8817883
* Glycosyltransferases as Immunoglobulin Receptors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Stephen Roth, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 12/31/1991
* USD 118,800.00

Recent data from this laboratory suggests that an IgA receptor, secretory
component (SC) is a galactosyltransferase (GT). In the presence of UDPgalactose,
the enzyme transfers galactose to IgA. In the absence of the sugar donor,
however, the enzyme merely binds to the IgA. The goal of this research is to
determine whether secretory component is a galactosyltrasnferase by cloning and
sequencing the gene that encodes the IgA-specific galactosyl- transferase. To
isolate the gene, antibodies will be used to identify bacteria transfected with
GT cDNA. In addition, a novel, functional screen will be employed. This screen
is based on four, linked enzymes that produce insoluble formazan precipitates
over cells that catalyze the transfer of galactose to a particular acceptor--in
this case, IgA. A functional screen is critical because immunological probes
might not discriminate among structurally related transferases, or transferase
fragments with shared epitopes and similar molecular weights. Recent,
preliminary biochemical, immunological, and functional evidence suggests that a
natually occurring, antibody binding protein, secretory component (which is,
itself, a primitive member of the immunoglobulin superfamily of proteins) may be
an enzyme that not only recognizes and binds to the antibody (IgA) with which it
associates, but also attaches sugar molecules to the IgA. If the critical test
proposed here demonstrates clearly that secretory component is, indeed, a sugar
transfering enzyme, this would be the first clear case in which an extracellular
receptor recognizes its ligand and modifies it chemically by the addition of
sugars. The demonstration of this process would imply a new mechanism by which
receptor-ligand interactions are established and modified and would have
important implications for our understanding of how signals are transmitted
between cells.