* 8817399
* The Impact of Protozoan Zooplankton on the Structure,       Composition and Fate of the North Atlantic Spring Bloom
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Diane Stoecker, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/1992
* USD 348,376.00

Recent field studies strongly implicate nano- and picoplankton as the dominant
primary producers in the open ocean. Their rapid response times to changes in
food supply are thought to maintain substantial coupling between production and
consumption in the euphotic zone. Yet sediment trap collections indicate that
significant episodes of vertical particle flux from the upper mixed layer to the
seafloor are associated with phytoplankton blooms. The blooms themselves are
offered as evidence of decoupling, presumably between macrozooplankton and
larger size classes of phytoplankton. These conflicting hypotheses underscore
the fact that the relative importance of small and large phytoplankton in the
open sea, the role of protozoan and metazoan grazers in regulating their
dynamics, the temporal and spatial heterogeneity of these processes, and their
relationship to particle export out of the mixed layer are not well known. These
ideas have coalesced into an international study (JGOFS) of the origin and fate
of the spring bloom in the Northeast Atlantic Ocean. This portion of the study
will quantify the abundance, biomass, taxonomic, and trophic composition of
autotrophic picoplankton, autotrophic and heterotrophic nanoplankton, and
phagotrophic protozoans, and measure the grazing impact and growth rates of
protozooplankton. These studies will be conducted using sophisticated
technology, including automated color image analysis, epifluorescence and
electron microscopy, and HPLC. The results will be used to analyze the role of
protozoan zooplankton in preserving coupling between the production,
consumption, and export of particulate organic matter in the upper ocean.