* 8817662
* Paleontology, Sedimentology, and Isotopic Geochemistry of   the Middle Proterozoic Bangemall Group, Western Australia
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Andrew Knoll, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1991
* USD 109,993.00

For the past century, most paleontological research has concentrated on
sedimentary rocks deposited over the past 550 million years. It is now clear,
however, that this conspicuous record of animals and plants documents only the
latest 15% of the history of life on Earth. The earlier (pre-animal) biological
record is written in the fossils of microorganisms, as well as in the chemical
traces of microbial activity contained in sedimentary rocks. Rocks of Late
Proterozoic age (900-550 million years) contain a rich fossil record that
includes diverse planktonic algae and seaweeds, as well as bacteria of many
kinds. The fossils indicate that this was a period of rapid evolutionary change.
Chemical and geological data further suggest that the Late Proterozoic Earth was
characterized by major changes in climate, tectonics, atmospheric chemistry, and
the cycling of biologically important elements. In contrast, rocks of Early
Proterozoic age (2500-1800 million years) reflect a very different world -- one
in which an exclusively bacterial biota thrived in environments unaffected by
the kinds of climatic and biogeochemical variability seen in the Late
Proterozoic era. The key to understanding the transition from the Early
Proterozoic Earth to the Late Proterozoic planet clearly must lie in rocks
deposited during Middle Proterozoic times (1800- 900 million years). Careful
field and laboratory studies will be conducted of the 1400-1300 million year of
Bangemall Group, Western Australia -- a suite of rocks especially well suited to
yield critical information on biological and environmental change during this
period. Field measurements of the thickness, composition, and characteristic
features of these rocks will be made; this will permit determination of the age
and environmental relationships of the rocks. Samples collected within this
matrix will be examined for their microfossil content, rock fabric and
alteration history, and geochemistry (especially the ratios of the isotopes of
carbon and strontium contained in certain of these rocks). The result will be a
multidisciplinary data set that will provide critical insights into Middle
Proterozoic biology and environments. Such data are of great importance in
efforts to understand life's early evolution and how biology and Earth surface
environments have influenced each other through time to produce the modern
world. Although this research is basic in nature, it has important applications
to mineral and petroleum exploration in Proterozoic rocks. Documentation of
fossil and geochemical marker distributions will improve our ability to
correlate Proterozoic rocks, the important first step in geological prospecting.
A better understanding of Earth's environmental history will additionally serve
to constrain patterns of exploration for the rich deposits of stratabound ores
locked in Proterozoic sedimentary rocks.