* 8817373
* Assembly of a Multimeric Membrane Protein Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1994
* Steven Theg, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 03/31/1994
* USD 258,600.00

Many enzymes and structural proteins are multimeric complexes made up of a
number of identical or different subunits. For those complexes located within
sub-cellular organelles, assembly often does not proceed until the
cytoplasmically synthesized subunits are translocated into the organelle. The
photosynthetic oxygen-evolving enzyme complex (OEC) of chloroplasts is one such
complex which is minimally composed of three nuclear-encoded polypeptides in
association with five chloroplast-encoded subunits. This project focuses on the
assembly of the OEC in organello by presenting the three nuclear-encoded
subunits, synthesized in vitro from cloned genes, to isolated intact
chloroplasts. The investigation will proceed in two sequential phases. In the
first, the experimental conditions allowing the efficient association of the
three extrinsic subunits with PS II will be optimized, and the state of the
newly assembled OEC will be evaluated. Different conditions will be examined for
their ability to produce newly assembled complexes which most closely resemble
those formed in vivo. In the second phase, some of the mechanistic details
concerning OEC assembly will be elucidated, such as the presence of pools of
unassembled subunits within the chloroplasts, the requirement for de novo
synthesis of chloroplast-encoded PS II reaction center proteins, and the
lifetimes of unassembled subunits in the lumen. Where possible, these results
will be used to evaluate general models of protein complex assembly, and the
regulation and control thereof. The living cell contains complex machinery for
many of its functions. These complex assemblages are made up of components
(proteins) which are made in different compartments of the cell. The process by
which these are made, transported and assembled serves to control the cell's
metabolism. This project studies a complex of photosynthesis but the general
principles being elucidated apply to many cell processes.