* 8817184
* Petrogenesis of Triassic Intrusions, SW Maine:  Forerunners of WMMS Igneous Activity
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Wallace Bothner, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 12/31/1991
* USD 50,000.00

Anorogeneic igneous activity during the Mesozoic in New England was a long-
lived and petrologically varied magmatic event. Three major pulses of magmatism
are recognized: (1) an early Triassic phase, (2) a spatially restricted and
voluminous Jurassic pulse, and (3) a regionally extensive Cretaceous phase.
Modern petrologic investigations have concentrated on two later phases;
petrogenetic conclusions vary from simple crustal anatexis to combined crustal
assimilation and fractional crystallization (AFC) of mafic, mantle-derived
magmas. In contrast, the earliest phase of activity, the Triassic event, has
been petrochemically ignored. Exposed only in SW Maine, this activity is
primarily represented by the Mt. Agamenticus complex (alkaline syenite to
granite) and the Abbott Mountain stock (syenite). Using modern petrochemical
techniques and geochronology (phase petrology, major, trace, and rare earth
element geochemistry, Sr, Pb, and Nd isotope geochemistry, and 40Ar/39Ar isotope
geochronology) the proposed research will carefully characterize these
intrusions and develop comprehensive petrogenetic solutions. Preliminary results
suggest that crustal anatexis and not AFC of mafic magmas is important in the
genesis of these plutons. If so, then this Triassic magmatic event may be
similar to the later Jurassic pulse and can be considered the forerunner of that
activity. Comparison of petrogenetic models developed for all of the Mesozoic
igneous events should increase our understanding of the evolution of this
'anorogenic' magmatism and provide better constraints on the nature of the
tectono/thermal activity that was is ultimate cause.