* 8817953
* Molecular Systematics of Pinus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Steven Strauss, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1993
* USD 185,800.00

Pines, conifers of the genus Pinus, are among the most geographically
widespread and most economically important trees of the northern hemisphere.
Whereas many aspects of the biology of pines are well known, especially
characteristics relevant to forestry, evolutionary relationships among the ca.
100 species of pines and relationships with other living and fossil conifers are
still controversial. Improved taxonomic knowledge of phylogenetic affinities is
likely to aid improvements in breeding techniques and management of forest
resources, as well as clarify genealogical lineages among pines and related
conifers. Using modern methods of molecular biology, including the new methods
of polymerase-chain-reaction to amplify targeted DNA molecules for nucleotide
sequencing, Dr. Steven Strauss of Oregon State University will study samples of
all the taxonomic subsections of the genus Pinus and determine an evolutionary
framework through comparisons of DNA differences. Preliminary results from Dr.
Strauss's laboratory demonstrate the feasibility of the techniques; the data
promise robust findings on the genomic changes that have occurred during
evolutionary divergence of pine species. When correlated with the well-known
record of fossil pines, the molecular findings may enable calibration of a
"molecular clock" of DNA changes in this group of gymnosperms.