* 8817203
* Gold and Copper Ores in the Acid-Sulfate Volcanic           Environment:  Are They Genetically Related?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Ulrich Petersen, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 12/31/1991
* USD 49,780.00

Epithermal gold, silver and copper deposits in volcanic environments have been
divided into "adularia-sericite" and "acid-sulfate" types. The adularia-sericite
gold deposits are more numerous and have been well studied, their environment of
formation being further clarified by studies of active geothermal systems. These
deposits formed from heat near-neutral and low salinity alkali chloride waters
under reducing conditions. In contrast, the acid-sulfate type gold, silver and
copper deposits are relatively scarce and few have been studied in detail using
modern techniques. In these deposits the enargite and the alunite appear to have
formed from acid waters with relatively high sulfur and oxygen fugacities, but
it is not certain if the gold was also transported and deposited under these
conditions. It is possible that the gold ores formed as a result of a separate,
generally later but spatially superimposed process. We intend to resolve this
uncertainty by making an integrated geochemical and isotopic investigation of
the El Indio (Chile) deposit, where very high grade gold ore formed after the
enargite mineralization, sometimes in different structures. This will allow us
to study separately the conditions of formation of the gold and the copper ores,
and thus clarify if both belong to a single evolutionary process or if they
result from quite different processes that coincide geographically, perhaps
because both are linked to the same intrusive and volcanic locus.