* 8817665
* REU:  Animal Influences on the Aquatic Landscape: Vegetative Patterns, Successional Transitions, and Nutrient Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1989,03/31/1994
* John Pastor, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 03/31/1994
* USD 823,200.00

This proposal addresses the effect of hydrologic modifications by beaver on
vegetative patterns, successional transitions, and the distribution of nutrients
on the aquatic portion of the boreal forest landscape. The research is oriented
around three related predictions (1) The physical structure of the landscape
determines pond establishment and location, wetland shape and seasonal dynamics,
but biological feedbacks (beaver- food, organic matter-redox potential)
determine pond abandonment and long-term dynamics of the landscape. (2)
Variability in transition probabilities is determined by variations in the
hydrologic regime and the food supply over different temporal scales. Different
lag times in various processes produce multisuccessional pathways and multiple
equilibria. (3) Resultant nutrient pathways are a response to beaver population
dynamics, lag-time in the system, topography, and history of the affected areas.
The result is manifested by vegetative succession patterns from unique
combinations of nutrient characteristics, hydrology, and initial vegetation. The
hypotheses will be tested by quantifying beaver- landscape interactions on the
294 km2 Kabetogama Peninsula in northern Minnesota from aerial photographs taken
on 14 dates from 1927 to 1991 (65 yrs). Field studies will be conducted of the
food supply, hydrology, redox potential, and nutrient availability. Experimental
nutrient manipulations of plots will be used to guage plant community response
to changing hydrologic conditions. These results will be coupled with
information on beaver population dynamics to examine landscape patch dynamics
using nested, non-stationary Markovian models. The results of this research will
have direct ecosystem implications for understanding the dynamics of spatial and
temporal transitions over various scales, the role of a keystone herbivore in
influencing landscape patch and boundary dynamics, multisuccessional pathways,
landscape nutrient economies, and lag-time responses within ecosystems.