* 8817812
* The Stratigraphy of Late Pleistocene Amazon Fan Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Roger Flood, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 01/31/1991
* USD 36,001.00

The Amazon Deep-Sea Fan is a typical large modern deep-sea fan. Past studies
have shown the structure and surface morphology of the fan, including the
location and character of the most recently active channel. Cores collected in
the vicinity of this channel sample the sediments deposited by channelized flows
before activity cease following post-glacial sea level rise. We need to
determine dates on, and to correlate between, cores on the fan to relate
sediment sequence to sea level and to each other. We propose here (1) to develop
a stratigraphy which will allow us to determine the age of sedimentary activity
of the fan, (2) to use morphological and sedimentological data to determine the
likely characteristics of latest Pleistocene channelized turbidity currents and
(3) to integrate the age and sediment facies data with the morphologic and
seismic data available on the fan. The stratigraphy will be based on delta 0-18
curves supplemented with C-14 dates. Delta 0-18 can be measured on samples
containing few foraminifera, an advantage in cores with high sedimentation
rates. C-14 dates on planktonic foraminifera and occasional wood fragments
(using AMS techniques) and pollen analysis will constrain the
chronostratigraphy. Benchmark stratigraphies, developed in areas where downslope
flows are minimal, will be carefully brought to areas where downslope flows are
more common, and zones of downslope transport will be identified based on
structure and grain size characteristics. The high- resolution 0-18 stratigraphy
will also help us to assess the role of the Amazon River, the North Brazil
Coastal Current and the Equatorial Countercurrent in determining late
glacial/early interglacial paleoclimate.