* 8817820
* Ecophysiology of Sunfleck Utilization by Understory Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Robert Pearcy, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 12/31/1992
* USD 178,101.00

This research will examine how sunflecks in forest understories affect the
growth, reproduction and ecological performance of plants. The availability of
light for photosynthesis limits plant growth in the understory and much of the
light that is received comes in the form of brief periods of direct sunlight
(sunflecks) that penetrate holes in the overstory canopy. Sunflecks and the
larger sun "patches" created by tree or branch falls are ecologically important
but little studied. These are highly variable both spatially and temporally
because of differences in overstory canopy structure. Research in this proposal
will examine how light of different frequencies and durations. influences growth
performance. How plants acclimate to fluctuating light and the constraints to
efficient utilization of this light will also be investigated. The research will
be carried out primarily on a tropical forest understory herb, Alocasia
macrorrhiza. Understory herbs are an important but poorly understood component
of tropical forests. This work has several implications for forest management
and agriculture. Regeneration of forests occurs through establishment of
seedings in the understory or in gaps. An understanding of the environmental and
physiological controls on the growth and ecology of these plants is therefore
important for understanding how to manage and maintain these forests.