* 8817950
* Sparrows in a Complex Habitat Mosaic:  An Approach to       Studying Populations in a Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* H. Ronald Pulliam, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 08/31/1992
* USD 223,249.00

A new technique is offered that combines information on food supply, feeding
rates and vegetative cover to predict the feeding sites of several sparrow
species. New research will determine to what extent this technique which has
been successful on a very local scale, can be used to predict the abundance
andhabitat distributions of these same species in a complex mosaic of many
habitats. An "iso-preference" technique will be employed at the local scale of
measure habitat preferences quantitatively and to predict how the distribution
of several species will change as a function of food depletion and habitat
manipulations. The iso- preference technique ranks habitats according to
preference of each species based on food and cover characteristics of the
habitats. To predict patterns of habitat utilization, information on habitat
preference and habitat availability must be combined. Therefore, it is proposed
to create a mosiac of experimental habitats in replicate old-field landscapes.
The food and cover characteristics of both the experimental habitats and the
old-field matrix surrounding them will be manipulated. Since limitations of this
approach of "scaling up" from the local to the landscape scale are recognized,
simultaneous "scaling down" will be done by initiating a study in larger, more
natural landscapes. The scaling down will determine how characteristics of the
matrix in which a study site is embedded influence the abundance and
distribution of sparrow species on the focal study site. With this hierarchial
approach, the extent to which variation in sparrow abundance and community
structure is controlled in the resources on the study sites versus differences
in the characteristics of the surrounding landscapes will be determined.