* 8817254
* Kinetics of Metamorhpic Processes in the Contact Aureoles   of Basalt Feeder Dikes, Killala Bay, Ireland
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Raymond Joesten, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 06/30/1991
* USD 34,994.00

Emplacement of basaltic feeder dikes in limestone at Killala Bay produced
grossular- and wollastonite-bearing assemblage in the aureoles of small (1.5 and
5.3m) dikes and in the outer aureole of a 50m dike, which has very high
temperature assemblages in its inner aureole and which has assimilated limestone
along its contact. Numerical modelling of the thermal histories of these
aureoles allows them to be used as natural experiments from which kinetic
parameters for the coarsening of calcite, wollastonite and quartz can be
recovered. Pressure, temperature, fluid composition and fluid/rock ratio in the
aureoles will be determined using stratigraphy, mineral assemblages and
compositions, and thermochemical and reaction-progress calculations for buffer
assemblages so that a numerical thermal history model involving multiple
episodes of feeder flow, magmatic crystallization and cooling can be calibrated.
Measured grain-size distributions will be use to distinguish the coarsening
mechanisms of Ostwald ripening and normal grain growth, and the variation of the
mean grain size with distance from the contact will be used to retrieve material
constants and activation energies for grain growth. This work will "calibrate"
the natural laboratory for the analysis of the kinetics of wollastonite and
grossular nucleation and annealing of quartz dislocations in future studies.