* 8817807
* Japan Long-Term Visit: Reproductive Synchronization of Long-Spined Sea Urchins
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1990
* John Pearse, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1990
* USD 41,800.00

This award will support Dr. John S. Pearse of the University of California,
Santa Cruz, to collaborate with Profs. Masashi Yamaguchi and Kiyoshi Yamazato of
the University of the Ryukus, Okinawa, and Naomasa Kobayashi, of Doshisha
University, Kyoto, for six months beginning in March, 1989. They will study the
development of two tropical Indo-West Pacific species of sea urchins of the
genus Diadema. In order to study the monthly gametogenic rhythms and how these
rhythms are related to moonlight and tidal cycles, and how these rhythms affect
fertility of these species, the researchers will 1) determine the monthly
gametogenic rhythms of the species at different locations; 2) monitor
populations to detect spawning events; 3) maintain animals in artificially
illuminated laboratory conditions to simulate moonlight cycles and 4) attempt to
rear the larvae of both species and, if possible, hybrids, through metamor-
phosis. This cooperative project will provide Dr. Pearse with access to Japanese
components of widespread and ecologically important members of the tropical
shallow-water fauna, as well as to support from Japanese laboratories and
researchers with experience in raising and studying these species. Since these
sea urchins are prevalent, cause bioerosion, and create a nuisance for fishermen
and swimmers, further understanding of their reproductive patterns may have
important ecological effects.