* 8817123
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Metallothionein in Biology and Medicine/December 1989/Honolulu, HI
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Curtis Klaassen, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 11/30/1990
* USD 12,630.00

This award will support a seminar on "Metallothionein in Biology and Medicine,"
organized by Prof. Curtis D. Klaassen of the University of Kansas Medical
Center, and Prof. Kazuo Suzuki of the National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba, Japan. Participants will meet in Honolulu, Hawaii, in December
1989 to exchange recent research results and promote future joint research
projects. The seminar will deal with the general biological and chemical
properties of metallothionein; its physiological and nutritional aspects;
transport of metallothionein within the body; diseases derived from
metallothionein; methods of analysis of metallothionein; and use of
metallothionein in medicine. Metallothionein is a protein which is easily taken
into tissues in the presence of cadmium. Since current work on metallothionein
grew out of cadmium contamination of the Japanese environment and subsequent
physiological disorders, the Japanese have become expert in this field. This
seminar may improve the understanding of metallothionein: while the dynamics of
metallothionein uptake and transport has been to some extent well-delineated
over the past few years, its function is still unknown. The multidisciplinary
approach evidenced by the diversity of those invited may lead to a breakthrough
in understanding the function of metallothionein, and therefore its good and bad
effects.