* 8817013
* Isotope Investigation of Mass Transfer in a Sedimentary Basin
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1992
* James Boles, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 03/31/1992
* USD 118,591.00

We propose to investigate fluid-rock interaction and mass transfer rates in the
San Joaquin basin. The work will test models of fluid flux in sedimentary basins
including: compaction driven flow, thermal driven convection, and meteoric
recharge. Our approach is to use 87Sr/86Sr and 143Nd/144Nd ratios as isotopic
tracers, in combination with our present understanding of diagenetic reactions,
to determine calcium mobility in the basin. We will compare calcium sinks
(carbonate and laumontite cements) with potential calcium sources including:
marine biogenetic carbonate, detrital Ca-smectite, and Ca-plagioclase.
Preliminary work suggests that Ca-plagioclase is the most likely source for
calcium in calcite cements. We believe that this study will offer a unique
insight into basin diagenetic processes, and owing to the well-constrained
geology in this area, we believe it is ideal for a study of this type. Our
success will depend on being able to recognize isotopic "fingerprints" for each
potential source, to be able to reliably measure isotopic ratios in cements, and
to be able to predict timing of reactions. Our work to date strongly indicates
that Sierran plagioclase is the only Sr isotopic source with ratios low enough
to account for those observed in cements at North Coles Levee, a Miocene
reservoir we have examined in detail. In addition, dissolution of plagioclase
would uniquely account for the decreasing ratios observed in progressively
modified modern pore waters of the basin. We propose to extend these studies at
North Coles Levee into a basinwide scale. To test the hypothesis of plagioclase
sourced Ca, we propose to examine four areas of varying feldspar alteration: 1)
areas with unaltered plagioclase, 2) with abundant plagioclase dissolution, 3)
with abundant plagioclase albitization, and 4) with K-feldspar dissolution but
without plagioclase alteration. In each area we will measure isotopic values for
cements and potential Ca sources including plagioclase. Pore waters will also be
measured to monitor the effects of fluid-rock interaction on Sr isotopic ratios.
Mass transfer rates will be calculated for each area where possible. Finally by
cooperative research with other groups we plan to compare our estimates of mass
transfer with those predicted by various hydrologic models. We believe this
controlled, multi- disciplinary project has great potential for understanding
mass transfer on a basin-wide scale.