* 8817779
* RACER: Development, Growth and Production of                Macrozooplankton, Including Krill
* O/D,OPP
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1993
* Edward Brinton, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 10/31/1993
* USD 943,453.00

Throughout the world ocean, coastal regions dominate biological production;
however, knowledge of biological processes in the Southern Ocean derives mostly
from studies of the circumpolar open sea. Ecosystem dynamics of Antarctic
coastal zones are virtually unknown. The present objective is to focus on the
northern Gerlache Strait, where the coastal ecosystem processes will be studied
in detail. This portion of RACER (Research on Antarctic Coastal Ecosystem Rates)
will study the development, growth and productivity of zooplankton, including
krill. Specific new objectives are to determine physical circulation, residence
time and dispersion of populations; events leading up to the annual spawning of
krill; growth and development of 3 principal species (Euphausia superba,
Calanoides acutus and Metridia gerlachei); flux of carbon and nitrogen through
macrozooplankton. Studies will include the use of ARGOS-linked Lagrangian
drifters, zooplankton nets and shipboard laboratory experiments. Principal
analytical methods will include computation of Lagrangian flows and dispersion
rates, cohort analysis and size-dependent modelling of zooplankton production.
Biodynamic processes in the northern Gerlache Strait may be characteristic of
many nearshore marine environments of Antarctica. This study may therefore
provide new insights into the functioning of Antarctic coastal ecosystems.