* 8817740
* Crop Surveys Using Space Technology, Guest Scientist at the Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute in New    Delhi, India, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,12/31/1989
* Raj Chhikara, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1989
* USD 13,237.00

Description: This project provides support for a U.S. scientist, Dr. Raj. S.
Chhikara, Department of Natural Sciences, University of Houston-Clear Lake,
(UHCL), Houston, TX, to spend a sabbatical leave at the Indian Agricultural
Statistics Research Institute (IASRI) in New Delhi. The cooperating scientist is
Dr. Randhir Singh, Senior Professor at IASRI. Chhikara plans to investigate the
applicability of remote sensing technology to study the Indian environment and
to research for efficient estimation of agricultural resources, including
development of efficient sampling strategies and crop discriminants and a yield
forecasting model. In addition he will finalize a research plan and task details
for a collaborative research program between his university and IASRI. Scope:
The UHCL has been involved for several years in the evaluation of the satellite
derived crop acreage estimation methodology as implemented by the U.S. National
Agricultural Statistics Service (USDA). IASRI has a number of experts in
sampling and experimental design. The interaction during this visit will be
beneficial to both sides, and should help extend the use of satellite data for
the development of agricultural statistics on a global basis.