* 8817402
* Sedimentologic and Chronostratigraphic Analysis of Cenozoic Strata, Southern Margin of Colorado Plateau: Tectonic and   Paleogeographic Implications
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Larry Middleton, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 05/31/1992
* USD 80,000.00

Cenozoic nonmarine sedimentary and volcanic rocks of the southern Colorado
Plateau and adjacent Verde Basin are divided into five tectonostratigraphic
packages that document stages in the evolution of the transition zone between
the Colorado Plateau and the Basin and Range provinces in central Arizona. These
two units are differentiated on the basis of, 1) geomorphic position, 2) clast
composition and provenance variations, 3) tectonic setting and structural
history, and 4) radiometric ages of intercalcated volcanics. The areal extent,
lithology, provenance, depositional environments and age of these stratigraphic
units are poorly constrained, and differences of opinion exist as to their
interpretation. One school of thought is that the Colorado Plateau escarpment
was formed by erosion during the Oligocene, and the other is that it was formed
by extensional faulting beginning during the Miocene, less than 10 million years
ago. Until these contradictory interpretations of the geologic history of the
Plateau margin are resolved, the tectonic and geomorphic history of the Colorado
Plateau and Basin and Range provinces remains speculative. This study will
establish the age relationships, and environmental and tectonic history of the
Cenozoic rocks in the southern Colorado Plateau-Mogollon Rim area. These
interpretations will be based on petrologic and facies analyses of five
tectonostratigraphic packages and more precise definition of their ages based on
paleontology, K-Ar and fission track dating.