* 8817746
* Structure and Dynamic Behavior of Selected Organolithium    Compounds
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1994
* Gideon Fraenkel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Paul W. Jennings
* 06/30/1994
* USD 562,080.00

This project in the Organic Dynamics Program by Professor Gideon Fraenkel of the
Ohio State University is aimed at the elucidation of the structure of
organolithium compounds by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy. In addition,
the Ohio State group will investigate the way that organolithium compounds group
together in solution (aggregation). This work is highly significant in that
organolithiums are widely used by organic chemists as intermediates in the
synthesis of new and important compounds. A variety of NMR techniques including
line-shape analysis and NOE experiments will be applied to the study of
structure and dynamic behavior of model solvated organolithium compounds
enriched in Li-6, and if necessary C-13 at the alpha carbon, selected to reveal
specific effects and interactions. Use of very low temperature, down to 120
degrees K, and low concentrations to ensure that C-Li bond exchange processes do
not perturb the spectra, will allow observation of specific structural features.
These include a) possible interactions of (RLi)n species with isolated double
bonds; b) nature of ligand solvation and accompanying thermodynamics; c) the
degree of non-planarity of allyllithiums; and d) structure of theoretically
interesting dilithium compounds. Cisoid diamines and triamines, some chiral,
will be synthesized to see if they stabilize different (RLi)n aggregates, and
also to ensure slow lithium ligand exchange. The architecture of ion pairs will
be studied via NOE experiments including ion pairs in liquid crystal media
making use of the structural dependence of the dipolar couplings. Exchange
averaging in the latter spectra will allow measurement of very fast rates of
exchange of ion among ion pairs. The signal averaging of C-13/Li-6 couplings and
shifts among species seen in NMR data for RLi compounds will be analyzed to
determine exchange rates, and via kinetics and structural information, to learn
about exchange mechanisms at equilibrium.