* 8817698
* Gulf Stream Upper Ocean Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Terrence Joyce, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/1991
* USD 262,138.00

Soon after it leaves Cape Hatteras, the Gulf Stream transport increases to
values in excess of 150 SV, over five times that of the Flordia Current and what
is necessary for the interior Sverdrup balance. Little is known about the
structure of the recirculation regime responsible for the transport increase or
the nature of its variability. Altimeter measurements at the sea surface suggest
that the spectrum of variability is brood, encompassing rapid, possibly
barotropic shifts in the Gulf Stream with time scales of order a month or less,
to annual and interannual variations, which may be both barotropic and
baroclinic, the latter associated with the field of mass. We propose to
investigate this range of time scales by combining repeated shipboard
measurements of the Gulf Stream, mainly using XBT and acoustic Doppler sections,
with satellite infraed images and GEOSAT altimeter data. The shipbopard
measurements will provide some estimates of the rapid variability of the Gulf
Stream system and its vertical structure to depths of 800 m with special
emphasis on a line from the continental shelfff south of the Cape Cod to
Bermuda. Inverse calculations combining varying subsets of the shipboard data
can assess the degree to which the rapid mode of variability affects resulting
solutions for mass budgets of the region. Two cruises are envisioned, each of
17-day duration, at times of the year when the Gulf Stream reaches its
climatological exetrmes of position and transport. Together with the altimeter
data, each cruise will provide an independent estimate of the surface geoid
along a track coincident with the GEOSAT altimeter as well as the three
dimensional structure of the Gulf Stream system at the time of the cruises. The
altimetric measurements will be used to extend the spatial and temproal sampling
from the cruises to encompass scales of meanders and annual/interannual
variability. The methods employed are analogous to those envisioned for the
Topography Experiment for Ocean Circulation (TOPEX and French POSEIDON) and in
situ data during the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE).