* 8817337
* Systematics of the Prodoxidae and the Phylogeny of Host     Associations and Mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1992
* John Thompson, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1992
* USD 252,968.00

This proposal addresses one of the central problems in the study of
coevolution: how interactions between species evolve during population
differentiation and speciation. Much of the diversity of insect species has
arisen through the differentiation of insect populations onto different plant
species. This study focuses on one of the classically cited cases of coevolution
between insects and plants in which pollinators of the plants have evolved as
seed parasites. Specifically, the study will analyze the systematics of the
Prodoxidae (Lepidoptera) and the phylogeny of host associations and interactions
between these moths and their host plants. These moths incluce the yucca moths
and related genera, and they have evolved species onto a wide variety of plants
over time. The study will take advantage of recent findings on host associations
and mutualism in Greya spp: some of these species are exclusively seed
parasites, whereas other species appear to be the primary pollinators of their
hosts. Many of the same behaviors seen in Greya also occur in the closely
related genera that are pollinators of yuccas. The study has three specific
objectives. In Objective 1 the evolutionary history of the Prodoxidae will be
inferred using sequence analyses of mtDNA. Objective 2 is to study the
systematic relationships within Greya, the pattern of association with plant
taxa that has evolved within this genus, and the origins of the morphologies and
behaviors important to the evolution of mutualism. Finally, Objective 3 is to
study differentiation in the interactions between Greya politella and its host
plants. Greya politella is the widespread species in the genus, and the outcomes
of interactions between these moths and their host plants appear to vary among
populations. Consequently, study of the systematics of Greya, its relationship
to other prodoxid genera, and the distribution of behaviors involved in
mutualism will provide an opportunity to study the evolutionary processes that
shape the outcomes of coevolution. These results will provide a more solid
empirical basis for evaluating current theories on the mechanisms of
coevolutionary change.