* 8817889
* The Energetics of Enzyme Catalysis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1993
* Jeremy Knowles, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1993
* USD 450,000.00

This work is aimed at a deeper understanding of the nature of enzyme catalysis.
Two groups of enzymes will be studied. First, the mechanism of amino acid
racemases will be investigated, with particular focus on glutamate racemase and
diaminopimelate empimerase. Each of these enzymes catalyzes the racemization of
an x-amino acid center without the need for or involvement of pyridoxal
phosphate. The enzymes will be isolated and characterized, and the energetics of
their reactions will be explored by the use of isotope exchange, isotope tracer,
and perturbation experiments. The second group of enzymes are the hydratases,
and the primary goal here will be to determine whether the reactions proceed in
a concerted or stepwise fashion. The double isotope fractionation test will be
used, and a new protocol will be evaluated that has the potential for extending
this methodology to previously inappropriate systems. Hydrations that proceed
with anti stereochemistry will be compared with those that follow a syn pathway.
Together, the studies proposed will provide information about the intimate
mechanistic details of these very efficient reactions. Enzymes are formidably
efficient catalysts that mediate specific chemical transformations at rates
rarely approached by even the best of man-made catalytic assemblies. If we could
trace the development of catalytic efficiency we should be better able to
understand the nature of enzyme catalysis as we find it today. Dr. Knowles is
certainly making headway with his incisive attack on simple systems.