* 8817965
* Collaborative Research:  Estimating Regional Forest         Evapotranspiration and Photosynthesis with a Satellite      Derived Vegetation Index and Surface Temperature
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Steven Running, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1992
* USD 252,797.00

Current maps of global vegetation have been produced by the Normalized
Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) from the AVHRR satellite sensor. These maps
have been related to absorbed solar radiation or surface leaf area index, but
the NDVI has only been related theoretically to evapotranspiration and
photosynthesis processes for vegetation and then only under optimal conditions
of water and temperature, constraints that severely limit real world
applications. The project will utilize a simple evapotranspiration and
photosynthesis model for forests driven entirely by AVHRR data that is sensitive
to sub-optimal water and temperature conditions. The investigators will (1)
relate the seasonal trend of weekly composite NDVI to vegetation phenology and
temperature limits, (2) test a satellite-derived surface resistance factor which
is related to canopy diffusion resistance and (3) define physiologically based
energy to mass conversion factors for carbon and water. These NDVI driven models
will then be evaluated against a more complex ecosystem process model. The
resulting simple, satellite-driven forest canopy models should allow a vastly
improved computation of surface water and carbon exchange rates by global
forests and improve accuracy of global carbon and hydrologic budgets. Output
from the project should be useful in understanding the regional-to-global
dynamics of water, CO2 and climate with regard to the "greenhouse effect" as
well as possibly providing better, more rapid means of estimating forest
production on large scales. The investigators are quite well qualified.
Institutional accommodations and support for both collaborators is excellent.
The Ecosystem Studies Program recommends support for this three- year
collaborative effort.