* 8817353
* Petrology and Mineralization Potential of the Chilas, Jijal,and Related Segements of the Basal Ultramafic-Mafic CumulateComplex, Kohistan Accreted Island Arc Terrane
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Gunnar Kullerud, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 07/31/1991
* USD 122,418.00

The Kohistan exotic terrane of N. Pakistan was accreted to Asia in the Mid-
Cretaceous and turned "edge-up" to expose in plan view an essentially complete
vertical section through the crust and upper mantle of an intra-oceanic island
arc complex. Beneath the volcanic and calc-alkaline batholith sequence is an
immense lower crustal mafic-ultramafic-layered cumulate complex that provides a
record of the differentiation processes by which "primary" basaltics melts from
the mantle evolved in the lower crust to yield the high-alumina basalts and
basaltic andesites that dominate the eruptive sequence. The plutonic layered
cumulates provide important evidence regarding the petrogenesis of the calc-
alkaline magma series that is quite unlike evidence deduced from the study of
phenocryst assemblages in lavas. The cumulate complex is one of the world's
largest exposures of layered mafic- ultramafic rocks and is potentially a major
storehouse of mineral wealth. By means of integrated field studies and whole-
rock and mineral geochemical studies in a series of traverses across the
cumulate series, this cooperative study involving geoscientists from Azad Jammu
and Kashmir University and Purdue University is expected to clarify important
petrogenetic questions and to screen the cumulate sequence for stratigraphic
intervals most promising as hosts to platinum, nickel, copper, chromium, and
vanadium ore deposits, employing innovative ore-petrogenetic concepts and
lithogeochemical exploration techniques.