* 8817694
* National Information Service for Earthquake Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1991
* Vitelmo Bertero, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* William A. Anderson
* 02/28/1991
* USD 810,000.00

This award provides renewed support for the National Information Service for
Earthquake Engineering (NISEE). The purpose of the National Information Service
for Earthquake Engineering is to disseminate information on earthquake
engineering and allied fields to practicing engineers and related professionals,
academic researchers, government agencies and the general public. The program
provides a central collection point for reports on NSF-sponsored research as
well as other developments in earthquake engineering. The NISEE program at the
Earthquake Engineering Research Center, University of California, Berkeley,
includes the EERC Library, Earthquake Engineering Abstracts and Computer
Applications. During the last two year grant cycle, the EERC Library
acquisitions and public service transactions continued to increase. Earthquake
Engineering Abstracts developed two new services, CAUS- Current Abstract Update
Service and CCIS-Customized Current Information Service, to improve the utility
of its services. Computer Applications continued its distribution of
microcomputer and mainframe computer software at its annual level of recent
years. NISEE will continue to take advantage of new information handling
technology to increase the efficiency of current operations, to broaden the
spectrum of service provided and to expand the audience served. Plans include
expansion of CAUS and CCIS services and conversion of all volumes of the
Abstract Journal into electronic media using optical character recognition
equipment. The EERC Library will join OCLC and convert existing records into
library standard format. Computer Applications will expand its microcomputer
software library by converting programs for operation on the PC.