* 8817961
* Structure of Plant-Arthropod Associations: Impact of Herbivores on Community Composition and Host Performance
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1989,01/31/1996
* Richard Root, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1996
* USD 298,800.00

The impact of goldenrod-feeding insects on the growth and reproduction of
individual stems and on field community composition during the course of
succession will be studied. Insect populations will be surpressed in plots of
newly cleared ground to determine whether feeding by insects affects which plant
species become established in these plots. To supplement this holistic approach,
more detailed experiments will be performed on two members of the old field
community, goldenrod and strawberry, to assess the role herbivores play in
mediating the competitive outcome between the two. A second objective is to
examine in detail the effect of different types of herbivore feeding damage on
the fitness of individual goldenrod stems. Experiments in which herbivore damage
is simulated in various ways will allow the investigation of how insect damage
disrupts the balance between carbohydrate sources and sinks within the plant. In
addition, because different herbivores are attracted to goldenrods growing at
different fertility levels, experiments will be conducted to assess the combined
effect of soil fertility and insect feeding style on plant fitness. Long-term
studies of the spatial and temporal variation in the populations of several
insect species that feed on goldenrod will be continued. To gain further insight
into the structure of the fauna and the quality of the herbivore load at our
various sites, experiments designed to determine the host finding abilities of
several insect species will be conducted. These data provide a context for
interpreting the more focused experiments by allowing the frequency with which
our experimental conditions occur naturally to be determined. They also form the
basis for building new hypotheses about the structure of the insect fauna of
goldenrods and the interactions between species.