* 8817592
* Engineering Study of Televiewer Possibilities for a Deep SeaWireline Re-Entry Probe
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Fred Spiess, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 06/30/1991
* USD 38,394.00

This is an ocean engineering proposal to perform a feasibility study of the
integration of a borehole televiewer (BHTV) with a borehole wireline re>.>entry
system. The proposers have received previous funding from NSF and DARPA
(APL/JHU) to develop the capability to re.enter boreholes drilled into the
seafloor utilizing a deep sea vehicle supported by an electromechanical cable
(wireline). This proposal is to perform the preliminary engineering studiesto
determine how a BHTV could be integrated into the re.entry vehicle. BHTV's are
acoustic devices that scan the inner walls of drill holes. The acoustic signals
are converted into imagesthat can be used to interpret the sedimentary and
metamorphic layering as well as the shape of the hole (ellipticity and
breakouts). These images can then be used for both scientific and operational
purposes. Interpretation of the hole shape and breakouts can be used to
determine stress and direction of stress within the drilled section. The status
of hole condition and locations of various layers is also useful operational
information since it may help to locate areas that may be in question for
subsequent measurement and may indicate whether a certain toll would be useful
in a particular location. In an effort to improve reliability over existing
BHTV's, proposers will also investigate the basic sensor design to determine if
the standard acoustic narrow beam rotating headcan be replaced by multiple,
simultaneously monitored non>.>rotating preformed beams. If proven feasible,
subsequent proposal(s) would be expected for the further design, construction
and testing of the system. It boreholes with re>.>entry cones including those in
the Atlantic and Pacific Basin.