* 8817192
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Biological Surface Science
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1995
* Robert Baier, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 07/31/1995
* USD 592,853.00

Biotechnology is now recognized as a new focus for industrial growth. There are
four principal interacting phases upon which all material/biosystem
compatibility is based - substrata/- macromolecular "conditioning films"/living
cells/surrounding media. A planning grant, NSF CDR 86-15640, has shown that an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Biological Surface Science is
both feasible and viable. This award is initiating an Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center on Biological Surface Science at the State
University of New York - Buffalo in collaboration with Montana State University.
The initial research is being focussed around model substrata of polymers,
metals and ceramics which are being used to study the deposits occurring during
exposures to relevant interacting biosystems. Other studies are addressing
biosystem compatibility with bacteria mamanalian cells blood components and
micro alage. A woman undergraduate is augmenting the research through studies of
model substrata. Eight companies are providing 60% of the Center's funding. Both
the University and the New York State Science and Technology Foundation are
providing significant cost sharing for the Center's total budget of over
$600,000. The Co-Principal Investigators and their colleagues are nationally
recognized experts in their fields and have the experience and industrial
contacts to run an Industry/University Cooperative Research Center. The Program
Manager recommends the State University of New York - Buffalo (in collaboration
with Montana State University) be awarded $75,000 a year for a five year
continuing grant. An additional $5,000 is recommended for one (1) year for
"Funding for Support of Women, Minority, and Disabled Engineering Research
Assistants" program. Near the end of each 12-month period, the Program Manager
and/or the Director of The Division of Cross-Disciplinary Research will review
the progress of the Center on a number of renewal criteria, including the
following: (1) extent to which university/industry interaction and collaboration
is developing; (2) extent to which the support base for the center is expanding;
(3) extent to which a robust research program is developing. If review is
satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend support of the next period of
this continuing grant.