* 8817981
* Phylogenetic Relationships in Cheilanthoid Ferns            (Adiantaceae) Based on Chloroplast DNA Restriction Site     Variation and rbcL Sequence Data
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1989,03/31/1993
* Gerald Gastony, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1993
* USD 151,500.00

The large numbers of ferns adapted to semi-desert or otherwise exposed
conditions in the Southwest and Mexico have long perplexed taxonomists and
biologists interested in the phylogenetic relationships and processes of
evolution in these plants. With new biotechnological tools of molecular
analysis, Drs. Gerald Gastony and George Yatskievych of Indiana University are
studying genetic variation in chloroplast DNA of representative samples of
genera and species of Cheilanthoid ferns of North America, to solve this
problem. Because DNA is not subject to modifying environmental influences in the
way that stems, leaves, and reproductive structures are, the comparison of
nucleotide differences among species can reveal genealogical affinities of the
species examined. By digesting the chloroplast DNA with enzymes that cleave the
molecule at specific nucleotide sites (so-called restriction-site enzymes,
developed from bacteria) comparative data from a large number of species can be
obtained. Their preliminary data reveal extensive amounts of restriction-enzyme
site variability, indicating extensive mutational differences among species.
Computer programs will be used to analyze the data and to arrange species into
the most probable evolutionary groupings on the basis of their shared DNA
characteristics. This phylogeny will then permit detailed analysis of processes
of speciation and of character convergence in these ferns in their adaptive
evolution to harsh habitats.