* 8817548
* Workshop on Atomic and Molecular Physics, Aligarh, India,   December 12-24, 1988, Group Travel Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Munir Nayfeh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1989
* USD 10,800.00

Description: This project supports four U.S. scientists to travel to India to
participate in a workshop on atomic and molecular physics at Aligarh Muslim
University (AMU), Aligarh, India. The workshop is organized by the Indian
Society of Atomic and Molecular Physics. The Indian counterpart is Dr. M.S.Z.
Chaghtai of the Physics Department at AMU. The topics to be covered include the
structure of atoms and molecule, collision and scattering with atoms, ions and
molecules, spectroscopy of multiplying ionized atoms, beam-foil spectroscopy,
cyclotron and tokomak radiation, and lasers in the study of atoms and molecules.
The U.S. participants are expected to visit other Indian research institutions
and to plan initiation of cooperative research. Scope: The workshop is the
seventh in a series of meetings in the same field. The proposed workshop is
expected to result in published proceedings that will cover advances in the
field as was done with proceedings of past meetings. Support for the workshop is
partially provided by the International Center for Theoretical Physics in
Trieste and by the Government of India. Indian scientists have a strong
tradition of good research in atomic, molecular and optical physics, and it is
highly likely that both they and U.S. scientists will benefit from the
interaction in this meeting.