* 8817910
* Workshop on: Water Science and Engineering in River         Impoundments, Status, Information Gaps and Research         Priorities; Murray, Kentucky; April 9-12, 1989
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1990
* G. Richard Marzolf, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 12/31/1990
* USD 30,000.00

Dams and their attendant reservoirs are built for various purposes, including
flood control, power generation, water storage, navigation, etc., all of which
involve the operation of the dam. Decisions about operations accompany the
existence of dams. In this regard, reservoirs are essentially different from
natural lakes, however, phenomena similar to natural lakes occur in them. The
degree to which these phenomena are significantly influenced by the riverine
character of reservoirs is significant and, therefore, of limnological interest.
Changes in operations which might carry additional benefits are now being
addressed more seriously as the limits of dam construction are approached, as
water quality issues become of higher priority and as demography, economics and
law alter the legal standing of water users. Thus, the influence of dam
operations on the reservoirs themselves and on downstream reaches of the
impounded river unavoidably links the basic (science) and the applied
(management). A workshop is proposed which will focus on reservoir science with
interactions among several disciplines interested in aquatic ecosystems. These
include: (1) the physics based modelers, (2) the biology based modelers, (3)
empirical earth scientists (geochemistry, ecology, hydrology), and (4)
experimental ecologists. A draft of the proceedings of this meeting will
document the status of the science and identify gaps in information from the
perspective of the scientists. Results from this interdisciplinary meeting of
reservoir limnologists and basic scientists will be published in a volume which
will be easily accessible for those interested in this major aquatic community.