* 8817862
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1990
* Albert Cover, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/1990
* USD 7,336.00

The manner in which legislators gain office has implications for democratic
theory. Modern political science equates representation with policy
responsiveness. But if service responsiveness looms largely in the contemporary
representative-constituent relationship, perhaps much of what legislators do and
constituents want is not representation. Coherent national policy can be
difficult to achieve when individual legislators have little incentive to
subordinate service responsiveness to a larger end. The problem, from the
standpoint of assigning political responsibility, is the reduced ability to
produce coherent policy decisions. By accident or intent, representational
trade-offs exist. If responsiveness to the individual needs of the ordinary
citizen waxes, party responsiveness, as well as the representation of the
collectivity wanes. Studies concerning the ways in which legislators sustain or
increase their constituent support have often contradicted one another and have
resulted in differing conclusions. The major limitation of this literature is
that most, if not all, of the data on perquisites are highly aggregated, and
district level data are often unavailable.. In this investigation the researcher
addresses these problems, and takes advantage of access to data on actual
constituent-member contacts to observe and record two groups of respondents, one
that had candidate contact and one that has not. Data are from 1,100 telephone
interviews in a selected legislative district. The study probes the impact of
legislative perquisites on constituent evaluations (i.e., incumbent reputation
and constituent trust) as well as voting decisions. It focuses on a particular
perquisite, ombudsmen service as the provision of assistance to individuals to
resolve a problem with a federal agency. Using simulatneous equation modeling,
hypotheses tested will reveal how legislators' use of perquisites to encourage
and perform casework affect constituent evaluations and voting decisions.
Results will illuminate how constituents respond to incumbent behavior. The
resulting effects on contemporary representative-constituent relationships and
the "repsonsible parties" model of government will also be addressed.