* 8817152
* An Investigation of Fluid-Rock Interaction During           Subduction Zone Metamorphism
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,09/15/1992
* Jane Selverstone, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jane M. Ernst
* 09/15/1992
* USD 113,500.00

CO2-H2O immiscibility to depths of &gt; 30 km should be a direct result of the
depression of isotherms that occurs during active transport of material down a
subduction zone. Fluid phase separation in this environment should have a number
of important consequences for the thermal, mechanical, and metamorphic
development of subduction zones, yet the effect documenting the extent to which
fluid immiscibility controls petrologic processes at high pressure. Particular
attention will be paid to determining whether small-scale interlaying of
blueschist and greenschist and blueschist and eclogite assemblages results from
generation and preservation of fluid heterogeneities and whether such
heterogeneities could be caused by fluid phase separation. The approach taken
will be (1) to use mineral phase equilibria to calculate a (H20) and a (C02)
ratios between adjacent layers both within facies types and across facies
boundaries, (2) to determine fluid compositions directly from multiple
generations of fluid inclusions, and (3) to model reaction pathways for rocks in
both the immiscible and supercritical fluid regimes. Samples to be studied are
from coherent high-pressure terranes on the Ile de Groix, in the Tauern Window,
and on the island of Sifnos. The results should provide better constraints on
the compositions of fluids present at high pressure and result in better models
for devolatilization of subducting slabs.