* 8817242
* Petrogenesis of Adjacent Calc-Alkaline and Tholeiitic       Volcanoes on Umnak Island in the Aleutian Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Charles Langmuir, Columbia University Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 06/30/1992
* USD 84,700.00

Okmok and Recheshnoi are adjacent volcanos on the volcanic front of the Aleutian
arc. Although separated by only forty kilometers on the island of Umnak, the two
volcanos exhibit most of the range of compositional variability in the Aleutian.
Okmok is a type example of an Aleutian "tholeiitic" volcano, while Recheshnoi
has all the characteristics of an Aleutian "calc- alkaline" volcano. Almost
three hundred samples from theses volcanos with substantial stratigraphic
control from two major and one minor field expedition allow the study of two
problems of major importance to petrogenesis. They are (1) the origins of the
diversity of the major element compositions of lavas at convergent margins; and
(2) the fractionation processes that occur in crustal magma chambers. The
chemical differences between the two volcanos have similar systematics to the
global array of variability of convergent margin volcanics. It is proposed that
this global array is caused by different extents of melting of the mantle wedge,
controlled primarily by the thickness of the overlying crust. But there are two
other prominent hypotheses (Kay and Marsh) to explain the variability observed
in Aleutian volcanos. All three hypotheses can be tested by detailed study of
adjacent, end-member volcanos. The question of fractionation processes has been
the subject of much theoretical speculation. Important constraints derive from
time- series evaluation of volcano evolution. Okmok volcano allows such a time-
series because of well-exposed pre-and post-caldera lavas, and a large well-
preserved ash flow. Plutonic inclusions from both volcanos allow a comparison of
plutonic and volcanic levels of the system. This will be a multi-faceted
approach to these problems, which includes additional field work unusually
comprehensive analytical work, careful petrographic work with major and trace
element studies of mineral zoning laboratory experiments, and quantitative
modeling of both melting and crystallization processes.