* 8817861
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Partial        Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1990
* Bjorn E. Dahlberg, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1990
* USD 35,000.00

Work on the project will continue research on the qualitative properties of
solutions and solution operators of linear and nonlinear partial differential
equations. Emphases will be on linear elliptic and on nonlinear evolution
equations with minimal smoothness conditions. By minimal smoothness conditions
one means either conditions on the equation, on the domain or both. From a
practical point of view, information about solutions on nonsmooth domains is
most often sought. Only recently have certain boundary value problems of
elliptic type defined on domains with boundaries, with edges and corners been
completely resolved. That is, one can predict the smoothness of the solutions at
the boundary. Several important problems suggest themselves and will be the
focus of work done on this project. They include questions of extentions to the
general elliptic equation, elliptic systems and higher order elliptic equations.
Some success has alresdy been achieved with fourth order equations. While the
elliptic equations on nonsmooth domains are beginning to be understood, the
corresponding evolution equations (involving time derivatives) remains a
mystery. The ingredient missing is an inequality relating gradients with normal
derivatives, usually classified as inequalities of Rellich type. The best
results to date depend on positivity of solutions of classical evolution
equations. Objectives in analyzing this class of solutions focus more on
questions of long term behavior, boundedness and uniqueness. Some computational
approximations may be employed in these studies.