* 8817585
* New Experimental Approaches to the Study of Organic NitrogenCycling in Marine Microplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Patricia Glibert, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1992
* USD 209,264.00

Knowledge of how the marine nitrogen cycle and the organisms mediating the
transformations of nitrogen in the cycle have changed tremendously over the past
five years. Bacteria can compete with phytoplankton for inorganic nitrogen, and
yet, may also serve as regenerators of nitrogen compounds depending upon their
nutritional and physiological state. Changing concepts of how systems work
frequently go hand in hand with advances in methodology. This is true for marine
nitrogen cycling, in particular, the role of organic nitrogen. The use of 15N-
labelled substrates have been the major tool with which inorganic nitrogen
uptake and NH4+ regeneration have been studied to date. This research addresses
the relationship and couplings between inorganic nitrogen, in the form of NH4+,
and organic nitrogen in the form of urea and amino acids, using a number of new
techniques, including: 1) a dual labelling techniques for simultaneous
measurements of uptake and release of urea: 2) a filtering technique for the
bacterial fraction that is compatible with mass spectrometry; 3) ion exchange
column techniques for recovering 15N-labelled DON/amino acids from incubation
experiments; and 4) measurement of low-level NH4+ concentrations by solvent
extraction. The combination of laboratory and field experiments are aimed at
establishing relationships between organism size and nutritional state, and
microplankton NH4+ and urea regeneration.