* 8817912
* Genetics of Host Affiliation in Herbivorous Beetles         (Chrysomelidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1993
* Walter Eanes, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 12/31/1993
* USD 222,439.00

Hundreds of thousands of species of insects feed on plants. Most of these
species, including most the small minority that are serious pests of crops and
timber, are highly host-specific in respect of the kinds of plants on which they
feed. The evolution of any feature, such as preference for a particular food
plant, requires that there has existed genetic variation in that feature.
Therefore, understanding why particular host plant insect herbivore associations
have evolved can be provided by assaying the genetic variation within insect
populations for those features associated with successful use of a particular
species of plants. Dr. Futuyma will work with species of Ophraella, a group of
beetles in which each species is associated only with one or another genus of
plants in the sunflower family (Asteraceae). This research is among the first
attempts to determine whether historical evolutionary events that can be deduced
from phylogenetic studies can be predicted at all from genetic analyses of
contemporaneous species. As such, it seeks to synthesize two very different
research programs in evolutionary biology - deduction of evolutionary history
and genetic analysis of evolutionary processes. More particularly, it addresses
the question of whether or not genetic analysis can shed light on why insect
species have adapted to some plants rather than others. This work also has
implications for the management of crop and timber pests. The present research
can serve as a model for assays of genetic variation in insects that may enable
crop entomologists to predict the likelihood that insects may become pests, even
if at first they are not.