* 8817579
* The Analysis and Dating of a 200-m Ice Core from Byrd       Station, Antarctica
* O/D,OPP
* 03/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Hitoshi Shoji, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Campbell
* 12/31/1991
* USD 382,873.00

This proposal discusses a planned study for a 200-m deep ice core and various
surface sample collections to be made at, and in the vicinity of Byrd Station,
Antarctica. The 200-m deep ice core is estimated to represent approximately 10
centuries of snow accumulation. It will extend from the present snow surface and
overlap the profile of the deep ice core augered to bedrock there in 1967 and
1968. The recovered core and surface samples will be measured and analyzed for
stable isotopes, volcanic activity, megascopic stratigraphy, ionic
concentrations, trace metals, dust concentrations, gas content and composition,
and physical properties. The entire investigation will provide new continuous
results for the last millennium for this scientifically important Antarctic
location. Results will include updated information on the short- and long-term
changes in the accumulation record and climate variability, the anthropogenic
trends, the volcanic disturbances and the variations in the chemical composition
of the atmosphere as they are all reflected in the deposited snow layers. The
various chronologies will extend down to, overlap and be compared with existing
records from the deep ice core obtained at Byrd Station and other Antarctic
locations. Significant geochemical and climatological signals will be compared
with similar environmental records already obtained from studies of Greenland
ice cores.