* 8817519
* Mechanisms of Stress-induced Shifts in Leaf Beetle          Resistance of Cottonwood
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1993
* Clive Jones, New York Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 08/31/1993
* USD 379,280.00

It is well recognized that abiotic "stress" may change plant resistance to
insects, but little is known about the mechanisms involved. Recent studies
demonstrated that a single, acute, ambient dose of ozone changes susceptibility
of cottonwood to insects and diseases. The leaf-chewing beetle, Plagiodera
versicolora, is particularly affected. Beetles prefer to feed on and consume
more of ozone-treated plants than controls, but do not grow or survive any
better; relative growth (growth per unit food eaten) is therefore reduced.
Females prefer to lay their eggs on control plants and have much lower fecundity
when kept with ozone-treated plants. The chemistry of cottonwood plants is also
changed by ozone. Soluble nitrogen increases, phenolic glycosides decrease and
other phenolics become polymerized to cell walls. These chemical changes may be
responsible for the "stress"-induced changes in insect resistance. The chemical
mechanisms responsible for changes in beetle feeding and oviposition preference,
consumption, relative growth and fecundity will be investigated. Chemical
isolations combined with bioassays; and testing of specific compounds will be
carried out. The dose response of the beetle to active compounds, and the time
course in the plant following fumigation will also be determined. These basic,
mechanistic studies also have a pragmatic value because they will increase
knowledge of the effects of air pollution on plant-insect interactions using
commercially important species.