* 8817053
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Early Archean Crust - Mantle       Development:  Isotopic and Geochemical Constraints from     the North Atlantic Craton
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1993
* Kenneth Cameron, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 04/30/1993
* USD 140,708.00

Funds are requested to support collaborative research on the evolution of the
early Archean gneiss complex in the Saglek- Hebron area, northern Labrador. The
study area forms part of the North Atlantic Craton, a major Archean block that
preserves fragmentary evidence of pre-3800 Ma crust formation. Objectives of the
study are to: North Atlantic Craton by documenting examples of pre-3800 Ma
crust; regions from a terrane that contains extremely ancient crust; and to
crustal evolutionary models. Research will carried out on: (1) tonalitic and
trondhjemitic Uivak and pre-Uivak gneisses; and (2) a variety of ultramafic
lithologies, some of which occur as tectonically emplaced rafts within pre-3600
Ma Uivak gneisses. Petrogenetic information for Uivak and pre-Uivak tonalitic
gneisses will be obtained from major and trace element geochemistry. Age data
will be derived through analysis of Sm-Nd, Rb-Sr, and Pb-Pb isotopic systems and
by application of the Kober (1986) single zircon TIMS technique. This will
provide additional petrogenetic data, and will enable mantle separation ages,
source compositions and metamorphic histories of the suites to be determined.
Information on the composition, age and crustal residence history of early
Archean ultramafic units will be achieved by a geochemical and Sm-Nd, Pb-Pb and
Rb-Sr isotopic study of whole rocks and separated mineral phases. Isotope
geochemistry will be carried out at UCSC. Major and trace element (including
REE) geochemistry will be carried out by Weaver at the University of Oklahoma.
The study will provide direct constraints on the chronology and chemical
evolution of early Archean crust in the North Atlantic Craton. These constraints
will be important for models of the early fractionation of the Earth.