* 8817897
* Controls Over Primary Succession at Glacier Bay, Alaska
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1990
* F. Stuart Chapin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 08/31/1990
* USD 28,743.00

The objectives of the proposed research are to (1) determine the relative
importance of competition and facilitation as mechanisms influencing primary
succession in a nutrient- impoverished environment, (2) dissect these mechanisms
into their component biological processes, and (3) compare experimental,
observational, and historical (retrospective) approaches to the study of
succession. The research will be conducted at Glacier Bay, "the" classical
example of facilitation. Although most experimental work has shown facilitation
to be unimportant in terrestrial ecosystems, this work has been largely
restricted to secondary succession where soils are well developed, whereas the
concept of facilitation originated mainly from observations in primary
succession, where plants confront a more severe environment. The central
hypothesis to be tested is that life history traits explain the basic pattern of
succession, but that the rate of succession is influenced by both facilitative
and competitive interactions among species. Life history traits to be measured
in the field are seed rain, growth rate, age of first reproduction, and
longevity. Possible inhibitory effects of established vegetation upon seed
germination and initial establishment will be tested by sowing spruce and alder
seeds into each of four successional stages (uncolonized, Dryas, alder, and
spruce) in presence and absence of forest floor. Competitive or facilitative
effects of established vegetation upon seedling growth will be tested by
planting alder and spruce seedlings into each successional stage. The record of
past competition and facilitation will be derived from studies of tree cores and
stand age structure.