* 8817767
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Plant Cell Bioprocess      Engineering for Production of Secondary Metabolites
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Dewey Ryu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 08/31/1992
* USD 35,400.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project between
Professor Dewey D. Y. Ryu and colleagues at the University of California, Davis,
and Professor Shintaro Furusaki, University of Tokyo, and co-workers at other
Japanese universities. The project involves multi-disciplinary basic research in
plant biotechnology. Major focus will be on the development of a knowledge base
having broad application to bioprocess technology for the production of
important secondary metabolites from genetically improved plant cell lines.
Secondary metabolites are cellular metabolic products not essential to the
cell's growth and survival, in contrast to primary metabolites, which are. Some
secondary metabolites have been found to be very useful as medicinals, coloring
and flavoring agents, components for cosmetics, and other economically important
products. The Japanese are at the forefront in research and development in this
area. The collaborating U.S. and Japanese faculty members in this current
project have collective expertise in plant biotechnology, plant biochemistry,
plant genetics, plant cell biology, and biochemical engineering. The research
program will focus on (1) biochemical design and genetic construction of plant
cells for efficient production of secondary metabolites of medical and economic
importance under bioreactor mass cell cultivation conditions; (2) design and
development of a novel bioreactor system suitable for large-scale plant cell
cultivation; and (3) fundamental bioprocess engineering studies on the plant
cell bioreactor system and bioprocess optimization for the most efficient
production of secondary metabolites. This project is expected to establish a
collaborative research program and a close working relationship between U.S. and
Japanese scientists in the area of plant biotechnology. It aims for a
significant contribution toward advancement of our understanding of generic
principles of plant biotechnology which can be translated to biotechnology
engineering practices for useful application, especially for the production of
secondary metabolites of economic and medical importance.