* 8817678
* Spectral Sensitivity of Photosynthesis to Ultraviolet       Radiation:  Methods for Studying Marine Phytoplankton
* O/D,OPP
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* John Cullen, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/1991
* USD 199,801.00

The effects of ultraviolet radiation (UV) on microalgae will be assessed with a
rapid and sensitive method intended for use on natural samples, even in extreme
environments such as the Antarctic, where UV effects are of great interest. The
method will be developed in a program of research on cultures of marine
phytoplankton. The central hypothesis is that short-term tolerance to UV varies
within and between species due to the presence of inducible UV-screening
pigments. Tolerance may also vary due to the activities of recovery mechanisms.
Polar and temperate phytoplankton will be grown under four regimes of UV plus
visible radiation. Subsequently, the sensitivity of photosynthesis to UV will be
determined by measuring the uptake of C-bicarbonate during or after exposure to
a range of UV fluence rates in 6 wavebands between 250 and 400nm. This will
yield an action spectrum of the inhibitory effects of UV on photosynthesis. The
shapes of action spectra will be compared to spectra of absorption and related
to the possible effects of UV-screens. The technique will be modified to assess
recovery of photosynthesis from UV-induced inhibition and to measure action
spectra of UV effects during exposure to visible light. This new method for
measuring the spectral sensitivity of microalgae to UV will be rapid, sensitive
and particularly appropriate for comparisons of planktonic and sea-ice
microalgae. It should be useful in assessing the effects of UV on polar primary
producers and for comparing plankton over latitudinal gradients.