* 8817311
* Collaborative Research in Maize Genetics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1988,08/31/1990
* David Weber, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1990
* USD 10,000.00

This award to Illinois State University will fund the purchase of small
equipment items necessary for the effective participation of Dr. Weber in a
collaborative research project with David Hoisington and Ed Coe at the
University of Missouri (NSF 8721921). The project will continue and expand
collaborative research aimed at producing an integrated physical and genetic map
of maize. Genetic mapping strategies of several types will be used to identify
and correlate the positions of RFLP markers, cytological markers (knobs,
deletions, insertions and inversions), biochemical markers (mutations
responsible for isozymes) and other, conventional markers. Although a
substantial amount of positional information for these various types of markers
is now available, relatively little has been done to correlate the map of
cytological markers with that of the biochemical ones, the RFLP map with the
cytological map and so on. Particular focus is placed on the newly developed
technique of RFLP mapping because the map is not yet complete, and because no
single lab has yet assembled a complete set of RFLP marker DNAs that are
available to all researchers. Although the research will be performed
principally by Drs. Coe and Hoisington, collaboration with other corn
geneticists, especially those skilled in the identification of biochemical
markers, is required. Thus, small concurrent awards are being made to this
investigator at Illinois State, as well as others at both Iowa State and North
Carolina State Universities. These awards will provide laboratory equipment and
computers that will facilitate analysis and comparison of data developed in the
separate labs and will insure that research materials developed by each
investigator will be readily accessible to all the collaborators. Traditionally,
techniques for genetic mapping have been a useful tool for researchers
interested in a variety of basic questions in biology as well as for plant and
animal breeders. The recent development of a powerful new technique called RFLP
mapping will have a significant effect on the ease with which genetics can be
brought to bear on both basic and applied problems. However, it is important
that the knowledge and tools of the more traditional techniques be preserved and
that they be integrated (or correlated) with the new RFLP maps. This is
particularly true in the case of corn, which has been the subject of extensive
genetic study. The proposed collaborative research will accelerate the
development of a complete RFLP map of corn and will insure that the map is a
tool available to all researchers and agronomists. Moreover, by facilitating the
integration of the RFLP data with that obtained with other types of genetic
markers, the research will insure that the RFLP map is of maximum utility for
those who need it.