* 8817481
* 14th Texas Symposium on Relativistic Astrophysics;          December 11-16, 1988;  Dallas, Texas
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1989
* Ervin Fenyves, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 06/30/1989
* USD 17,200.00

The 14th Symposium on Relativistic Astrophysics will be held in Dallas, Texas
December 11 -16, 1988. The Texas Symposia are celebrating their 25th Anniversary
since the first Texas Symposium on Relativistic Astrophysics was held in 1963 in
Dallas. The Texas Symposia take place every other year and serve as
international summary of recent developments in the main areas of astrophysics
and relativity. The biannual meetings are held in different cities in the U.S.,
and every third meeting is held in a foreign country such as the meetings in
Munich, Germany in 1978, land in Jerusalem, Israel in 1984. The first
presentations on the discovery of quasars were made at the first Texas Symposium
on Relativistic Astrophysics. The identification of pulsars as neutron stars,
the first candidates for black holes, the indirect evidence for the existence of
gravitational waves, millisecond pulsars, and other rather important discoveries
were first presented at the Texas Symposia. In addition to this, X-ray
astronomy, the interaction of particle physics and cosmology, big bang theories
and the early universe, galaxy formation, active galactic nuclei, supernovae and
compact objects, cosmic rays and recent problems of general relativity were
extensively covered at the Texas Symposia. The 1988 Texas Symposium will have
mainly invited review talks which give a comprehensive overview of the major
developments in the forefront of astrophysics, cosmology related topics of
particle physics and space sciences, as well as relativity theory.