* 8817758
* A Water Relations Model for the Regulation of Seed          Germination
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Shang Fa Yang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 07/31/1992
* USD 225,000.00

Seed germination is a critical phase in the establishment of crop plants in the
field, or in the life cycles of wild annual plants. The overall quality of seed
is closely related to the time taken for the seed to germinate after it is
supplied with water, or the germination rate. The rate of germination slows as
the temperature is lowered, as the water supply is restricted, or as the seeds
deteriorate during storage. Species and varieties can also differ in their
inherent rates of seed germination. The purpose of this project is to study the
physiological basis for the differences in germination rates among species or
seed lots in response to various environmental or physiological factors. We have
modified a general model for the growth of plant tissues to adapt it to the
description of seed germination rates. It is based upon water uptake in relation
to plant cell growth, since the embryonic tissues must grow in order for
germination to occur. By verifying this model and then applying it to seeds both
the embryo inside the seed and the surrounding tissues such as the endosperm and
seedcoat interact to determine when, or whether, germination occurs. This model
should allow us to identify the mechanism(s) by which external (environmental)
factors influence internal (physiological) parameters in specific tissues to
either accelerate or delay germination. This model will serve as a framework or
guide to lead to a better understanding of how the complex process of seed
germination is regulated. From the practical viewpoint, the results will have
utility in the production and marketing of higher quality seed for agricultural
purposes. In many crops, particularly in the vegetables, the uniformity and
timing of germination and seedling emergence through the soil are critical
factors in the overall profitability of the crop. Through a quantitative
understanding of how seed germination is regulated, techniques can be developed
to enhance the performance of seeds under specific environmental conditions.
Such enhanced seed are already being marketed in some crops, but the procedures
used thus far have been developed by trial and error, rather than by application
of a fundamental understanding of how seed germination is regulated. In
addition, species and varieties differ in their seed quality characteristics.
Knowledge of the physiological basis of such differences could identify specific
selectable traits to use in breeding programs, or even specific genes to be
transferred by biotechnical approaches, in order to improve seed quality. The
fundamental information generated by this project will be readily absorbed by
the seed industry and incorporated into their programs to improve the quality of
seed available to farmers.