* 8817874
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research:  Languages for    Databases and Knowledge Base
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* O. Peter Buneman, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1993
* USD 55,250.00

This award will support a two year exchange program between US and French
researchers on the topic of languages for databases and knowledge bases. The US
group will be under the leadership of Dr. Peter Buneman, University of
Pennsylvania. The French collaborators are Drs. Serge Abiteboul and Francois
Bancilhon of the French National Center for Information Science and Automation
(INRIA) and Dr. Nicole Bidoit of the Laboratoire de Recherche en Informatique,
University of Paris-Orsay. Recently there has been a convergence of research in
the areas of languages used in databases, artificial intelligence and
programming languages. Examples of this convergence are seen in recent work in
deductive databases, semantic networks, data models, object-oriented languages
and type disciplines. This proposal will being together leading US and French
researchers in these fields to carry out a series of workshops on the topics of
1) database programming language 2) principles of query and transaction
languages and 3) types and data models. In addition, the investigators will have
the opportunity to spend extended research visits at INRIA. The proposed project
may result in the acceleration of research in data model issues of database and
knowledge base languages. In addition, this cooperative international effort may
minimize the divergence of core modeling concepts and terminology and thereby
remove unnecessary artificial barriers to the collective research advancement of
the field.