* 8817634
* RUI: A Proposal for the Collection ad Analysis of           Photometric Data Giving Solar Irradiance Fluctuations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Gary Chapman, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 08/31/1992
* USD 36,100.00

In the late 1970's and early 1980's two satellite experiments were launched to
measure the solar irradiance, sometimes called the "solar constant". These two
satellite experiments have shown quite clearly that the solar irradiance varies
on time scales from minutes to years. The largest amplitude variations occur on
time scales of 5 to 7 days and are clearly associated with the passage of large
sunspot groups across the face of the sun. Ironically, the highest values of
solar irradiance are during the peak of the solar cycle when the average area of
sun spots is much larger than at other times. The enhanced irradiance near solar
maximum may be due to the presence of large areas of faculae, magnetic field
regions seen in white light near the limb as bright patches were thought to be
too faint and too scarce to cause a significant change in solar irradiance
compared to sunspots. The work at the SFO over the last six years has shown that
faculae are indeed important sources of emission. In particular, it was shown
for a group of large sunspots in 1982 that the emission from faculae
approximately balanced the blocking of sunspots. The fragments of magnetic
fields scattered across the sun, part of what is called the photospheric
network, may be responsible for the surplus of emission that is seen at the time
of the solar maximum. By obtaining accurate photometric images of the sun at
various wavelengths, it is intended to determine the effects of sunspots,
faculae and the network in the measurements of satellite irradiance monitors and
permit the search for even more subtle solar effects. The results of this work
may help to better predict the effects of the solar magnetic cycle on the
earth's climate.