* 8818772
* ROA:  Associated and Abiotically Released DOM:  Significanceto Stream Detritivores
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Daniel Lawson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 08/31/1991
* USD 168,400.00

Allochthonous inputs of organic matter to woodland streams comprise the
principal energy source for diverse groups of detritivores during all, or for
various stages of their life cycle. However, this statement only refers to the
ability to ingest detritus and it remains poorly understood what components of
detritus are assimilated. Associated microbial biomass is known to only
contribute 12-45% of the dietary needs of the detritivores examined. Since
detritivores lack the enzymes to degrade major plant structural components, it
is suggested that other components of detritus are exploited by detritivores. It
is proposed that the major dietary requirements of detritivores are provided by
dissolved organic matter (DOM) which is associated with and/or released from
coarse particulate organic matter (CPOM). The major source of this DOM is
derived from organics which are: 1) released from the matrix of ingested
detritus; 2) released from extracellular microbial products; or 3) transformed
by microorganisms associated with their alimentary tract. It is hypothesized
that detritivores have evolved a variety of feeding and digestive strategies to
maximize the utilization of these resources. These are 1) physico-chemical
properties associated with their midgut to release and digest these compounds;
and 2) metabolism by hindgut micro-organisms and assimilation of these
metabolites by detritivores. Studies will include: 1) characterization of the
temporal qualitative and quantitative nature of DOM which is associated with
and/or abiotically released from CPOM; and 2) determining the relative
assimilation and fate of these ingested compounds. The significance of these
studies not only applies to the basic principles of detritivore nutrition and
growth, but to an understanding of carbon sorption, retention and turnover in
lotic systems.