* 8818432
* Patch-Clamp Studies of Mitochondrial Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Henry Tedeschi, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1992
* USD 230,755.00

Recent work from this laboratory has provided information on the electrical
behavior of mitochondrial membranes by applying patch clamp techniques. The
macroscopic currents observed confirmed the presence of voltage sensitive
channels in mitochondrial outer membranes previously observed after
incorporation of an outer membrane protein (VDAC) into artificial bilayers. In
addition, a novel behavior which may correspond to the transient formation of
high conductance channels has been described. Completion of these studies and
further attempts at obtaining single channel recordings with the outer membrane
are proposed. Single channel behavior with the inner membrane has been observed
in this laboratory using voltage clamp techniques. Multiple conductance levels
are observed and a primary goal of this proposal is to characterize these levels
in terms of their channel behavior, e.g. ion selectivity. The general
macroscopic ionic currents associated with the initiation of metabolism include
a) a decrease in resistance which is reversed by a metabolic inhibitor, b) a
change in outward current, and c) a change in the magnitude of current
fluctuations. Proposed work includes investigation of the underlying events
responsible for these observations. In addition, the effect of imposed membrane
potentials on ATP synthesis will be studied. Mitochondria are organelles within
cells where biochemical reactions convert energy into a useful form that
supports many other cell functions. The biochemical reactions going on in
mitochondria have been the object of much research over many years. It is now
generally believed that an important aspect of the regulation of mitochondrial
function involves the distribution of ions across the mitochondrial membranes.
"Patch clamp" techniques of electrophysiology that permit measurement of the
permeability pathways for ions across the mitochondrial membrane have become
available only relatively recently. The proposed research represents one of the
first systematic studies of the permeability properties of intact mitochondrial
membranes taking advantage of this technique. The results of this research will
make an important contribution to basic knowledge of the function of these
organelles.