* 8818838
* Numerical Modeling of Complex Flows with Heat Transfer,     Award In Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Junuthula Reddy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1992
* USD 31,848.00

Description: This project supports collaborative research by Dr. J.N. Reddy,
Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University, Blacksburg and Dr. K.N. Seetharamu, Department of
Mechnaical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India. These two
scientists plan to develop a finite element computer program for the analysis of
complex fluid flows with heat transfer in three-dimensional domains. The
solution of the Navier-Stokes equations with the energy equation in three
dimensions will use the finite element method based on the penalty-function
approach. Account will be taken of variation of material properties, such as
viscosity, coefficient of thermal expansion, thermal conductivity, with
temperature and/or strain rates. The result could be the development of a
powerful tool for solving complex problems in engineering applications such as
in heat exchangers. The development of such a tool is possible at this time with
the availability of extremely powerful computers in many laboratories thus
making it possible to apply the finite element methods to geometries of material
and flows that are unwieldly by analytical methods. Scope: The topic of this
research project was developed following an Indo-U.S. workshop on research needs
in heat transfer, held in Madras, India in December, 1981. The development of
the proposal was completed in 1986 with contributions by Drs. Reddy and
Seetharamu who are leaders in the field of numerical and finite element
analysis. The cooperative research is of direct importance to the development of
these tools of solving engineering problems, and should benefit engineers and
scientists in both countries.