* 8818264
* Dissertation Research:  Experimental Analysis of Patch      Dynamics in Tallgrass Prairie Vegetation
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1990
* Susan Glenn, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 09/30/1990
* USD 2,689.00

North American tallgrass prairie is dominated by a small number of matrix-
forming grasses, between which are found a large number of less abundant
interstitial species. Distributions of these species are influenced by
disturbance regime and soil variability, resulting in a patchy mosaic. Patches,
as defined by interstitial species, have been defined in tallgrass prairies in
Kansas and Oklahoma, and vary unpredictably within and between growing seasons.
The importance of matrix-forming species on the unpredictable variability of
these patches will be tested experimentally. Schizachyrium scoparium, a matrix-
forming species, will be removed form half of five 10x10 m2 study blocks,
leaving the remaining halves as controls. Patch structure in each block will be
analyzed from cover data form each square meter. Samples will be taken three
times over the growing season. If a matrix- forming species colonizes the space,
patch composition and spatial structure will not change. If interstitial species
already occupying the patch type colonize the space, patch composition and
spatial structure will change. Inter-site comparisons will be possible by
applying treatments to eastern Kansas. This study will aid in understanding
effects of unpredictable, Interstitial components on spatial-temporal dynamics
in tallgrass prairies.