* 8818899
* Research on Antarctic Coastal Ecosystem Rates (RACER):      Microbial Dynamics and Carbon Flux
* O/D,OPP
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1993
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 10/31/1993
* USD 468,623.00

The southern ocean maintains a moderate, but patchy, biological productivity in
spite of harsh environmental conditions (low temperature, extended periods of
constant darkness, deep vertical mixing of surface waters). Primary production
in coastal Antarctic ecosystems is characterized by an intensive spring bloom
which is initiated by a simultaneous increase in water column stability and
availability of solar radiation. The duration of the bloom is generally less
than 2-3 months, during which time the coastal Antarctic ecosystem receives
approximately 70-90% of its annual organic carbon production. The net effect of
this temporal pulse of fixed carbon is to increase biological productivity at
all trophic levels, from bacteria to baleen whales. However, the precise
pathways of carbon transfer, and the rates and mechanisms involved therein have
not been carefully investigated. In particular, the role of microheterotrophs in
Antarctic foodwebs and the immediate fate of phytoplankton production need to be
elucidated. As part of the RACER (Research on Antarctic Coastal Ecosystem Rates)
program, this project will evaluate several ecological predictions based upon
central working hypotheses which relate physical characteristics of the water
column to the temporal pulse of biological productivity. Research efforts will
attempt to define the mechanisms, pathways and rates of coupling between
photoautotrophic and heterotrophic populations and to evaluate the coupling
between the pelagic and benthic habitats. The data obtained during this
expedition will add to an overall understanding of the rates of primary and
secondary production, and will ultimately be used to formulate a general model
of carbon and energy flow in Antarctic coastal ecosystems.