* 8818904
* Computer Science Research, Indo-U.S. Workshop for Joint     Program Development, Hyderabad, India, August 1-3, 1989,    Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1990
* Anil Jain, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/1990
* USD 28,600.00

Description: This project supports participation by eight U. S. scientists in a
workshop for development of a program of cooperative research in computer
science. The workshop is to be held in Hyderabad, India where the host
organization, the CMC Limited, has its Research and Development Center. CMC is a
Government of India Enterprise focusing on electronics, computer science and
communications. The workshop will address areas of common interest to the two
countries' scientists, including: artificial intelligence; computer vision;
software engineering; networks; computer architecture; and software systems. The
workshop will also discuss the most suitable areas for productive collaboration
and the mechanisms of collaboration. A workshop report will be produced and
disseminated in the U. S. and India. Visits by participants to specific Indian
research facilities will be made to enhance the development of working
relationships. Scope: The rapid development of computer applications and the
revolution in information handling and utilization including new areas such as
artificial intelligence and computer vision are recognized by scientists in the
U. S. and in India. The Government of India is placing great emphasis on making
rapid advances in this field, especially in software systems and software
engineering. It is highly likely that a strong match between the U. S. and
Indian research interests exists and that good cooperative research activities
would result from this project.