* 8818441
* REU:  Mechanisms of Below-ground Competition in Plants:     Linking Form and Function
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1990
* Kurt Pregitzer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 08/31/1990
* USD 74,000.00

This research will examine how the morphology and demography of the fine root
system of plants enables the acquisition of two limiting soil resources: water
and nitrogen. The ability of plants to alter fine root morphology (length,
width, branching pattern, production of root hairs) and demography (birth,
death, and elongation rate) is thought to affect the rate at which then
encounter and exploit soil resources. The overall hypothesis is that species
differences in fine root morphology and demography regulate their ability to
acquire below.ground resources and therefore compete for these resources. The
ability to encounterand exploit resource patches that vary in space and time
must be linked to root morphology and dynamics. Several specific hypotheses will
be tested in a series of greenhouse experiments. Fine root dynamics will be
measured using in situ video imaging of minirhizotrons and summarized using
life-tables and projection matrices. By varying the availability and spatial
distribution of water and nitrogen, and by using 15C as a tracer, we will be
able to measure the relationship between fine and root morphology and dynamics
and resource acquisition. This research is novel and innovative because it
utilizes new technology to understand how resource availability drives fine root
demography. Until now, virtually all ecological investigations have either
ignored fine roots (a major carbon sink), or quantified them in one or aseries
of static observations. This project will make significant progress toward the
development of a more mechanistic understanding of competition for soil
resources in terrestrial plants.