* 8818663
* Molecular Mechanisms in Post-Germinational Regulation of    Genes in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* G. Redei, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/1991
* USD 60,000.00

The objective of this research is the identification and molecular
characterization of developmentally active plant genes. This will be done by
isolating insertional mutants. So far in Dr. Redei's laboratory and in that of
his collaborators, about 1,500 Arabidopsis plants have been regenerated after
transformation by a variety of T-DNA vectors, including different fusion
vectors. The insertion of T-DNA by Agrobacterium in about 1% of the cases
inactivated various genes as revealed by the appearance of recessive mutations
absolutely linked to inserts. These inserts serve also as a molecular tag on the
plant genes and promoters, permitting their isolation and molecular and
functional characterization. A number of developmentally regulated promoters
have been identified and the reisolated and sequenced gene fusions indicate that
the T-DNA insertion does not necessarily involve structural rearrangements,
losses or additions. Therefore the experiments outlined appear useful for the
study of developmentally regulated genes in depth and under native conditions.
Because of the high efficiency of the transformation system, Dr. Redei expects
to cover with gene fusions and insertions a substantial part of the entire
genome and obtain developmental information on a representative collection of
Arabidopsis genes. This project is a collaborative effort between the University
of Missouri, Columbia and the Max-Planck Institut, Cologne. %%% Arabidopsis has
become one of the key model systems for the study of plant development. This is
due in part to its short life cycle and to its small genome size. Dr. Redei's
work will generate a series of mutants which could prove to be a extremely
valuable resource for the research community.