* 8818551
* A Plant Science Center for the Experimental Analysis and    Transfer of Plant Genes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1988,07/31/1995
* Maureen Hanson, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 07/31/1995
* USD 5,679,700.00

Dr. Maureen Hanson and her colleagues at Cornell University will establish a
Plant Science Center. The Center will provide salaries and supplies for three
technicians, for up to 12 undergraduate summer assistantships, up to 12 advanced
graduate students (pre-doctorate fellows), and eight postdoctorate fellows. The
University will fund an additional two advanced graduate fellows and up to 10
graduate students during their first two years of study. A modest budget
allowance will provide for improvements in equipment ("particle gun") that
delivers DNA coated on microprojectiles to plant cell nuclei, mitochondria and
chloroplasts. This technology was invented, and is being developed
cooperatively, by Cornell biologists in the College of Agriculture and Life
Sciences and engineers at Cornell's National Nanofabrication Facility (now in
its 11th year of NSF funding). Co-investigators and their postdocs will be
moving into the new Biotechnology Building this summer. The facility, built at a
cost of $32 million shared by Cornell and the State of New York, will have a
large central plant Cell Culture and Transformation Facility (CCTF). It will
operate chiefly for the Center's investigators and their students but it will be
available for other Cornell faculty, for visiting scientists, for scientists of
the independent but campus-housed Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research,
and for industrial scientists. In addition to the training program and the CCTF,
a third component of the Center is the technology development project. It seeks
new means for isolating important plant genes, for the experimental analysis of
plant gene function and for transferring genetic information into nuclear and
organelle genomes. Central to the latter is biolistics--a term used to denote
directed delivery of extracellular DNA or genes, coated on microprojectiles,
into discrete structures of intact plant cells. Further development of this new
but proven technology is crucial to highly predictable and efficient
transformation of model plant systems and agronomically important species.
Cornell has long been a notable preparer of students and postdocs for academic
and industrial careers in plant science. The Center would unite diverse faculty
research in a core theme with a well- conceived multiphasic student training
program, and would house them in a state of the art facility dedicated entirely
to the faculty in the Sections of Genetics and Development, and Biochemistry,
Molecular and Cellular Biology. In addition to the on-campus co-investigators,
strong collaborative relationships exist with the University's Agricultural
Experiment Station at Geneva, The Boyce Thompson Institute and the USDA's Plant
Gene Expression Laboratory at Albany, California. The Center's management and
administration will be considerably aided by affiliation with Cornell's five-
year old Biotechnology Program which will provide services on-campus as well as
visibility and outreach to the State and industrial members. The Program is a
consortium of Cornell, the State of New York and several large firms. A fourth
element is support derived from the U.S. Army which has named Cornell a
Biotechnology Center of Excellence. Presently, in none of these components is
there a major emphasis on plant science which will be provided by the Center.