* 8818501
* Sexual Selection VS Natural Selection in the Spider,        Agelenopsis aperta
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Susan Riechert, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 01/31/1992
* USD 150,828.00

This research project is concerned with the degree to which selection of males
for mating by females may limit members of a population from achieving those
traits that might best adapt them to the rigorous physical and competitive
environment in which they exist. The work is based on the premise that whereas a
female's success is related to her ability to compete for food, a male's success
is determined by his ability to compete for females. These asymmetries may lead
to selection of different characteristics in males versus females which
ultimately will increase the variability of traits exhibited in the population,
moving the mean away from behavioral and morphological characteristics that
might be best suited for the environment. The investigators will test this
premise in a population of spiders occupying an extremely harsh physical
environment where there is strong selection for individuals that: 1) "recognize"
the value of particular habitat feature: and 2) successfully obtain and
dependthese superior foraging sites against intrusion by other members of their
own species population. Spiders, by their nature, have proven to be excellent
tools for study of this and other ecological and evolutionary problems. They are
readily and adequately sampled because they are present in large numbers and are
not disturbed by the human observer. They also can be easily manipulated without
disruption of their "natural" behavior. This is a major problem when utilizing
vertebrate subjects. Finally, as a group, spiders perform many of the behaviors
and exhibit adaptations characteristic of the vertebrates, but in a less complex
and, thus, more analyzable and quantifiable form.