* 8818076
* REU:  Reciprocal Relationships of Distant Sagebrush         Communities with Their Mycorrhizal Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1993
* Edith Allen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 08/31/1993
* USD 277,471.00

Artemisia tridentata (sagebrush) is the most widely distributed shrub in North
America and is the local dominant in many communities, due in part to
physiological and genetic characteristics. The relationships of A. tridentata
with its mycorrhizal fungal communities will be examined to determine if local
adaptations of the endophyte-host relationship have a role in the wide
distribution of the shrub. These facts are of special interest in this
relationship. The shrub has up to a 2.5 times increase in biomass with
mycorrhizal infection. Associated species of mycorrhizal fungi are of tropical
origin in southern sites and of temperate origin in the northern sites.
Different species of mycorrhizal fungi have different physiological effects on
this host so local fungal communities may explain the success of the shrub. Both
descriptive and functional approaches, including an examination of vesicular-
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal communities in stands of A. tridentata throughout
its distribution and reciprocal transplants of A. tridentata and its associated
fungi between sites in Southern California and Southwestern Wyoming, will be
taken. An interdisciplinary team of researchers will measure morphological,
anatomical, physiological, and fungal parameters to determine success of the
transplants. The measurements will be integrated using a conceptual hierarchical
model. These data will be used to sort out differences between sites, plant
populations, and fungal populations and genera on local adaptations of A.
tridentata and its ability to persist in geographically remote sites.