* 8818788
* International Symposium/Workshop on Microbial Conversion of Biomass, February 1989, Lahore, Pakistan,
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1990
* M. I  H Aleem, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1990
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This project supports U.S. participation in an international
symposium and workshop on microbial conversion of biomass to be held in Lahore,
Pakistan in February, 1989. In addition to U.S. and Pakistani scientists,
participants are expected from several third world countries. The symposium is
to provide the Pakistani and third world scientists with the most recent
information on the subject, and to impart to them current experimental
techniques. The workshop is planned to help identify specific scientific
problems of interest to the U.S. and to Pakistan and to develop outlines for
joint research leading to their solutions. Topics to be covered include
biological means for improving the breakdown of lignocellulose, optimum enzyme
production, genetic manipulation of test organisms, improving pentose
fermentation to ethanol, methane production from biomass, lignin degredation in
fungi by photoplast fusion, microbial degradation of lignin, oil degredation
organisms, the recovery of metal by microorganisms, and the practical aspects of
gaseous energy production. A workshop proceedings is expected to result from the
meeting. Scope: The cooperating Pakistani scientist, Dr. Kauser Malik, at the
Pakistan Nuclear Institute for Agriculture and Biology in Faisalabad, Pakistan
is one of the most dynamic and productive researchers in Pakistan in the field
of biotechnology. His institute (NIAB) is well equipped to organize the meeting
and to manage the technical sessions and the proceedings production. Dr. Malik
and the P.I. are currently collaborating on several projects funded by NSF and
others funded by AID. Their cooperation in this meeting and the good selection
of U.S. participants to cover the various specific areas will likely lead to a
successful result.