* 8818876
* COLLABORATIVE PROJECT:                                      Receptors for Juvenile Hormones and JH Mimics
* BIO,DCB
* 10/01/1988,03/31/1992
* Lynn Riddiford, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 03/31/1992
* USD 247,890.00

The proposed research is a continuation of an interdisciplinary collaboration
on the structure, dynamics, and physiology of proteins which bind and degrade
juvenile hormone (JH) and JH mimics (JHM). The original goals of this
collaborative research were to develop chemical and biochemical techniques to
approach the molecular biology of juvenile hormone (JH) reception and
catabolism. These initial objectives have been acheived, and in this renewal
request, further goals are proposed: First, to study the structure of the JH and
JHM binding proteins (JHBP an RP) in Manduca larval epidermal cell cytosol and
nuclei, and of JH esterases (JHE) and epoxide hydrolases (JHEH) through (a)
synthesis of radioligands, (b) JHBP/RP and JHE/EH purification and sequencing,
(c) active site labeling and sequencing, (d) antibody production, (e) gene
isolation and sequencing, and (f) overproduction of proteins; second, to examine
the dynamics of the ligands and macromolecules, including (a) timing and
location of JHBP/RP, JHE/EH, (b) movement of hormones and proteins between cell
compartments, and (c) protein-ligand, protein-protein, and protein-DNA
interactions. A key to the structure and dynamics goals will be the development
of a baculovirus expression system in Bombyx for protein overproduction. The
third goal is to correlate structure and dynamics with physiology by
characterizing, (a) the appearance of JHBP/RP and JHE/EH in the life cycle, and
(b) comparative biochemistry of JHBP/RP and JHE/EH in insects, with respect to
ligand recognition and protein similarities. The characterization of receptor
proteins for juvenile hormone (JH) and JH mimics (JHM) and knowledge of the
pathways of their degradation are major keys to understanding the molecular
basis for hormonal regulation of gene expression in insects. This research is an
interdisciplinary collaboration which combines expertise in molecular biology
and physiological manifestations of gene expression in insects (L. M.
Riddiford), biochemical and molecular studies of JH metabolism (B. D. Hammock),
and synthesis and use of high specific activity labeled JHs and JHMs (G. D.
Prestwich). This proposal was submitted under the NSF initiative in the
Chemistry of Life Processes.