* 8818687
* Temporal Regulation in Dictyostelium development
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1993
* Stephen Alexander, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1993
* USD 242,275.00

Dictyostelium has a number of interesting timing characteristics including:1)
the ability to rapidly recapitulate morphogenesis after disaggregation, 2) the
ability to induce "erasure" and a program of dedifferentiation, 3) the ability
to identify rate limiting steps or timers using conditional experiments, and 4)
the ability to isolate specific timing mutants that have their individual rate
limiting components altered. Dr. Alexander has recently characterized the
mutant, FM-1, which has a specifically shortened preaggregative period.
Conditional experiments demonstrate that this is due to the loss of the first
rate limiting step. The cells progress through each subsequent developmental
stage and form normal fruiting bodies. The mutation was mapped to linkage group
II and is recessive to wild type. FM-1 and its derivatives show the remarkable
property of rapid phenotypic switching. These strains can switch phenotypes at a
rate of up to 100. The switch phenotypes include strains altered in timing,
aggregation and morphogenesis. Dr. Alexander proposes to continue the
investigations of developmental timing and phenotypic switching. He will: 1)
phenotypically and genetically characterize timing mutants and the interactions
of the genes, 2) determine whether rapid phenotypic switching can result in
mutations in many different genes, 3) characterize a switching strain that is
unique from the FM-1 switching system, 4) determine whether rapid phenotypic
switching has characteristics that suggest that a mobile genetic element is the
underlying molecular event, 5) attempt to demonstrate at the molecular level
that high frequency switching in strain FM-1 and its derivatives is due to a
transposable element. Identification of this element can lead to its use in
transposon tagging for the generation of mutants and the isolation of the
disrupted genes. %%% Temporal control is a central element of the developmental
program of all organisms. The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum is a
particularly good system for the study of the regulation of developmental
timing. The timing of the morphogenetic stages is exquisitely synchronous and
reproducible between experiments.