* 8818873
* Mediation of Conformationally Labile Solutes and Their      Photoinduced Reactions by Layered and Other Anisotropic     Solvents
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Richard Weiss, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy L. Richard
* 08/31/1992
* USD 299,000.00

This renewal award is made in the Organic Dynamics Program to support the
research of Dr. Richard Weiss of Georgetown University. His research will
explore in detail the ability of anisotropic media with varying rigidities, such
as liquid crystalline solvents and alkylated silica particles, to alter the
conformations and photoreactivities of solutes. Dissection of the factors
responsible for the influence of anisotropic solvent order on solute reactivity
requires a detailed knowledge of how solutes and neighboring solvent molecules
interact under constrained conditions and the consequences of those interactions
on both the mobility and flexibility of the reactive centers of the solutes.
Specific processes to be studied include the formation of twisted intramolecular
charge-transfer states, Norrish II reactions of alkanones and alkylphenones, and
electron transfer reactions. In some cases, the reactive solutes will serve as a
diagnostic tool of their local environments and in others the solvent will be
used to determine the degree to which a solute's reactivity can be diverted by
external forces. Reactivity parameters measured in the ordered and isotropic
phases of the media will be compared and correlated with the sizes and shapes of
a series of solutes. Initial solubilization sites and modes will be discerned
from measurements that probe the macroscopic and microscopic properties of the
systems. Results from these experiments should be germane to studies where
dynamic intermolecular interactions are important.