* 8818671
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Volcanological and        Geochemical Studies at Vulcano, Pantelleria, and Sabatini,  Italy
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,10/01/1990
* Michael Sheridan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/01/1990
* USD 400.00

This award will provide funds for Prof. Michael F. Sheridan of Arizona State
University to travel to Italy to conduct field work and collaborative research
at three different Quartenary volcanos in Italy with his Italian counterparts,
Prof. L. La Volpe (Bari), L. Civetta (Naples), and G. Cavaretta (Rome). The
general objective of the proposed research is to achieve a better understanding
of the physics of volcanic activity through geochemical investigations at the
proposed sites. The specific objectives are: 1) to reconstruct the volcanic
history of Vulcano in Sicily, following a field investigation of the oldest
exposed stratigraphic sequence; 2) to interpret explosive volcanic phenomena
recorded in the products of eruptive cycles younger than 50,000 years on
Pantelleria (Straight of Sicily), using the variation in volatile species and
light trace elements measured by the ion microprobe; and 3) to investigate the
geochemistry of boron and other light elements in the hydrothermal minerals of
the Sabatini Volcanic District (Latium). The activity planned at Vulcano is
important for its likely contributions to the basic science of volcanology vis a
vis volcanic hazards. The work at Pantelleria is of potential scientific value
since it promises, through the application of ion microprobe analysis, to yield
important analytical data on the volatile and light element content of glass
inclusions and phenocrysts, thus providing information on the volatile
concentrations of the magmatic reservoirs of the volcano. The proposed research
project will take advantage of the combined skills and expertise of the U.S. and
Italian investigators, who have worked together effectively as a team in the
past, in the conduct of preliminary field work at the volcanic sites and the
completion of laboratory analysis in Naples and Arizona State University.