* 8818975
* Laser-Driven Ultrastrong Magnetic Pulse Generator           (REU Supplement)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Won-Ho Choe, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 11/30/1991
* USD 122,269.00

The prospects for achieving ultrastrong magnetic fields is of fundamental
significance to engineers and physicists who are concerned with challenging
current limits of physical understanding and innovative technological
achievement. An exploratory theoretical study, based on previous NSF supported
work (ECS-8614652), is proposed on a new approach to ultrastrong magnetic field
generation. The new approach includes induction of return-electron-currents
driven by laser beams and magnetic flux compression by laser implosion. The
proposed concept may be capable of producing magnetic fields limited in
magnitude only by the brightness of available laser sources. Theoretically,
there appears no limit on the magnetic field strength that can be generated by
the method of laser irradiation. With the proposed approach, magnetic fields of
up to 100 MG at rising speeds higher than 100 MG in 100 psec can be achieved
essentially without modification of existing laser facilities. Potential
applications include microparticle acceleration, studies of geological and
industrial material samples under extreme pressure conditions, simulation of an
EMP and study of its effects on high-Tc materials and semiconductors, solid
state physics, high-energy-density physics and developments of high energy
radiation sources. This work is intended to provide a theoretical model for
future experimental efforts to bring the concept up to the level of practical
applications.