* 8818529
* Studies on the mechanism of Pyridine Nucleotide Dependent   Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Bruce Anderson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1993
* USD 169,000.00

The objectives here are to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms by
which pyridine nucleotides function as coenzymes in dehydrogenase-catalyzed
oxidation-reduction reactions and as substrates in NAD glycohydrolase-catalyzed
hydrolyses and ADP- ribosylation reactions. These studies will include the
isolation and purification of pyridine nucleotide dependent enzymes, the
investigation of chemical, physical and kinetic properties of these enzymes and
studies of the binding processes involved in the proper orientation of
substrates and products. Structural analogs of the pyridine and nucleotides will
be synthesized, chemically characterized, and applied in studies of selective
interactions important to enzymic processes. Some of these derivatives will be
designed as fluorescent probes while others will be designed to function as
site-labeling reagents or suicide substrates. These studies will employ
spectrophotometry, fluorimetry, titrimentry, liquid chromatography, and a number
of general biochemical and chemical techniques. The overall importance of
coenzyme analogs as experimental tools for he study of many biochemical
processes is well-documented. The proposed new series of coenzyme analogs having
unique properties will provide additional reagents applicable to biochemical
studies. In addition to the proposed use of these compounds to elucidate enzymic
mechanisms involved in NAD metabolism in H. influenzae, these analogs should
find an even broader application in mechanistic studies of the many essential
pyridine nucleotide-dependent enzymes.