* 8818136
* Sinking and Suspended Particulate Matter on the Antarctic   Continental Margin
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1993
* Robert Dunbar, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 12/31/1993
* USD 418,424.00

This project is a study of the vertical flux and the rate of dissolution of
biogenic silica in the water column of the Ross Sea, and is part of a
coordinated study of the biogenic silica and organic carbon cycling in the water
column and the sediments of the Ross Sea. The antarctic deep sea and continental
shelf environments is the major repository for silica accumulation in the global
ocean, and dominates the global silica budget. The Ross Sea is a particularly
anomalous area in which large amounts of biogenic silica are accumulating in
modern sediments, while the surface production rates are generally below the
global average. Moreover the usual similarity between the oceanic silicon and
carbon cycle does not appear to hold around Antarctica, and the two cycles are
decoupled in that the rate of particulate carbon deposition in the modern
sediment is very low. The overall project is an integrated study of the
production, vertical transport, dissolution, and deposition processes, using
moored instrumentation and direct observations in a series of transects in the
Ross Sea by R/V POLAR DUKE. The vertical flux and dissolution rates will be
measured by deploying time-series sediment traps at two depths on each of three
moorings for a period of fourteen months. In conjunction with transmissometers
and current meter arrays, these moorings will allow the measurement and
characterization of both vertical and horizontal fluxes of particulate matter
during a complete annual cycle of production and sedimentation. The sediment
trap data will provide the link between surface production studies and sea-floor
accumulation studies that will be carried out by other investigators cooperating
in this project.