* 8818066
* Mechanisms and Consequences of Fitness in a Natural Plant   Population
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1989,09/01/1989
* Diane Campbell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 09/01/1989
* USD 47,971.00

This study addresses some of the most fundamental questions about processes
that determine the evolution of flowering plants. Individual plants can vary in
the amount of pollen transported to, and fertilizing, other plants (male
reproduction) as well as pollen received and seeds set (female reproduction)
Using dyes to follow pollen transport by animal pollinators and genetic markers
to determine paternity of seeds, Dr. Campbell will determine male as well as
female reproductive success in a natural plant population. The results will
yield some of the first measurements of natural selection acting on flower
traits through both male and female reproduction, and will allow tests of
general theory on the evolution of breeding systems and energy allocation to
reproductive structures. Behavioral studies of the pollinators will seek to
characterize the mechanisms of this selection. In addition, methods of
quantitative genetics will be used to link field measurements of heritabilities
and selection to current theory. These studies will contribute to understanding
of the roles of genetic constraints and conflicts between opposing selective
pressures in determining the course of evolution. The results will have
significance for both natural population and crop plants, particularly those in
agricultural breeding programs dealing with seed and fruit production.