* 8818952
* Efficacy in Social Traps
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1993
* Norbert Kerr, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 07/31/1993
* USD 108,144.00

Social traps are settings in which individual and collective welfare are in
conflict. For example, an individual taxpayer might be personally better off by
acting (e.g., voting) to retain special tax breaks or entitlements, yet the
nation as a whole might be better off if many such preferences were eliminated.
One reason individuals may not act in the whole group's welfare is that they
believe that such cooperative acts have little impact and/or that the group
cannot successfully avoid the trap. This research explores how such beliefs are
formed and how they guide cooperative behavior in social traps. One study
explores how the necessity for coordinated effort in many social situations may
undermine confidence in the effectiveness of personal cooperation. Another study
examines whether people feel less overwhelmed by very large social problems when
the problems are broken up into smaller parts. Another study explores whether
people sometimes excuse their failure to cooperate in a group by saying their
contributions just don't matter, and thereby convince themselves that future
cooperation is also pointless. Yet another study tries to determine when a sense
of helplessness might counteract other factors that would normally increase
cooperation (e.g., loyalty to the group). This research will a) contribute to
basic knowledge on how people think and act in social traps and b) suggest ways
of strengthening peoples' beliefs that they and the groups to which they belong
can solve their groups' problems.