* 8818746
* US-Belgium Cooperative Research:  Fundamental Studies of    Metal Electrocrystallization
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1993
* Thomas O'Keefe, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1993
* USD 10,480.00

This award will support continued collaborative research between Dr. Thomas
O'Keefe, University of Missouri at Rolla and Dr. Rene Winand, Free University of
Brussels, Belgium. A major area of current technical importance is the
processing of high technology materials. The electronics, chemical, aerospace
and automatic industries all rely heavily on such processing techniques. Surface
coatings and interfacial phenomena continue to play a role in the material
science related to these areas. In this project, Drs. O'Keefe and Winand will
expand their previous research efforts on the topic of metal film processing on
both conductive and non-conductive substrates. The areas of primary emphasis
will be the fundamental principles of thin metal film production. The
characterization and evaluation of the performance and properties of such metal
coatings, as a function of deposition process parameters, will be included. The
techniques used will include both electrolytic and RF plasma enhanced
organometallic deposition. Specific work will also be carried out on mass
transport measurements in aqueous metal deposition systems. This data is
important to future high current density processes. The results of this joint
work may lead improved understanding of factors affecting the properties of thin
film. Dr. Winand is a leading European electrochemist specializing in
electrodeposition of metals. Dr. O'Keefe is well known for his work on zinc
deposition. This project will benefit from their combined expertise.