* 8818244
* Fluxes of Dissolved Inorganic Nitrogen (DIN) and Dissolved  Organic Matter (DOM) during the Spring Bloom in the Temper- ate North Atlantic Ocean: Magnitude and Control Mechanisms
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Christopher Garside, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/1991
* USD 168,429.00

A collaborative study of the transformations of dissolved inorganic Nitrogen
(DIN) and dissolved organic matter (DOM) (both N and C) by phytoplankton and
bacterioplankton will be conducted during the spring plankton bloom period in
the Eastern North Atlantic Ocean. Observational studies of DIN and DOM fluxes
have stimulated network models which consider together DIN and DOM flows as
inputs and outputs of functionally-defined groups of organisms. Fixation of DIN
by phytoplankton and of DOM and NH4 by bacterioplankton often dominate the flow
of Nitrogen in the euphotic zone. Informed by this conceptualization of plankton
dynamics, the study will follow the transformations of Nitrogen, beginning with
the transport of nitrate-Nitrogen (NO3) to the upper ocean during the spring,
its fixation by phytoplankton, and its regeneration and cycling by bacteria and
other microplankton. The objectives include: a) precisely quantifying the
euphotic zone supply, stock and utilization of NO3; b) determining via new high
precision techniques, the reliance of primary production on new and regenerated
nutrients; c) assessing the significance of bacterial production in general, of
bacteria as competitors with phytoplankton for NH4; d) determining the impact of
microbial regeneration of NH4 on the availability of Nitrogen for primary
production; and finally e) evaluating the relationship between phytoplankton and
bacterial production and the export of PON and POC over time scales of days-
weeks.