* 8818114
* RUI: Seasonal and Spatial Variation in a Neotropical Canopy Tree
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1989,05/31/1993
* Marilyn Loveless, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 05/31/1993
* USD 54,534.00

The way in which plant species exchange pollen during mating determines which
individuals make a genetic contribution to the next generation. This breeding
structure thus effects levels of genetic variation and potential patterns of
evolutionary change in the population. Dr. Loveless will examine how different
individuals sample the pool of available pollen from their neighbors and the
effects of this mating system on progeny genotypes. The study species,
>>>Tachigali> >versicolor> (a legume) is especially interesting because it is
outcrossed. The progeny of different fruiting trees are thus likely to have
sampled pollen from conspecific individuals in the immediate vicinity of the
seed parent. This permits Dr. Loveless to isolate and measure the effects of the
spatial population structure on mating systems, and to assess the amount of
variation in the mating system among individuals flowering in a single season.
The tree is also monocarpic; each individual flowers once and dies. The presence
of known and aged cohorts of seedlings in the forest on Barro Colorado Island,
Panama, will allow assessment of particular elements of the reproductive biology
of this species which result from spatial and phenological structure in the
adult population. The results of this work should have bearing on understanding
of the processes by which genetic diversity is generated and maintained in
tropical plant populations, and on the ecological processes by which pollen is
moved about in rain forest communities. The data should also contribute in a
general way to theories of plant mating systems which are applicable to both
temperate and tropical plant species, and should be important in plant breeding
and in understanding microevolutionary processes in natural communities. Such
information is important in tree breeding programs to measure the degree of
isolation required and the range over which pollen might be transported. It also
impacts efforts to assess minimum critical population sizes for canopy rain
forest tree species, based on breeding biology of the species.