* 8818810
* Influences of Geological Structure on the Biological        Productivity of Stream Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Rona Donahoe, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 08/31/1992
* USD 853,509.00

> The effects of geology on stream ecosystem structure and function, while often
presumed, remain controversial and have not been factored into current stream
ecosystem theory. Geological influences on ecosystems are diverse and include
interactive components of streams and their watersheds. This project will
address the following features in multiple watersheds in different geological
regions: (1) basic physico.chemical features of watersheds (e.g. basin shape,
soil characteristics, vegetation patterns, channel morphology), (2) detailed
hydrologic patterns of streams (annual and storm hydrographs, rainfall/runoff
relationships, etc.), and (3) biological characteristics, including biomass and
/or productivity measurements of multiple trophic levels in streams. The
University of Alabama is ideally situated to initiate these studies because of
its proximity to 4 major geological regions which are in a climatically similar
area. These include the Valley and Ridge, Appalachian Plateau, Piedmont, and
Coastal Plain provinces. The investigations will include watersheds in the first
three provinces, which have steams with predominantly bedrock, cobble substrata.
The results of this research should enhance understanding of geological
influences in both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, strengthen the predictive
capabilities of existing stream theories, and provide general information on
geology as a determinant of ecosystem organization and productivity. The
institutional support for this project are more than adequate and the
investigators are well qualified.