* 8818203
*            MRI:  Nature of Eukaryotic Translational Respress
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1995
* William Walden, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jerry D. Johnson
* 02/28/1995
* USD 378,200.00

Both normal and transformed cells regulate the expression of some genes at the
level of translation. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying these
controls could give valuable insights into why certain cells lose the ability to
control processes such as growth. The long term objectives here are to
determine: (a) the role played by translational repressors in regulating
specific gene expression; (b) the repressors; (c) how eukaryotes use this form
of translational regulation to control essential cell processes, such as growth,
development, and responses to stress conditions. These projects are focused on
the study of translational repressors specific towards ferritin mRNA. The
specific aims are to: 1) Purify repressors of ferritin mRNA translation; 2)
Determine the physiological role of these repressors; 3) Study the mechanism of
derepression of ferritin mRNA translation; 4) Isolate and characterize cDNA and
genomic clones of ferritin repressors; 5) Determine the pattern of expression of
repressor genes. Ferritin translational repressors will be purified using
standard enzyme purification techniques. Translational control mechanisms can
have a major influence on the final level of expression of specific genes in
eukaryotes. The list of examples of genes whose expression is controlled at
least in part, is growing. Each of the examples raises essentially the same
question: how does the cell choose to (or choose not to) translate a particular
messenger RNA over another? In certain cases this has been answered, however for
most of the mRNAs the control of translation is poorly understood. Dr. Walden's
work should help this understanding.