* 8818728
* Comparative Physiology of Osmoregulation in Mosquitoes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Timothy Bradley, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 08/31/1991
* USD 113,800.00

Due to their bloodsucking habits, mosquitoes are disturbing annoyances to the
public, as well as being the vectors of many serious diseases. Many of the
species of mosquitoes which pose a health hazard in the United States breed in
salt water. On the East Coast, saltwater mosquitoes occur in huge numbers in
coastal marshes and their control is essential for the use and enjoyment of
beaches and coastal waterways. In the West, salt-tolerant mosquitoes are the
vectors of very serious diseases such as viral encephalitis and heartworm. The
larvae of mosquitoes are aquatic. Dr. Bradley is investigating mechanisms used
by salt-tolerant mosquitoes to survive in this harsh aquatic habitat. A better
understanding of the mechanisms used by these mosquitoes may enable us to
circumvent these mechanisms and/or predict the location of mosquitoes
populations, thereby reducing these populations and directing control procedures
to the sites where intervention is required. This proposal describe
investigations into the mechanisms of osmoregulation in mosquito larvae.
"Brackish-water" mosquito larvae are euryhaline osmoconformers by means of the
accumulation of organic osmolytes in the hemolymph. Using the brackish-water
species Culex tarsalis, Dr. Bradley will examine a) the time course and pattern
of osmolyte regulation during changes in salinity, b) the role of the excretory
system in eliminating or retaining osmolytes of low molecular weight and c) the
osmolytes used intracellularly for volume and osmotic regulation. Phylogenetic
evidence indicates that mechanisms associated with the brackish-water pattern of
osmoregulation arose independently in two genera of mosquitoes. The Principal
Investigator will compare the mechanisms employed by these independent lineages.
The studies are designed to increase our understanding of the mechanisms of
osmoregulation in a taxonomically restricted group of insects inhabiting a
diverse range of osmoregulatory niches.