* 8818071
* REU:  Life History Evolution in Trinidadian Guppies         (Poecilia reticulata)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1989,02/29/1992
* David Reznick, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 02/29/1992
* USD 286,064.00

There is enormous diversity in every aspect of animal life histories, including
the age at maturity, frequency of reproduction, number and size of offspring,
and the effort invested by parents in individual offspring. What factors in the
environment selected for these differences among and within species? The goal of
the proposed research is to evaluate the role of specific environmental
influences on life history evolution of natural populations of guppies on the
island of Trinidad. Natural populations of guppies from the Northern Range of
Trinidad have life history differences associated with differences in predation.
Guppies that co-occur with the pike cichlid Crenicichla alta and other predators
mature at an earlier age, devote more of their available resources to
reproduction, and tend to produce more and smaller offspring than guppies that
co-occur with just the killifish Rivulus harti. Crenicichla and some of the
associated species of predators prey predominantly on large, sexually mature
size classes of guppies. Rivulus prey predominantly on small, immature size
classes of guppies. The size specificity of these predators suggests that they
select for life history changes by altering the age-specific survival of
guppies. By preying on large guppies, Crenicichla should reduce adult survival.
By preying on small guppies, Rivulus should reduce juvenile survival. The
influence of such differences in age-specific survival on life history evolution
has been investigated theoretically; the predicted responses in life history
evolution correspond precisely with the differences observed between Crenicichla
and Rivulus localities. The key field experiments in the proposed research
involve introducing guppies and guppy predators into sections of stream where
they had previously been excluded by waterfalls. The effects of predators and
the environment, most notably resource availability, will be evaluated with
direct observations of growth and survival, plus indirect estimates of growth
and survival using otolith. Otolith are bone-like structures in the inner ear
which record daily rings, similar to the annual rings commonly seen in cross-
sections of tree trunks.