* 8818753
* REU:  Deep Water Carbonate Sedimentation in the Lesser      Antilles Arc, Eastern Caribbean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1992
* R. Reid, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 12/31/1992
* USD 200,643.00

The proposed research will identify patterns, processes and controls of deep-
water carbonate sedimentation in the Lesser Antilles arc. The study will be
based on analysis of Holocene to late Pleistocene sediments in existing piston
and gravity cores. The following questions will be addressed: 1. what are the
sources and transport mechanisms of deep-water carbonate sediments in the arc?,
2. do the deep-water sediments record cyclic variations in carbonate content,
carbonate mineralogy, and frequency of turbidites that correspond to sea level
fluctuations?, and 3. how is carbonate sedimentation affected by arc volcanism
and input of terrigenous detritus form South American sources? A stratigraphic
framework for the cores will be developed using foraminiferal biostratigraphy,
tephrochronology, and oxygen isotope stratigraphy. Detailed core descriptions,
total carbonate analyses, thin section petrography, scanning electron
microscopy, x-ray diffraction, and strontium determinations will establish the
distribution of carbonate, the relative contributions of pelagic and neritic
carbonate components, and the proportions of volcanic and terrigenous detritus.
The study represents the first in-depth analysis of modern deep-water carbonate
sediments in a convergent margin. It will complement previous studies of
volcanogenic and terrigenous sediments in the Lesser Antilles to show how deep-
water deposition in a volcanic arc compares with periplatform sedimentation in
passive margin settings. The findings will aid interpretation of other volcanic
arc sequences, both modern ancient.