* 8818557
* Psychophysiological Inference:  Implications for the Study  of Affect and Emotion
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,09/30/1992
* John Cacioppo, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 09/30/1992
* USD 229,522.00

Advances in bioelectronics, imaging and signal processing procedures, and
laboratory computing over the past several decades have rapidly increased our
ability to record signals noninvasively from the brain and various peripheral
physiological systems with greater sensitivity and fidelity than ever before.
Nevertheless, advances in physiological signal acquisition have not yet had a
consistent impact on theory and research in the social and behavioral sciences
for at least three reasons: (a) insufficient technical considerations, (b)
elementary signal representation or analysis, and (c) fallacious reasoning based
on physiological data. To illustrate, previous research has revealed that
variations in emotion are followed by distinct but sometimes visually
imperceptible patterns of facial expression. These important observations have
led to inferences about the physiological mechanisms underlying emotion, and to
psychophysiological assessments within the behavioral and social sciences for
the purpose of gauging the presence or extent of a particular psychological
event or process (e.g., anxiety, emotion, group cohesion). However, except in
instances in which the psychophysiological relationship is isomorphic or in
which two (or more) theories make competing predictions about the physiological
response, knowledge of the effects of variations in psychological/behavioral
variables on a physiological response does not provide sufficient information
for a strong inference about the psychological variable given this physiological
response. To illustrate, research showing that a negative emotion leads to a
particular pattern of visceral or facial electromyographic activity does not
imply that this pattern of bodily response indexes (e.g., was preceded or
accompanied by) this negative emotion. This is because knowledge that a
statement is true does not imply logically that the converse is true. The
current research will examine the social, psychological, and physiological
processes involved in emotion using paradigms designed to avoid these problems.
This research, therefore, should both establish a new paradigm or
psychophysiological inquiry on important social and behavioral processes and
yield more appropriate tests of existing theories of emotion.//