* 8818848
* Expression of Immunoglobulin Lambda Genes in Wild Mice
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Lisa Steiner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 07/31/1992
* USD 180,000.00

The immunoglobulin lambda light chain locus in inbred mice contains a limited
number of germline genes. However, recent studies of lambda genes in populations
of wild mice have revealed that these mice may have an amplified number of
lambda genes, as judged by cross-hybridization of DNA restriction fragments with
lambda probes derived from inbred strains. It is not known, however, whether
these putative lambda genes are functional. To obtain further insight into the
evolution of the lambda locus, the organization and expression of these genes in
wild-derived mice is being examined. The approach is to prepare lambda-
producing hybridomas which are a source of rearranged lambda genes and their
expressed products. Several hybridomas have been identified that appear to
produce lambda chains that differ substantially from those in BALB/c. The
variable region of one of these chains, from a mouse from Skive Denmark (SD),
differs so greatly in sequence from any known V-lambda that cross- hybridization
of the corresponding genes would not be expected. Such a gene would have escaped
detection in earlier studies. To pursue these findings, a cDNA library has been
prepared from the SD hybridoma. The sequence of clones encoding the unusual
lambda chain has been determined. The V region of the SD lambda chain is only
about 40% identical in amino acid sequence to the lambda 1 V region. Next,
unrearranged lambda genes will be characterized in a DNA library that will be
prepared from SD kidney. The results should indicate the extent of somatic
mutation in the gene encoding the SD26 V segment. Hybridization probes
corresponding to V lambda SD26 will be used to evaluate the possible presence
and expression of related genes in other wild mice and in laboratory strains of
inbred mice. The expression of other, previously unrecognized lambda genes will
be sought by examining additional lambda-producing wild mouse hybridomas.
Although inbred mouse strains are regularly used in studies of the regulation
and function of the immune response, relatively few studies have compared the
organization and function of the immune system in inbred mouse strains and wild
mice. The mechanisms by which a great diversity of antibodies is generated to
recognize a wide array of possible foreign molecules is fundamental to our
understanding of immune function. Previous results from this laboratory have
revealed interesting and provocative differences between the genes encoding
antibody light chains in wild mice and those in inbred strains. Further results
of this research should shed new light on the organization and evolution of
immunoglobulin genes.