* 8818133
* RUI:  Ecology and Physiology of Anoxygenic Phototrophic     Prokaryotes in Microbial Mats
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Beverly Pierson, University of  Puget Sound
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 06/30/1992
* USD 192,801.00

The objectives of this project are: (1) to understand the ecology of anoxygenic
phototrophs in microbial mats and in particular, the causes of the sequence of
layers of anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria in complex multi-layered microbial
mat communities; (2) to isolate and characterize the ubiquitous filamentous
phototroph, Chloroflexus, from intertidal and hypersaline mats; (3) to isolate
and characterize the previously undescribed filimentous bacteriochlorophyll a -
containing phototrophs from translucent thermal mats. These prokaryotic
communities found in extreme environments are modern analogs of extensive
stromatolitic communities that dominated the biosphere during the Precambrian.
An understanding of the physiology and ecology of the phototrophs comprising
these modern mat communities gives us insight into the nature of the
environmental conditions and the microorganisms that comprised the ancient mats
that existed on earth from 0.5 to 3.5 billion years ago. These objectives will
be met by conducting field studies on thermal and intertidal mats where multi-
layered communities exist. The effects of oxygen, sulfide, and light on layering
sequences will be determined by comparing oxygen, sulfide, and light
microprofiles in adjacent mats that exhibit different layering sequences. Direct
isolation, gradient culture, and selective enrichment techniques will be used to
isolate the marine Chloroflexus and undescribed thermophilic filamentous
phototroph. Characterization of these isolates will be done to determine their
relationship to known strains and their significance as descendents of ancient
stromatolite-forming phototrophs.