* 8818797
* Semiconductor Diode Laser Amplifiers for High Performance   Photonic Switching Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/1989,09/30/1992
* Mario Dagenais, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 09/30/1992
* USD 350,031.00

Semiconductor optical amplifiers will be important components in future optical
communication and photonic switching systems. In this proposal, an experimental
study of the potential of using both Fabry- Perot and traveling-wave laser
amplifiers for enlarging the bandwidth of present fiber optic systems is
proposed. In particular, this is a study of the problem of crosstalk, gain
saturation, sensitivity and fidelity of both Fabry-Perot and traveling-wave
laser amplifiers for the amplification of ultra high data rates intensity
modulated wavelength multiplexed signals. In collaboration with Harry Diamond
Laboratories, the principal investigator also proposes to fabricate waveguides
and to optimize the optical coupling efficiency of bistable diode laser
amplifiers in an out-of-plane addressing configuration by using 45o-angle
mirrors and gratings fabricated with a focused ion beam. These technical
objectives complement this work on photonic switching devices and, at the same
time, support and enhance similar thrusts of the Harry Diamond Laboratories
optoelectronic program. In addition, he proposes to use the technique of in-situ
ellipsometry for monitoring the deposition of anti-reflection coatings on the
facets of a commercially available diode laser. This will ensure the
reproducible making of high-quality traveling-wave laser amplifiers.