* 8818228
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on the Effects of Hydrogen  Upon the Passivating Films on Iron and Nickel
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Richard Oriani, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1992
* USD 7,050.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Richard A. Oriani, Professor and
Director, Corrosion Research Center, University of Minnesota, to pursue with Dr.
Su-Il Pyun, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), for a period of 24 months, a
program of cooperative research on the effects of hydrogen on passivating films
on iron and nickel. The research will focus on three specific tasks, namely, (1)
the determination of mobility of hydrogen in passivating oxide films, (2) the
effects of hydrogen on the ionic and electronic properties of passivating films,
and (3) the effect of hydrogen on the pitting characteristics of passivating
films. The surface of iron and nickel objects often is protected from corrosion
by surface layers of passivating oxide films. In the present project, the
collaborators will study how hydrogen within passivating oxide layers on metals
behaves and how it modifies their properties. The transport of hydrogen across a
passivating layer appears to be involved whenever free corrosion takes place in
an acid medium because hydrogen is found both within the metal and in the
aqueous phase. This project will deal primarily with the kinetics and mechanism
of hydrogen transport in free corrosion and stress corrosion cracking in acid
media, but the research will contribute to an understanding of stress corrosion
cracking and corrosion fatigue of metals. Thus, the research may have important
applications in many settings, including corrosion in heat exchangers for
fission and fusion nuclear reactors. The U.S. and Korean collaborators are
highly respected scientists who have a record of successful collaboration. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
This project will add an international cooperative dimension to Dr. Oriani's
research under NSF Grant No. DMR-8714547.